
                               1 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 1, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ROSE BOWL;
ADDED INCENTIVE FOR ONE MORRIS

BYLINE: By GORDON S. WHITE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: PASADENA, Calif., Dec. 31


Jamie Morris has a chance to become the first known major college football
player to walk around wearing the ring of a victorious player in the Super Bowl.
All the Michigan junior tailback needs is one victory for himself Thursday in
the Rose Bowl and three victories by the Giants.

Morris, the slick little running back, is the youngest of the three brothers of
the Giants' slick little running back, Joe Morris. The two have agreed to trade
bowl rings if Michigan beats Arizona State Thursday in the oldest bowl game and
the Giants get to and win the Super Bowl -which will be played in the Rose Bowl
on Jan. 25.

''We've been talking about it all year,'' said Jamie. ''Joe and I talk once or
twice a week. It's about life in general. It's also about football. Once, when
we talked before the season, we talked about maybe we could both get to the Rose
Bowl this year. And I said then we could trade rings.''

Michigan No Surprise

Such talk before the season was a longer shot for Joe, who seemed then to have
less chance of getting to the Pasadena Super Bowl than Jamie had of making it to
the New Year's Day Rose Bowl. Michigan, after all, entered this season favored
to win the Big Ten title and get here. The Wolverines and Jamie lived up to
expectations.

The two excellent running backs are not exactly peas in a pod, but from a
distance they appear much the same as they scamper and twist their ways for big
gains. They're both 5 feet 7 inches tall and the sons of Earl Morris, another
5-7 running back who played high school football in St. Louis. Jamie and Joe and
their two brothers and two sisters grew up in Ayer, Mass. Their father, a former
Green Beret master sergeant in Vietnam, is a postmaster in Groton, Mass.

Jamie and Joe differ for two notable reasons. Joe is stockier, weighing about
195 pounds to Jamie's 180. Joe and two other brothers, Mike and Larry, played in
the Carrier Dome at Syracuse, where Joe broke the rushing records of Jimmy
Brown, Floyd Little, Larry Csonka and Ernie Davis.

Jamie went to Michigan, where he played in Michigan Stadium, an outdoor stadium
so big that, he said, ''The first time I went out on that field I wanted to turn
around and run off. I never saw so many people in my life.''

Regarded as Too Small

Bo Schembechler, Michigan's coach, is from the old school. Even though he
doesn't stand much taller than Jamie Morris, Schembechler said: ''I told Jamie
when we recruited him he was too small to be a running back and we wanted him
for running back kicks. I did, however, promise him the chance to try to be a
running back for us. Good thing I did, isn't it?''

''My friends thought I'd naturally go to Syracuse, what with three older
brothers who were Syracuse football players,'' Jamie said. ''But Joe told me to
go where I'd be happy. When I told him I thought I'd be happier at Michigan, he
said, 'Go Blue.' ''

The kick-return specialist role didn't last long. Jamie became very happy at
Michigan in just his third game as a freshman when Schembechler put him in as
the starting tailback. Except for times when injuries took their toll, Jamie has
started at tailback for the Wolverines since.

This season he seemed headed for a big season when a knee injury against Florida
State forced him to sit out the Wisconsin game the following week. There
appeared to be little chance the tailback would reach his goal of 1,000 yards
rushing for the regular season. But in the final game against Ohio State - a
game Michigan had to win to get to the Rose Bowl - Morris carried 29 times for
210 yards and a season total of 1,039 yards.

Took Time to Heal

''That pop on the knee in the game against Florida State hassled me a lot,''
Jamie said. ''Even after I came back, the knee bothered me when I tried to cut.
I finally felt good in the Purdue game and finally felt I was all the way back
against Ohio State.''

Michigan played only two games on grass in 1986 - at Purdue and at Notre Dame -
and won them both. The Rose Bowl has a grass field that Schembechler says
''isn't really very good.''

Morris isn't worried about slowing down on the grass, but he said, ''You have to
learn to keep your feet under you more or else you'll slip. Because we beat
Purdue and Notre Dame, I don't think the grass here will bother me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 1, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Afghan Throne of Bayonets

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 467 words


As the Afghanistan war grinds into its eighth year, the Soviet Union seems of
two minds about its bloodiest encounter since World War II. Mikhail Gorbachev
now feeds hopes of withdrawal and reconciliation. He even permits open criticism
of the war by Andrei Sakharov. Yet there are only token reductions of a Soviet
occupation army of 110,000. The investment in roads and bases implies a policy
of absorption and annexation.

The war's costs in life are bitter, most unforgivably for the Afghan people.
Hundreds of thousands are dead; perhaps five million, a third of the population,
have fled to Pakistan and Iran. Yet resistance is unabated and so is the world's
denunciation of an unwarranted attack on a nonaligned neighbor.

The Soviet posture confirms an adage attributed to the Rev. William Inge, once
Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral: ''A man may build himself a throne of bayonets,
but he cannot sit on it.'' It's not Mr. Gorbachev's throne, not yet. He has made
cautious moves toward extrication. He has installed a new leadership in Kabul,
and is making overtures to non-Communist Afghan exiles. Soviet television no
longer ignores the war, but even reports on casualties. And Soviet diplomats
claim agreement on all but one element in a United Nations plan to bring about a
Soviet withdrawal in exchange for an end to outside aid to the Afghan
insurgents.

The remaining snag is ostensibly the timetable. Moscow says it needs years to
pull out its troops; Pakistan insists that only months are required. Yet the
real obstacle, almost certainly, is Soviet unwillingness to see the triumph of
an Islamic tribal insurgency over a Marxist client regime. At stake in Moscow's
eyes is the Communist doctrine that the march of Soviet power is irreversible.
But that doctrine, like the war, has unacknowledged roots in the czarist past.
Under Alexander II (1855-81), Russia added 400,000 square miles of territory in
Central Asia, as big as Western Europe. Over time the czars overwhelmed
resistance, and in an imperial age, nobody cared. The difference now in
Afghanistan is that much of the world does care.

The test for Mr. Gorbachev, as it was for the United States in Vietnam, is
whether he is prepared to lose, or risk losing. To acknowledge a blunder of such
magnitude would have adverse repercussions for Soviet power at home and in
Eastern Europe -though it also might open the way for a rapprochement with
China.

But carrying on is hardly more attractive. Short of Moscow's sending a million
troops, the Afghan resistance is bound to continue. What's worse: the costs of
admitting a huge mistake or of indefinitely bleeding the Soviet Union and an
Islamic neighbor? If Mr. Gorbachev is big enough to scorn the latter course, he
can bring this cruel war finally and mercifully to an end.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, JANUARY 2, 1987

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 961 words


International

A3-11

Cardinal O'Connor apologized to Israelis and their Government for canceling
meetings he had scheduled with Israeli leaders. The New York Archbishop spoke in
his first public ceremony in Jerusalem.

Page A1

The Virgin Mary will be honored in the first Marian year since 1953-54 beginning
in June. Pope John Paul II announced the observance in a homily during a mass at
St. Peter's Basilica.

A7

Chinese students defied a Government ban and held a mass protest for democracy
in the capital. The demonstration by thousands of college students was the
largest in Beijing since 1976.

A8

South African police fired birdshot and tear gas to disperse looters on a black
beach, and a black mob attacked a train and killed an Indian youth in a day of
racial violence on the Indian Ocean coast.

A3

Stalemate in the Iran-Iraq war has raised fears that the conflict may spread to
other Persian Gulf countries, including Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, according to
Western military officials in the region.

A11

Afghan leaders set a cease-fire in the seven-year war with rebel forces starting
Jan. 15. But a spokesman for the seven insurgent groups said they rejected the
move by the Soviet-backed Government.

A10



Warsaw hippies get tolerance

A4


Kohl's wrong tape on TV

A4


Vietnam assembly ends

A9





National

A12-17, B6-7, D12-13


Officials suspected arson in a San Juan hotel swept by a flash fire that killed
at least 43 people and injured 1,000. The blaze began in a ballroom where union
members had rejected a proposed contact.

A1

Hotel union leaders insisted they had nothing to do with the fire that engulfed
the San Juan hotel. A survivor said a hotel cook had told her he feared violence
in the union's bitter dispute with the hotel.

D12

20 guests in the burning hotel lay sprawled on a 16th-floor balcony for four and
a half hours Wednesday, certain they were going to die. But firefighters crossed
the smoke-filled room and led them to the roof.

A1

Survivors were angry, confused and uncomfortable in the wake of the Dupont Plaza
Hotel blaze. Officials said it could be weeks before they had positive
identifications of the badly burned victims.

D13

New York survivors relieved

D13

Puerto Rico does not require hotels to have sprinkler systems, Governor Rafael
Hernandez Colon acknowledged. He said that hotels would be required to install
them as soon as possible.

D13

The fire is likely to expose the owner, Hotel Systems International Inc. of
Santa Monica, Calif., to huge lawsuits similar to those brought against the
M-G-M Grand Hotel in Las Vegas in 1980, lawyers said.

D12

The President, stressing armament, seeks $1.8 trillion of military spending over
five years while cutting farm aid by more than half and sharply curtailing the
growth of many other domestic programs.

A1

A man with the AIDS virus who is accused of street prostitution has officials in
Jackson Miss., in a quandary over whether to prosecute him and risk spreading
the AIDS in prison, or free him and risk spreading the disease on the street.

A12

Reports of steering problems and unintended acceleration in some General Motors
cars with front-wheel drive have prompted Federal officials to begin an inquiry
involving six million automobiles from the 1980 to 1984 model years.

A17

A bullet that wounded a passenger on a jet approaching Raleigh-Durham Airport
Wednesday could have ricocheted, killed the pilot and caused the airliner to
crash, an F.B.I. spokesman said.

B7

The 1963 onion field murder of Ian Campbell, a police officer, prompted a life
sentence for Gregory Ulas Powell. The California Supreme Court has issued a
ruling that may result in his freedom.

A13

3 of every 100 American men were in jail, in prison or under correctional
supervision at the end of 1985, the Justice Department said. It said the number
of adults under supervision increased by 17 percent from 1983 to 1985.

A17



Shift in loan plan sought

A14



Washington Talk

B6


Perplexity and the Boesky case

Loose lips and nuclear ships

Regional

B1-5


Governor Cuomo was inaugurated for a second term, saying his administration had
proved that ''the New York idea works'' - that government could be both
compassionate and fiscally responsible.

A1

A snowstorm touched the metropolitan region, after causing extensive damage
along the Southern coast. The area prepared for coastal flooding, icy roads and
traffic bottlenecks in this morning's rush.

A1

Lawyers for two surviving victims of a racial attack said their clients would
cooperate with Federal authorities, and they urged Governor Cuomo to name a
special state prosecutor to handle the case.

A1

An off-duty police officer was shot in the face without warning by youths the
police said were carrying concealed switch-blades, brass knuckles and crack
after he asked them not to smoke in a nonsmoking Long Island Rail Road car.

B1

A 71-year-old French tourist died from head injuries suffered in a robbery near
Times Square on New Year's Eve. The police said the victim, Jean Casse, struck
his head when he fell during the attack on East 52d Street by a young man.

B3

The new Corporation Counsel for New York City will be Peter L. Zimroth, a former
chief assistant prosecutor in the Manhattan District Attorney's office,
according to Koch administration officials.

B1

Early Jan. 1 subway cars were filled with revelers wearing red-sequined
slippers, or cowboy boots with spurs, or leather chaps, or confetti in their
hair, or cardboard tiaras or metallic blue fezzes.

B1



Kunstler is a subject at trial

B3


Lundine is optimistic about role

B5



Neediest Cases

D14


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WARSAW JOURNAL;
HIPPIE FOES OF THE DRAFT HANDLED WITH KID GLOVES

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1173 words

DATELINE: WARSAW, Jan. 1


As they waited outside a local court where their confederates were on trial for
taking part in an illegal demonstration, the members and supporters of Freedom
and Peace, Poland's draft resistance movement, presented a picture of protest
that stylistically, at least, seemed closer to 1960's American hippies and
yippies than to the banned Solidarity movement.

The young men, all in their 20's, included some with long hair and some with
single earrings. One wore one red sneaker and one blue one, and another was
dressed in tails, a rhinestone on his satin lapel.

With them were women who hugged them and joked openly about police efforts to
keep them from the courtroom, where 22 detained members of the organization were
being charged with staging a sidewalk protest urging the release from prison of
two members who refused military service. The men were released a few days after
the protest.

Angry stares of young police officers at the courthouse seemed like flashbacks
to construction workers in New York heaping abuse upon antiwar protesters of the
Vietnam era.

'A Personal Thing'

''Yes, I felt the police hatred was a personal thing,'' said Jacek Czaputowicz a
short time after the court aquitted half the demonstrators and fined the rest.
An economist, 32 years old and unemployed, he is one of the leaders of Freedom
and Peace group.

''It was not just professional disdain,'' he said. ''It is personal, passionate
hatred. I think it is because we are spontaneous and that, among other things,
we are ridiculing the military myth so powerful in this country while they are
so neat.''

''But, there was also something else,'' he went on. ''It was clear that the
police were under orders from the top to handle us like eggs - no hitting, no
rough stuff - and that must have infuriated them.''

In November, 51 supporters of the group, including 2 West German antiwar
activists, were detained for several hours by the police near the town of Tarnow
as they prepared to place a wreath on the grave of Otton Szimek, a German
soldier executed by the Nazis for refusing to kill civilians. ''We were kept
from the grave,'' said one of the group. ''But here, too, the police officials
who questioned us acted as if they had gloves on.''

'Respected Our Views'

''They said they respected our views and our goals but that they were only
concerned that our wreathlaying ceremony might be exploited by those German
revanchists who yearn for the formerly German parts of Poland.''

Why exactly should this still small group of antiwar. political oppositionists
and ecologically concerned young people be accorded deferential treatment is a
source of wonder and debate within the wider opposition where Freedom and Peace
has allies and supporters. After all, some of the older opposition had told the
young Freedom and Peace people they seemed particularly vulnerable.

Though small in membership the group is the most cohesive organization to have
arisen since Solidarity, reflecting ideas and tactics of a generation swept up
by hopes unleashed in Solidarity's bloom while its members were still in school.

It was mostly made up of students lacking the protective validity of prominent
workers such as Solidarity still enjoys. Moreover, by stressing draft
resistance, the group's members were aware that they might arouse disapproval
among pious Catholics and Government critics who still widely regard military
service as a patriotic obligation.

Remarkable Victories

And yet, despite the warnings from their older mentors, the group has not only
thrived and expanded, but has won remarkable victories.

''With our hunger strikes, demonstrations and petitions, we have won the release
of people from prison who refused to take the oath of military service and more
recently we pressured the Government to extend the amnesty for political
prisoners to embrace people who went to prison rather than report for army
service,'' Mr. Czaputowicz said. The group is eclectic in its goals and
amorphous in its membership, including conscientious objectors, pacifists and
even some quite militant anti-Communists. A minority is concerned with
ecological issues, pushing for plans to have draft resisters allowed to clean up
the environment.

Links With Western Groups

Pamphlets and leaflets are prepared secretly and members have established links
with antiwar groups in Western countries while developing less close contacts
with men and women interested in independent social action in the Eastern bloc.

Perhaps the group's most extensive campaign was its support of those young men
who were prepared to go to the army but not to swear, as all new soldiers must,
that they will uphold the interests of Poland's military allies, which is
understood as an act of fealty to the Soviet Union.

Freedom and Peace has suggested that some army units be set up for those
unwilling to swear what it views as subservience to a foreign power. The group
has never received any direct response from the Government, but Mr. Czaputowicz
maintains there is a continuing process of ''negotiations through protest and
fact.''

Another demand put forward by Freedom and Peace has called for a system of
institutionalized alternate service for those whose world views will not allow
them take arms. At present, Poland does permit some young men to work off their
army time in community service, but Mr. Czaputowicz said the decision in these
cases is made entirely by military authorities and it never includes those in
the top health category.

Right of Alternate Service

He said Freedom and Peace wanted all young men to have the right to perform
alternate service outside of the military if they wanted to, by working in
hospitals or on squads repairing ecological damage.

Mr. Czaputowicz, a former leader of the independent university student movement
of 1980, said Freedom and Peace had about 100 full-time, fully involved
campaigners but that there were about 10,000 variously involved supporters
associated with chapters in all large Polish cities.

Among its members are people with well-known names and well known genealogies.
For example, one of the leaders of Freedom and Peace in Cracow is Konstanty
Miodowicz, a lecturer at Jagelonian University, whose father, Alfred Miodowicz,
is the head of the labor unions set up by the Government to replace the outlawed
Solidarity unions. The elder Mr. Miodowicz is also a member of the Communist
Party Politburo. Also, Jan Jozef Lipski, an internationally respected historian
and opposition patriarch, has lent his name and stature to the Freedom and Peace
group.

The presence of such people in the ranks is at times offered as explanation for
a degree of official tolerance. But Mr. Czaputowicz thinks that what has so far
provided his group with the greatest protection has been the support it has
gained from those Western, mostly West European, antiwar groups, which have been
singled out by Moscow as important factors in Soviet disarmament and European
strategies.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Freedom and Peace members demonstrating for release of
comrades in Warsaw (NYT/Witold Jaroslaw Szulecki)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM PARLEY ENDS; LEADERS AREN'T NAMED

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 468 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 1


A six-day session of Vietnam's National Assembly ended in Hanoi on Monday
without the naming of new Government leaders. No explanation was given by the
official Vietnamese news organizations for the absence of expected Cabinet
changes.

A Vietnamese News Agency account of the session said only that the assembly had
approved a draft law on marriage and the family, adopted development and budget
plans for 1987 - including a call for a 7 percent economic growth rate - and
welcomed a Soviet call for a nuclear-free world.

On Dec. 17, in the largest shake-up in party history, four prominent Communist
leaders resigned or were dropped from the party Politburo during the sixth
national Vietnamese Communist Party Congress. It was assumed by scholars and
diplomats, as well as by some Vietnamese officials interviewed by journalists,
that the former Politburo members would also lose their Government positions
when the National Assembly met.

Most Western journalists have been barred from reporting in Vietnam during the
last few months.

Resigned at Congress

The leaders holding concurrent high party and governmental positions who
resigned during the party congress were Pham Van Dong, the country's Chairman of
the Council of Ministers, or Prime Minister, and Truong Chinh, the party's
General Secretary and Chairman of the State Council, or President of Vietnam.
Mr. Chinh was replaced as party General Secretary by Nguyen Van Linh.

Le Duc Tho, a veteran party leader, also retired Dec. 17, and To Huu, a former
deputy Prime Minister, was quietly dropped from the Politburo. Mr. Huu had
already lost his Government job in a shake-up last June.

In addition, Gen. Van Tien Dong, the country's Defense Minister, lost his
Politburo seat during the party congress. Vietnamese exiles say he or members of
his family may have been involved in corruption scnadals. He was also associated
with the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

Vietnamese officials say new Government appointments can be made at any time.
Some scholars believe they may come when there is less public attention focused
on national meetings, or they could be postponed until June 1987, when a new
assembly is due to be convened.

Speculation Over Divisions

There is considerable speculation that continuing divisions in the party are
holding up the formation of a new government.

According to the Vietnamese Embassy in Bangkok, the new Politburo of the
Vietnamese Communist Party, from whom the Government officials are likely to be
named, is as follows:

Full members in order of rank are Nguyen Van Linh, Pham Hung, Vo Chi Cong, Do
Muoi, Vo Van Kiet, Le Duc Anh, Nguyen Duc Tam, Nguyen Co Thach, Dong Si Nguyen,
Tran Xuan Bach, Nguyen Thanh Binh, Doan Khue and Mai Chi Tho. There is one
alternate member, Dao Duy Tung.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Nina Darnton

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1376 words


OLIVER STONE, the writer and director of ''Platoon,'' the critically acclaimed
film about the day-to-day life and fears of an infantry platoon during the
Vietnam War, was a soldier in Vietnam from 1967 to 1968. When he assembled his
30-man cast - most of the actors too young to have fought in the war - he had to
find a way to help them understand something about the world they were
portraying. He hired a retired Marine captain, Dale Dye, and three Marine
reservists, who put the actors through two weeks of rigorous field training on
location in the Philippines. The training was difficult and physically
demanding, and although it was closer to playing war in summer camp than
actually fighting for survival, it did engender some of the exhaustion, strain
and comradeship of battle conditions, making a more cohesive and convincing
cast.

''We all had to deal with the task at hand,'' said Willem Dafoe, who plays
Sergeant Elias, the officer who is the soul of the unit. ''It was fairly
grueling. It's not easy shooting in those conditions in the Philippines. There
were no usual Hollywood perks, no honey wagons'' - dressing-room trailers -
''for the actors to relax in, no good food. We sat in foxholes and ate rations
and never slept more than two hours at a time. So a real camaraderie developed.
The training really helped - though it sounds kind of self-important and
self-satisfied to talk about it too much. But it did set the tone of this being
important. Oliver had a story to tell and the training was a kind of initiation
that made us somehow worthy to tell his story.

''I'm not saying we really suffered, and I'm not saying we know war, but we did
something difficult that helped us get into it,'' Mr. Dafoe said. ''It became
very important to all of us to get the respect of Captain Dye and to respect
what he had done, regardless of how we felt politically about the war.'' The New
Vision Of Carlos Saura The career of the Spanish director Carlos Saura, whose
film ''El Amor Brujo'' is playing at the Cinema Studio 1, illustrates a paradox
in the relationship between art and political freedom. Mr. Saura, a democrat
with strong anti-Fascist convictions, remained in his native Spain throughout
the Franco period, managing to produce a body of work that expressed his
personal vision as well as, implicitly, his opposition to Franco's politics.
Although his country was ruled by a dictator and his films had to pass a censor,
Mr. Saura often concerned himself with forbidden themes. One of his most
political and controversial films, ''La Prima Angelica,'' managed to pass the
censors but aroused a great deal of controversy in its frank examination of
Nationalist forces and values during the Spanish Civil War, especially their
oppressive influence on one Spanish family. Another film, ''Anna and the
Wolves,'' was banned in Spain in the early 1970's.

Franco has been dead for more than 11 years now, and Spain is governed by a
freely elected Socialist Government. The kind of censorship imposed during the
Franco era is a thing of the past. Yet Mr. Saura's last three films - all
featuring the dancing skills of Spain's foremost flamenco star and
choreographer, Antonio Gades - are movies he could easily have made during
Franco's regime. ''Blood Wedding,'' the first collaboration between Mr. Gades
and Mr. Saura, was a commercial success. ''Carmen'' was one of the
highest-grossing Spanish movies ever made and was nominated for an Academy
Award, and the latest, ''El Amor Brujo'' (''Love, the Magician''), made at a
cost of about $2 million, is one of the most expensive films in Spanish history.
Why has Mr. Saura turned away from social and political themes now that he has
the freedom to say whatever he wants?

''In my case,'' said Mr. Saura, ''it's a moral or ethical question. With Franco,
I needed to attack a system which I found hateful, within the limits of
possibilities under censorship. When Franco died, Spain changed. There is
complete freedom, so I am free, too. I feel freer to do things that are more
personal.''

Mr. Saura pointed out that his films had never been political in the sense of
promoting a manifesto or party. ''The only politics were that they were
anti-Franco,'' he said. Life on the Fringe, In Pakula's 'Orphans'

Although the play ''Orphans'' is set in Philadelphia, Alan J. Pakula moved the
story's locale to New Jersey for his film version, and used several shots of New
York City. ''There are certain New York locations that are just fabulous,'' Mr.
Pakula said. ''For example, the first shot is at the new Convention Center - a
highly unlikely opening for this picture, but it provides a total contrast to
where and how these boys live. The story didn't mandate Philadelphia, it could
take place in any major city.''

Mr. Pakula wrapped up the shooting of ''Orphans'' a few months ago. The film,
starring Albert Finney and based on Lyle Kessler's play, is tentatively
scheduled to open in early fall.

It is about two brothers, living together on the margins of society, who have
evolved a strangely symbiotic relationship. Treat, the elder (Matthew Modine),
obtains money by mugging and picking pockets, and looks after the younger,
sickly Phillip (Kevin Anderson). Mr. Finney, re-creating his London stage role,
plays Harold, the Chicago businessman whom Treat attempts to hold for ransom and
who turns the tables, transforming their shabby lives.

''The story is really about two young people living on the outskirts of
society,'' Mr. Pakula said. ''In New York there is always the sense of wealth
and power - the feeling is even in the buildings. Even when you're not directly
using that idea, it's there in the background. This story had the quality of a
legend. While it's real, it's a heightened reality, and you have to try to use
sharpened visual contrasts. For me, no place gives that like New York. The
contrast is extreme. It should be like going from the Emerald City to where the
boys live on the outskirts of civilization.'' For Disney Films, Time Means
Profits ''Lady and the Tramp,'' Disney's classic animated feature about the
blossoming of true love between a pampered cocker spaniel and a good-hearted
mutt with street-smarts, was back to warm the hearts of a new generation of
children this Christmas. The film, which Disney distributors estimated would
gross about $36 million to $37 million this time, has made over $13 million so
far.

Disney films, like good wine, have a way of increasing in value with time. When
the film first opened in 1955, it grossed about $9 million, according to Richard
Cook, senior vice president for domestic distribution at Disney. When it was
brought out again in 1962, it took a slight dip, grossing between $6 million and
$7 million. But in 1971, the film made $10 million, and when it was re-released
in 1980, it grossed $27 million. ''Even allowing for inflation,'' Mr. Cook said,
''the increase is appreciable.''

The pattern seems to hold true for most Disney animated films. Their commercial
value is not measured in the first-run grosses, but in their increasing profit
margin over the years.

''One Hundred and One Dalmatians'' first opened in March 1961, grossing $14
million. It has had three releases since then, each one better than the last. In
1969, it earned its company $15 million; in 1979, $19 million, and in 1985 it
brought in a whopping $32 million. Considering that the Disney classics require
no huge expenses to keep them going, the films certainly seem to be paying their
own way.

One of the most dramatic cases is ''Pinocchio,'' Mr. Cook said. ''It was first
released in 1940, when it grossed about $4 million to $5 million. Of course
admission then was probably about 25 cents. In 1978, it grossed $15 million and
in 1984, $26 million. It was out in video but after Christmas we stopped it. As
we release new movies for video, we will call back others. We'll continue to
re-evaluate things to see what is better for us to do commercially.''

Disney releases about three animated features a year. At Easter it will bring
back ''The Aristocats,'' and next Christmas - along with a new animated version
of ''Oliver Twist'' - ''Cinderella'' will once again go to the ball and marry
the handsome prince.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William Dafoe

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 3, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BANGKOK JOURNAL;
SIHANOUK'S SON JOINS FATHER'S FIGHT

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 2


Eight years ago this month, when the Vietnamese Army marched into Phnom Penh and
overthrew Pol Pot, Prince Norodom Ranariddh was living the untroubled life of a
university lecturer in France.

He thought the turbulent years of his Cambodian youth were behind him. His
father, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, had been in and out of power - first as King,
later as leader of a Government overthrown by Washington-backed officers, and
finally as Pol Pot's head of a Khmer Rouge state, brought back to give the
regime respectability.

''I was not so rich in France,'' he said of life in exile. ''But I was very
free.''

As the anniversary Jan. 7 of Vietnamese occupation nears, Prince Ranariddh, 43
years old, is back in Southeast Asia, deeply enmeshed in the torment of what he
calls ''my poor country.'' He is commander of a growing army of guerrillas, one
of three forces allied against the regime in Phnom Penh, as well as the
alliance's diplomatic strategist. He is also becoming in some Cambodian eyes an
heir to the powerful symbolic role of his father.

Prince Ranariddh, in an interview on New Year's Eve in his Bangkok home, said he
did not seek a royal role. But in the minds of exiles, he said, Prince Sihanouk
is certainly identified with a period of ''real independence for our country,
and also peace, liberty and development - a very beautiful time.''

A Learning Experience

Prince Ranariddh said that in the last three years of shuttling back and forth
between the Cambodian border and Beijing, where his father is based, he had come
to know the Cambodian people for the first time.

''I was the son of a King,'' he said. ''I lived in the palace, and I spent a lot
of time - maybe more than 10 years - abroad, especially in France. And so I did
not know the Khmer people, the Khmer mentality, the Khmer feeling.''

''Thanks to my father, I have had the great joy to discover my people,'' said
the Prince, a scholar of international law with a Ph.D. from the University of
Aix-en-Provence, where he later taught.

The Prince said he is worried that the Soviet Union, which supports Vietnam, and
China, which backs the Cambodian insurgents, might strike a deal on Cambodia, to
the country's detriment.

''I cannot believe that China and the Soviet Union, the two Communist
superpowers, could allow Cambodia to adopt a liberal ideology,'' he said.

''In Washington at the State Department recently they told me: 'Don't worry
about that, because the hostility between the Soviet Union and China is so deep
that there is no chance they will reach an agreement on Cambodia,' '' he said.
''The Americans are really very naive.''

The Popularity Contest

The Prince said a Chinese journalist recently asked him for proof that his
father was still popular in his homeland.

''I said the proof is that the Chinese Government had printed a hundred thousand
portraits of Prince Sihanouk and sent them to the Khmer Rouge to take inside
Cambodia,'' he said.

''Could they bring to our people the portrait of Mr. Pol Pot?'' he asked.
''Could they play on the radio the voice of Mr. Khieu Samphan?''

Khieu Samphan represents the Khmer Rouge in the coalition, which also includes
the Sihanoukists and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front. Pol Pot, who
led the Khmer Rouge Government that left hundreds of thousands dead from 1975 to
1978, is said to have retired; there are reports that he is gravely ill.

The Prince said he doubted that anything in the Khmer Rouge's radical ideology
had changed, despite highly publicized commitments to more centrist policies.

Rivalry Within Alliance

The Khmer Rouge remains the strongest member of the coalition. Prince Ranariddh
said it was imperative that his army equalize resources with the more powerful
and numerous Khmer Rouge, so that Cambodians who do not want the Vietnamese will
cease to fear a return of the Khmer Rouge.

The National Liberation Front, wracked by internal bickering, is the smallest of
the three groups. Prince Ranariddh dismissed it, along with many members of the
exiled Cambodian middle class who, he said, ''struggle from the coffeehouses of
Paris and New York.''

The Prince talked about his ''Solarz projects'' - paid for with about $4 million
in United States aid for which Representative Steven J. Solarz, the Brooklyn
Democrat who heads the House subcommittee on East Asia, was a key Congressional
sponsor.

The Prince said the money had bought medicine, clothes and radios. He said more
money would allow the Voice of the Khmers, a 10-kilowatt radio station, to be
upgraded to reach all of Cambodia.

He said there could be no military victory against the Vietnamese. His only
hope, he said, was to ''mobilize the people'' into noncooperation and sabotage.
He said more money was needed to ''win hearts'' by sending medical teams into
the Cambodian countryside and outbidding the Vietnamese for Cambodian farmers'
rice.

Erosion of Culture

Prince Ranariddh reserves his most eloquent anguish for the erosion of Khmer
culture.

''A lot of people talk just about the war in Cambodia,'' he said. ''But there is
another process: the Vietnamization of Cambodia.''

''There are 700,000 Vietnamese civilians in Cambodia, and they are exploiting
our soil,'' he said. ''Even in the very small villages, there are already
Vietnamese merchants. They buy rice from our people at very low prices and send
it on trucks back to Vietnam.''

''The Vietnamese have rewritten our bilateral history,'' he went on, adding that
in almost every area of culture subtle changes were taking place ''that the
foreigner does not see.'' On a note pad, he sketched the evolution of classical
dance students' costumes from a traditional Khmer to a Vietnamese style.

''The Vietnamese have tried to Vietnamize us many times in history,'' the Prince
said. ''But this time is more dangerous.''

''They are supported by the very powerful Soviet Union,'' he said. ''They also
have an ideology, the Communist ideology, that is very powerful. France
colonized us just economically. But now the colonization is political,
physical.''

''Maybe,'' he said ''and I hope not - this is the beginning of the end of the
ethnic Khmer nation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 10, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of editing errors, a Bangkok dispatch on Jan. 3 about Prince Norodom
Ranariddh, a Cambodian guerrilla leader who is Prince Norodom Sihanouk's son,
incorrectly described his travels and the relative size of the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front. Prince Ranariddh said he shuttled back and forth
between the Cambodian border and Bangkok, not Beijing. And the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front is not the smallest of the three groups in the
Cambodian guerrilla coalition; the Sihanouk force is.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Prince Norodom Ranariddh visiting Cambodian refugees at a
border camp in Thailand (The Bangkok Post)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONTRA SUPPORTER DESCRIBES HIS ROLE

BYLINE: By GEORGE VOLSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Jan. 3


A Cuban-American who was reportedly among the key operatives in supplying
weapons to Nicaraguan rebels described his part in that effort Friday.

In his first public statement on the subject, the Cuban-American, Felix
Rodriguez, said, ''At the end of 1985 I became marginally involved with a group
supporting the Nicaraguan freedom fighters.''

Mr. Rodriguez is one of several Cuban-Americans who are said to have been
working in El Salvador to assist the rebel supply network. An undetermined
number of Cuban-Americans assist the rebels from Honduras, according to many
sources here.

Eugene Hasenfus, an American cargo loader whose plane was shot down in Nicaragua
and who was held prisoner by the Sandinistas, had described Mr. Rodriguez, who
is sometimes known as Max Gomez, as a key contact in San Salvador.

Statement Read on TV

''My principal concern was the competence and the conduct of the key personnel
who directed the supply network,'' said the Rodriguez statement, which was read
by the lawyer, Fernando Mendigutia, on Spanish-language television here.

''I never had any knowledge from where they were receiving funds, nor did I have
control over the personnel of that group,'' Mr. Rodriguez said.

He said that he was recently interviewed by agents of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and that his statement to the F.B.I. was voluntary. The F.B.I.
office in Miami had no comment.

He said his main reason for issuing his statement was to ''put in its proper
perspective certain erroneous speculations'' that have appeared in the press
concerning the role of Vice President Bush in the controversy surrounding the
financing of the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras.

Asked about the whereabouts of his client, Mr. Mendigutia said Mr. Rodriguez was
in the United States. According to some of his friends, he recently had a hernia
operation and is convalescing in the Miami area.

Three Meetings With Bush

Mr. Rodriguez said he met with Mr. Bush three times - twice in Washington, on
Jan. 22, 1985, and on May 1, 1986, and once ''briefly'' in Miami, on May 20,
1986. He added that ''at no point'' were the operations connected with the
contras mentioned during these talks.

Mr. Rodriguez, who fought with United States forces in Vietnam, said he went to
El Salvador on March 15, 1985, about two months after he first met with the Vice
President.

He said his principal role in El Salvador was to ''try to implement a helicopter
concept I developed in Vietnam to help the people of El Salvador eradicate the
Communist insurgency.''

He added that statistics on fighting insurgency issued by the Salvadoran armed
forces indicated the ''success of this concept'' and that the Reagan
Administration, the Pentagon and Congress had been informed ''to this effect.''

He also denied that he ever discussed the contra operations with Donald P.
Gregg, military adviser to the Vice President, or with other high aides to Mr.
Bush, until Aug. 8, 1986, ''as described in the chronology of events released by
the office of the Vice President.''

Explains Breaking of Silence

In his statement, Mr. Rodriguez emphasized that he had decided to ''break the
professional code of silence'' because he became ''deeply concerned with
inaccurate and repeated allegations in the media which appeared to doubt the
truthfulness of what the Vice President and members of his staff have said.''

He did not clarify who introduced him to Mr. Bush, or the role of the Vice
President or Mr. Gregg in his job in El Salvador, which was apparently to be a
counterinsurgency consultant with the Salvadoran armed forces at Ilopango Air
Base outside San Salvador.

Neither did he say who was instrumental in his ''marginal involvement'' with the
contra supply network at Ilopango.

According to some of his friends, Mr. Rodriguez's job in El Salvador has ended
because of the publicity surrounding his presence there.

''He's an agent who had been burned out,'' a friend said. ''There is no way he
can go back there now.''

HASENFUS TO MEET INVESTIGATORS

MARINETTE, Wis., Jan. 3 (AP) -Eugene Hasenfus, who survived the crash of a rebel
supply plane in Nicaragua, will meet here next week with Federal investigators,
his attorney said today.

The lawyer, Ernest N. Pleger, said two F.B.I. agents would interview Mr.
Hasenfus on Monday and Tuesday.

A Customs Service official from Miami is also scheduled to meet with Mr.
Hasenfus on Tuesday, Mr. Pleger said.

He said Mr. Hasenfus's information might be forwarded to Congressional
committees for investigations into arms smuggling to Nicaraguan rebels.

Mr. Hasenfus, a 45-year-old former marine, was captured by Nicaragua on Oct. 6,
the day after his plane was shot down. A Nicaraguan tribunal sentenced him to 30
years in prison for terrorism and other crimes, but he was pardoned Dec. 17 and
released.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'THE COMPANY' AS BIG BUSINESS

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3234 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


ON 15 flights early last year, the Southern Air Transport Company's big-bellied
aircraft took 406 tons of cargo into El Salvador's Ilopango military airport,
the principal transshipment point for Nicaraguan insurgents. Southern Air, a
charter airline based in Miami, is a risk carrier, charging premium rates to fly
to hot spots that large scheduled airlines will not go near. ''We do spur of the
moment, ad hoc work, anywhere,'' said William Kress, a spokesman for Southern
Air. The company's role in supplying the Nicaraguan Contras might have remained
secret but for an occupational hazard: On Oct. 5, a transport traced to Southern
Air was shot down over Nicaragua - and the sole survivor, Eugene Hasenfus,
quickly told interrogators that he thought his mission was backed by the Central
Intelligence Agency.

Now, as the Congress prepares to take a close look at the recent Iran
guns-for-hostages affair, Southern Air's activities are coming under new
scrutiny. For it was Southern Air that flew the American weapons to Israel, for
shipment to Iran.

But Southern Air - which denies that it does work for the C.I.A. - is not the
only company to get involved in covert foreign missions. While no one has taken
a recent count of just how many companies are involved, it is well known in
intelligence circles that ''the company,'' as the C.I.A. is nicknamed, uses all
kinds of private-sector businesses to carry out its own business of gathering
intelligence worldwide: transportation, export-import, construction and
security-services companies, banks, public relations firms, and thousands of
tiny companies that do not do much of anything - except provide cover for C.I.A.
activities.

Most companies that do work for the C.I.A. are mere shells, lightly capitalized
''paper'' companies set up for a quick arms purchase or an untraceable financial
transfer, and then dissolved. But some are legitimate continuing operations, for
which the C.I.A. links are just an incidental part of business. Many companies
have a long history of C.I.A. ties: Southern Air was a wholly owned C.I.A.
subsidiary not long ago. A few businesses, including an insurance complex, are
still owned outright by the agency.

''We get the impression that they have many, many thousands of such companies
throughout the world,'' said Michael F. Barrett Jr., counsel for the House
subcommittee on oversight and investigations. ''Setting them up is a routine
matter.'' MOST experts say these companies - known as ''proprietaries,'' a term
left over from an era when most were actual subsidiaries of the C.I.A., rather
than simply contracting with the agency, as most do now - are a necessary tool
for the agency. ''If you're going to have an intelligence service, you need
proprietaries,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, vice
chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.

Over the years, Washington policy makers have had intense disagreements about
the implications of using private, profit-making companies in sensitive
intelligence work. But the policy issue is only part of the problem. For the
C.I.A. is a sort of shadow force in the private sector, a barely visible
presence whose patronage can give certain favored companies a huge competitive
advantage - and consign others to failure. (See box.) Most analysts agree that
C.I.A. business is not a big factor in the national economy. ''My impression is
that they were never large enough to have a significant impact,'' said Henry S.
Rowen, a professor at the Stanford University Graduate School of Business and
former chairman of the National Intelligence Council.

But it does cause ripples here and there. ''I'm sure they have a big impact on
the Beltway,'' said Robert D. Hormats, a former senior economic official in four
administrations, referring to the Washington ring road jammed with
high-technology and consulting companies that serve the C.I.A. and other
Government clients.

Sometimes the agency acts as a kind of wild card, affecting the economy in
unforeseeable ways:

* According to a former intelligence official, C.I.A. objections are among the
reasons behind the present interagency review of the proposed sale of the
Fairchild Semiconductor Corporation of Mountain View, Calif., to Japan's Fujitsu
Company. Fairchild is among the suppliers of classified electronics gear for the
C.I.A.'s Langley, Va., headquarters, a few miles inside the beltway. The agency
is worried about diffusion of its secrets in Japan, the source said. Paul G.
Hirsch, director of information systems for Fairchild, said he had no knowledge
of this.

* The C.I.A.'s casualty and life insurance complex was originally capitalized at
$4 million in 1962, after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba spurred action
to provide death and disability benefits for agents whose cover would be blown
by participation in the C.I.A. or Civil Service retirement plans. By 1974, the
complex had assets of more than $30 million, according to a 1976 Senate
committee report and even by conservative estimates, the figure is now several
times that. These assets are invested in offshore time deposits of American
banks, long-term interest-bearing securities and common stocks.

* Much of the money appropriated to the C.I.A. each year - the agency's budget
is estimated at $2.5 billion to $3 billion - is deposited in banks here and
abroad to cover operational needs. Since these accounts often maintain balances
much larger than the amount needed to offset banking costs, they can be an
important source of bank profits. The First National Bank of Chicago is among
the banks named in government documents as holding C.I.A. accounts, but Anthony
B. Zehnder, a bank spokesman said he could not confirm any relationship with the
C.I.A.

* Where companies connected with the C.I.A. compete with private enterprises,
they may cause significant damage. One case that came to light involves the
failure of at least 15 small, nonscheduled airlines in the 1960's following the
C.I.A.'s purchase of Southern Air to conduct some of its risky business in
Central and South America. The C.I.A. insisted that Southern Air bid on military
transport contracts, to help maintain its cover as a civilian airline. Over
three years, $250 million of military transport contracts went to verted to
Southern Air and five other airlines that knew of its C.I.A. link.

Private-sector businesses help the C.I.A. in many different ways. They provide
the agency's Office of Logistics with many of its technological needs, from
super computers to super bugging devicies. They purchase weapons, foreign
armaments and technical devices; conduct security investigations; buy real
estate; insure uninsurable risks; train foreign police forces, and run airlines
in remote areas.

Adm. Stansfield Turner, who directed the C.I.A. during the Carter years, said
the proprietaries are needed to provide cover for C.I.A. operations: ''You run
into some anomalous situations when you are trying to make people live in two
environments at once. Little things like a paycheck and I.R.S. accounting can
give away their second identify, and so you make changes in an innocent way to
help them keep their cover.''

But mixing statecraft and profit can create real trouble.

''The proprietaries have been one of the sources of the problems the agency has
run into over the years,'' said Admiral Turner. There is always a risk, he said,
that the businessmen brought into an operation will persuade intelligence agents
to take actions that do more to increase profits than to help the operation, a
phenomenon he referred to as ''the tail wagging the dog.''

And in this case, the tail may be bigger than the dog. While exact figures are
impossible to come by, most analysts say that the agency's outside activities
probably involve more peoactivities probably involve more people than its
internal activities.

By the last estimates, made in the 1970's at hearings of the Senate Select
Committee to Study Intelligence Activities, the C.I.A.'s wholly owned companies
employed 20,000 people -while the parent agency had only 18,000 employees.
According to committee estimates, the agency had a gross annual income of $1.6
billion.

The Select Committee was established to investigate a series of abuses by the
C.I.A. and its proprietaries, from infiltration of civil rights groups to
interference with the Allende Government in Chile. Amid growing criticism - and
with the end of the Vietnam War lessening the agency's transport needs
subsidiaries - the C.I.A. sold off its free-wheeling airline proprietaries.

Although the C.I.A. has fewer subsidiaries now, and contracts out most of its
business to specialists with intelligence ties, analysts say outside businesses'
role in agency projects has increased markedly under WilC.I.A. directors in
decades. Some experts say there may be more people involved now than in the
1970's.

''The agency uses fewer wholly owned subsidiaries and more private contractors,
but the range of activities is little changed, and the volume of business could
be 10 times higher than in our day,'' said L. Fletcher Prouty, a retired Air
Force Colonel who ran many of the covert activities in the 1960's as chief of
special operations with the joint chiefs of staff.

As a result of the furor over the sale of arms to Iran - and the ongoing debate
about the exact roles played by the C.I.A., Manucher Chorbanifar, an Iranian
arms dealer, and Adnan Khashoggi, a Saudi financier - Congress may set new
limits on the use of outside businessmen in C.I.A. actions.

''Some people in the C.I.A. tend to forget they're still working for a
Government entity that needs to follow certain rules and accountability,'' said
Senator Leahy, adding that the intelligence panel would probably consider the
problem next year. ''I know a lot of the proprietaries around the world,'' he
said. ''I've talked to the people who run them. But now,'' after this Iran
operation, ''I want more assurances that they're not handling things that we've
agreed they can't do.''

Southern Air was not the only private company implicated in the Iran affair.
Lake Resources Inc. - a Panamanian shell company set up in May 1985, about two
months before the first shipments of weapons to Iran, and dissolved a week after
the White House confirmed the sales -was far more typical of the sort of
operation the C.I.A. uses.

Such shell companies maintain the fiction that they are going businesses by
keeping bank accounts, generating business correspondence, retaining accounting
records for audits, filing tax returns, and sometimes even obtaining bogus
employee identification numbers. They usually have only $5,000 to $10,000 in
capital, with a roster of taciturn lawyers as directors, officers and
shareholders.

Lake Resources' most important asset was an account in the Swiss Credit Bank,
where the profits from the weapons sale were deposited -an account controlled by
Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, the National Security Council official who was
dismissed when the White House disclosed that the profits had gone to the
Contras. While most C.I.A. businesses are shells, some legitimate ongoing
enterprises have also maintained C.I.A. connections for decades. Many of the
companies sold off in the 1970's retained some ties to the agency.

For example, shortly after E-Systems Inc. bought Air Asia, a fomer C.I.A.
airline, William F. Raborn, a former director of the C.I.A., joined the board of
E-Systems, a Dallas-based comapny that makes electronic and aerospace systems.
Although officials of E-Systems declined to discuss their relationship with the
C.I.A., the company is widely thought to be a leading supplier of intelligence
paraphernalia.

The C.I.A.'s connection with Southern Air, too, goes back for years. The C.I.A.
bought Southern Air outright in 1960, paying $307,000 as part of an effort to
beef up its air transport capacity. In 1973, the C.I.A. sold its airline to
Stanley G. Williams, who ran the company for the agency, for $5.1 million -
rejecting an unidentified buyer's offer of $2 million more.

The sale was financed by what was described in one affidavit as an
''unconventional loan'' from the First National Bank of Chicago, guaranteed by
the C.I.A. In 1979 Mr. Williams sold it to the present sole owner, James H.
Bastian, who was the carrier's lawyer during the C.I.A. years. Mr. Bastian had
served on the board of Air America, once the agency's largest wholly owned
company, with assets of $50 million. SOUTHERN Air's connections apparently have
not hurt. The airline now has 25 planes and 540 employees, almost double that of
a year ago, and its earnings -$907.000 in the third quarter of 1986, and $1.24
million in the second quarter - have risen sharply. United States Government
business is only part of Southern Air's work. Over the last two years company
logs show that it has been flying between Luanda and the diamond mining towns in
northeast Angola under contract to Guernsey IAS, an Irish air cargo company. A
senior State Department official said the department had learned that the
airline was ferrying Cuban soldiers: ''We told them this was against American
law, and they stopped it,'' he said.

Mr. Kress said he knew nothing about this activity. He also denies that Southern
Air is part of a C.I.A. network. ''I'm tired of denying all the rumors that
we're working for the C.I.A.,'' he said. Asked why the reports persist, he
replied, ''I guess people really like spy stories.'' Mr. Kress stresses Southern
Air's less splashy business, including an overnight air express package service,
Burlington Air Express, out of Fort Wayne, Ind.

Not all of the companies the C.I.A. uses are in such high-tech fields as
electronics or airlines. Robert R. Mullen & Company - a well-known Washington
public relations firm that has represented such clients as the American Bar
Association, the American Automobile Association, and the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints - provided slots for covert C.I.A. agents in Washington and
in the firm's offices in Mexico City, Kuala Lumpur and the Hague, until the
firm's cover was blown in 1973. E. Howard Hunt Jr., a C.I.A. operative convicted
of conspiracy after the Watergate break-in, was at one time a writer in the
Washington office.

Another firm that helped the agency in this way, according to Congressional
sources, was Bishop, Baldwin, Rewald, Dillingham & Wong, a Honolulu investment
firm that was involved in a securities fraud case. After the firm declared
bankruptcy in July 1983, court documents showed that the C.I.A. had paid $2,700
of its phone bills. The C.I.A. acknowledged that it had a ''slight''
involvement.

Three C.I.A. agents were among the investors who lost $22 million in the
collapse: Jack Kindschi, a former head of the Honolulu office, J. Rardin, his
successor, and R. Richardson, a covert agent. Despite these investments, which
violated C.I.A. policy and earned reprimands for the agents, Congressional
investigators concluded that Bishop Baldwin was used only as an address for
covert agents and was not a C.I.A. money-laundering proprietary as Ronald R.
Rewald, the firm's president, alleged.

Other court records, from Australia, suggest that the C.I.A. was involved in
international banking as part of its money-moving operations. Nugan Hand, a
Sydney investment bank, was founded in 1973 by an Australian, Frank Nugan, and
an American, Michael Hand.

After it failed in 1980 Mr. Nugan was found shot dead and Mr. Hand vanished. A
Sydney police report said Mr. Hand had business dealings in the late 1960's and
early 1970's with the C.I.A.-controlled Air America and the C.I.A.-connected
Continental Air Service, creating a ''strong inference that Hand's intelligence
activity was with the C.I.A.'' It continued, ''There is some evidence to suggest
that Hand retained his U.S. intelligence ties through the 1970's and into the
1980's.''

The bank - which astoundingly had increased its assets to $1 billion from $1
million in three years - employed a large number of retired American military
and intelligence officers, and its legal adviser was former C.I.A. director
William E. Colby. Mr. Colby's business card was the only thing found in Mr.
Nugan's pockets when his body was discovered. The C.I.A. denied any involvement
with the bank, but senior intelligence analysts here said that whether or not it
had formal C.I.A. links, the company performed important financial services for
the agency.

VICTIMS OF A C.I.A. CONSPIRACY?

It was more than 20 years ago, but Ralph W. E. Cox Jr. says the memory of how
his company was forced out of business still rankles.

Mr. Cox's company, U.S. Overseas Airlines, was one of 15 small airlines that
failed in the early 1960's - victims, he says, of a conspiracy by the C.I.A.,
which had recently acquired Southern Air.

''They wiped us out,'' said Mr. Cox, who now, at 71, manages a camping ground in
Cape May, N.J., a few miles from the Cape May County Airport, which was home
base for his carrier. ''We continued to try to operate. We couldn't conceive
that our Government would do things like that. We were grounded Sept. 24, 1964,
and forced into bankruptcy two years later. We didn't know until 10 years later
what had really happened.''

What happened, Mr. Cox and others say, is that $250 million of Military Air
Transport contracts were diverted from their companies to Southern Air and five
other airlines that learned of the secret link between C.I.A. and Southern Air
and, in a quiet blackmail, demanded the military contracts as their price for
keeping quiet about the connection.

The C.I.A. will not discuss it. ''We never discuss matters of this kind,'' said
Sharon Foster, a C.I.A. spokesman. But the agency's role in the failure of the
small airlines came to light in Government documents, obtained through Freedom
of Information Act requests by Mr. Cox and others, and in 1976-77 testimony
before the Senate Small Business Committee. The documents show a substantial
diversion of military business in the early 1960's to Southern and five other
carriers - most now defunct - alleged to be aware of Southern Air's C.I.A.
connection.

Mr. Cox, a World War II

Navy pilot, says his company had revenues of $11.6 million in 1960, before the
C.I.A. cut into his business. He and operators of the other failed airlines
charge that the C.I.A. deprived them of their basic marketplace rights by
conspiring with officials of the Government agencies that gave out the transport
contracts, and with the airlines that knew the Southern Air secret.

Led by Mr. Cox, Richard D. Neumann of the defunct California Air Charter Inc.
and Amos Heacock, head of Air Transport Associates, another failed carrier, the
former airline operators have spent years fighting for redress. They have filed
suit in several Federal courts, claiming damages of $540 million. They have
written formal letters of complaint to the C.I.A., and petitions to the Civil
Aeronautics Board. But all of their claims have been rejected.

While they still feel victimized, the owners of the failed airlines have given
up the battle. ''It costs too damned much to fight the Government,'' said Mr.
Neumann, who is now back in the aviation business in California. ''They can put
200 attorneys against you and tie you up for 10 years. We don't have those
resources.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: C.I.A. logo; photo of Ralph Cox, Jr. (NYT/Clyde F. Farnsworth) (page
6); photo of Southern Air Transport office (Miami Herald) (page 6)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

What Went Wrong?

SECTION: Section 6; Page 54, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 124 words


Leon Wieseltier's analysis of ''What Went Wrong'' is a solid piece of work on
the defects in our ideology, but the problem with our Presidency is as much
systemic as ideological. It is a problem that let a superbly qualified President
- Lyndon B. Johnson -give us Vietnam. President Reagan only proves that an
unqualified President who is presumably imbued with the proper spirit fares
little better.

So long as the Presidency is in the hands of a single powerful man, he will
inevitably be surrounded by people who tell him only what he wants to hear. Thus
does today's policy error become tomorrow's unquestionable premise. Thus do the
President's flaws become, not countered, but magnified.

WILLIAM A. AKER
  New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pres. Reagan (Robert Trippett/SIPA-Special Features)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SAM NUNN'S RISING STAR

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey; Phil Gailey is a reporter in the Washington bureau of
The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 25, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3867 words


IN MID-DECEMBER, A SHORT MONTH after they had retaken the United States Senate,
Democrats were feeling buoyant, perhaps nowhere more so than on an Amtrak train
heading from Washington to Williamsburg, Va. The Democratic Leadership Council,
a group of younger leaders dedicated to moving their party to the right, had
chartered the train to take members, their families and the press corps to a
conference at which the council would discuss ideas for regaining the White
House.

The train was chock-a-block with new Democratic stars - Florida Gov. Bob Graham,
just elected to the Senate, and former Virginia Gov. Charles S. Robb, frequently
mentioned as a 1988 Presidential or Vice-Presidential prospect. And on the first
car, so surrounded by party officials and television cameras that he was
virtually unable to move, sat Sam Nunn Jr., the senior Senator from Georgia, the
Democrats' principal spokesman on defense, an unprepossessing man who had never
attracted much national attention.

Until now. ''How's it going, Mr. President?'' several well-wishers asked Nunn as
they joined the throng. He greeted the queries with a weak smile. Near the end
of the three-hour journey, Nunn tried to make his way to the next car, where his
wife, Colleen, patiently waited. He never made it. With each step, he was
stopped by someone wanting to know if he intended to run for President. The
Senator gave the same humorless, verbatim response each time: ''I'm not leaning
toward it, but I will make a decision by the end of January.''

Later, at the conference, Nunn opened his speech on defense policy with a bit of
deadpan: ''I've been asked to demonstrate some charisma, by talking about
throw-weight, hardened silos, megatonnage and MIRV's.'' His remark drew
laughter, but it also teased a question that many Democrats are asking: Is Sam
Nunn too smart, too conservative and too dull to be President?

The more intriguing question may be whether Nunn, a man who has come reluctantly
to political prominence in recent months, really wants to be President.

Nunn, who is about to realize his ambition of becoming chairman of the Senate
Armed Services Committee, long has been recognized as his party's leader on
national security. The 48-year-old lawyer has left his mark on almost every
major military and foreign-policy issue of 1986. Recently, as President Reagan
has struggled with the controversy over the Iran-contra arms sale scandal, Nunn
has been widely acclaimed for his role in leading his party's early response.

It was Nunn, in an interview following the President's first news conference
after the controversy broke, who advised the President to empanel a group of
''wise men'' to review the policy-making process inside the White House; Mr.
Reagan accepted the advice a few days later. And it was the Senator from Georgia
who, in perfect political pitch, cautioned Democrats to avoid the temptation to
exploit the situation politically. ''He's certainly the clear winner in what
could turn out to be a national tragedy,'' said Ann F. Lewis, national director
of Americans for Democratic Action, the liberal policy group. ''If Sam Nunn
didn't exist today, we'd have to invent him - a Southerner who rises above
politics in times of crisis.'' But, added Ms. Lewis, ''the ability to rise above
politics that makes him so effective could hamper him as a Presidential
candidate.''

NEITHER A STRIKING PRESENCE nor an inspiring speaker, the bespectacled lawmaker
combs his thinning brown hair over a bald spot and speaks in a flat drawl. He
has never employed a Washington campaign consultant to advise him on his image
or on issues. And his voting record - he is one of President Reagan's strongest
Democratic supporters in the Senate - is disconcerting to many Democrats.

For most Presidential aspirants, these handicaps could be insurmountable. But in
Nunn's case, they have only added to the growing curiosity. And his leadership
on national defense and his tough anti-Soviet foreign policy have effectively
thrust him into the public eye.

In a two-week period between the November elections and the eruption of the
controversy over the Iran arms sale and the diversion of money to the Nicaraguan
contras, Nunn was swamped with almost 100 interview requests - an extraordinary
number for a Senator.

The press interest forced Nunn to do something he has rarely done in his 13-year
Senate career: hold a Washington news conference. When he strode into the
crowded conference room in the Capitol, several reporters began humming ''Hail
to the Chief,'' musical fanfare that has officially graced the entrances of only
one Georgian, Jimmy Carter.

There are important differences between the Senator and the former President, of
course. Jimmy Carter was an outsider, but Sam Nunn is a consummate political
insider who has cultivated close personal relationships with members of the
Washington establishment. (On weekends, Nunn, one of the Senate's best golfers,
can usually be found in the company of Washington powerbrokers on the
Congressional Country Club links.) But there are also similarities. Both Carter
and Nunn are technocrats, masters of complex detail. Many political insiders
wonder whether Nunn, like Carter, will founder on the shoals of detail. Indeed,
Nunn has yet to demonstrate the capacity to inspire and move voters by
articulating broad themes of national purpose. A serious man, Nunn refuses to
seek political advantage where others rush in.

For example, when his press secretary asked Nunn - a member of the Senate
Intelligence Committee who has spent much of his time recently in closed
hearings on the Iran arms affair - whether Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, the
former White House national security adviser, had invoked the Fifth Amendment
before the committee, Nunn told his aide: ''I can't discuss what happened in the
committee.''

Yet there is a folksier aspect to Sam Nunn's personality. Several months ago,
during a trip to rural Georgia, Nunn told a gathering of local farmers about the
''big-city politician who visits a farm and accidentally steps in manure.'' The
politician, recounted Nunn, ''looked down at his feet and cried, 'Oh my God, I'm
melting!' '' SAM NUNN IS A MAN OF CONTRADICTIONS. HIS politics and Senate career
have been marked by extreme caution and deference. He goes out of his way to
avoid confrontations and to compromise on controversial issues.

But at his big, rambling split-level house in Bethesda, Md., he displays the
fiercely competitive side of his nature that friends and family have known for
years.

Recently, a reporter and a photographer from The Atlanta Constitution convinced
Nunn to engage his 17-year-old son, Brian, in a game of backyard basketball.
Soon, the Senator's incessant chatter rattled the boy, forcing him to miss a
one-handed shot, and Nunn aggressively grabbed the rebound. Reviewing the scene,
the reporter, Hal Straus, wrote: ''The impromptu basketball game had started as
a setup for a photo session. Like almost everything Sam Nunn is involved in,
though, it had quickly become serious.'' Nunn is so serious, in fact, that when
playing Trivial Pursuit with his 20-year-old daughter, Michelle, he has even
been known to question the answers on the game cards.

A classic overachiever, even in high school Nunn was showing the residents of
Perry, a small town of 10,000 in central Georgia, the qualities that would drive
his political career. He was a superior Eagle Scout, an honor student and
captain of his high-school basketball team, leading it to a state championship
despite his weak legs. ''For two years,'' he recalled, ''my mother would wrap my
ankles every day for basketball practice.''

Nunn's family was part of Perry's social and political aristocracy. Sam Nunn
Sr., a formal man with a passion for reading, who died in 1965, was a lawyer, a
farmer, a one-time mayor of Perry and a top officer in the town's major savings
and loan institution.

As a boy, Sam Jr. would sit enraptured while his father discussed politics with
some of Georgia's political barons, men such as Representative Carl Vinson,
Nunn's great uncle and a lawmaker who amassed enormous power in his 51 years in
the House, much of that time as chairman of the Armed Services Committee.

After studying at Georgia Tech, Nunn earned a law degree from Emory University,
then served stints in the Coast Guard and on the staff of Vinson's House Armed
Services Committee in Washington. In 1964, he returned to Perry to pursue a
political career; four years later, he was elected to the Georgia legislature.

In 1972, at age 33 and with his statewide name recognition at only 2 percent,
Nunn embarked on a long-shot campaign to win the United States Senate seat
vacated by the death of Richard B. Russell. He won the Democratic primary, and
then faced Fletcher S. Thompson, a conservative Republican, who plastered the
state with posters linking Nunn to Senator George McGovern, the liberal
Democratic Presidential nominee that year.

To appeal to rural white voters, Nunn flew to Montgomery, Ala., to receive the
endorsement of Gov. George C. Wallace, the most prominent symbol of the South's
resistance to racial desegregation. ''George Wallace represents the real views
of Georgians,'' Nunn said in Montgomery, echoing Wallace's attacks on ''judicial
tyranny'' and court-ordered school busing.

Before election day, Nunn traveled to Washington to lay claim to a seat on the
Senate Armed Services Committee, a panel once headed by Russell and a source of
political strength in Georgia, where the economy depends heavily on military
installations and defense contractors.

Carl Vinson, by then retired from the Congress, introduced his nephew to some of
the most powerful men in the Senate, including Henry M. Jackson of Washington
State and John C. Stennis of Mississippi, who later would become Nunn's mentors.
They were impressed by the young candidate's eagerness to join Armed Services at
a time when the Vietnam War had made the military an unpopular institution. Nunn
returned to Georgia with a promise of a seat on the committee, and used the
informal commitment to his advantage in the final stages of the campaign. He won
the election with 54 percent of the vote. NUNN'S VICTORY BELIED the long-shot
odds political pundits had placed on him, primarily because of his sober mien
and nearly complete lack of charisma.

To make himself look more appealing to voters in 1972, ''I was told I had to get
rid of my black horn-rimmed glasses,'' Nunn recalled. ''After a day of wearing
wire-rimmed glasses, I had a headache and they just about ruined my nose. I said
I'll either get elected with my comfortable glasses or I'll be defeated with
them.''

His style since coming to Washington has remained aggressively staid. At the end
of his 10- to 12-hour days, he usually heads home to be with his family. He
rarely attends cocktail parties or luncheons with lobbyists, and until last year
he resisted becoming a national figure. ''I don't know of anyone up here who has
less ego or cares less about publicity,'' said one Democratic Senator.

In 1982, Nunn was the first choice of Senate Democratic leaders to give the
party's views on national defense in response to President Reagan's State of the
Union address. ''Most Democratic Senators were fighting to get a piece'' of the
prime-time television exposure, said Greg Schneiders, currently a Democratic
consultant who at that time was an aide to Robert C. Byrd, the Senate Democratic
leader.

''I told Nunn he'd have twominutes for his part,'' recalled Schneiders. ''He
called back at the end of the day and said he couldn't do it. Two minutes was
not enough time to address a complex issue like national defense, and we should
get someone else to speak.''

His seriousness of purpose and mastery of detail have gained for Nunn great
influence in the Senate. Last fall, when Congress was engulfed in the political
frenzy over illegal drugs, the Senate took up a proposal to use military
aircraft in the war on narcotics. Nunn rose to speak.

''To seal the borders to drug smugglers,'' he said quietly, ''will require 80
new military bases, 800 helicopters, 7,400 military police and three times the
number of Awacs reconaissance planes currently flying.

''I can go on,'' continued Nunn, ''but it gets worse.'' His colleagues gave in -
some of them even began to wave handkerchiefs in surrender. The measure was
tabled.  He has also been a key figure in the debate over the MX missile.
Although he has criticized the Administration's plan to base MX missiles in
hardened Minuteman silos, Nunn has been a part of every major compromise that
has kept the MX alive, and he was instrumental in getting the number of MX's
reduced from 60 to 50.

Nunn's seriousness about issues is matched by his near-legendary political
caution. When fellow Georgian Jimmy Carter ran for President in 1976, Nunn
withheld his endorsement until after the Pennsylvania primary, when Carter
already had a lock on the nomination. And in 1984, Senator John Glenn of Ohio
came to the South to make his last stand in the contest for the Democratic
Presidential nomination. Glenn was running as a centrist, and he desperately
sought Nunn's imprimatur. The two men appeared together at a rally, at which
Nunn lavished praise on the former astronaut. But he withheld his endorsement,
refusing, under prodding from reporters, even to say whom he planned to vote for
in the Georgia primary. BUT NUNN APPEARS TO be taking the first halting steps
toward political activism. President Reagan's landslide re-election victory over
Walter F. Mondale in 1984 provided centrists with an opportunity to take charge
of their party's political debate. Nunn has played a lead-ing role in that
effort, helping in 1985 to establish the Democratic Leadership Council, a group
that includes such other potential Presidential aspirants as Representative
Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, Arizona Gov. Bruce Babbitt and former Governor
Robb of Virginia.

Nunn insists that the creation of the council was motivated less by ideology
than by the need for the Democratic Party to come up with an agenda for winning
the White House. ''Democrats have to show they can govern,'' he said. The
council will demonstrate the party's ability by focusing on strategies for
economic growth. ''Defense and foreign policy will be a measure of our
competence,'' he said. ''But we will regain peoples' confidence by how we handle
the economy.''

At the same time he is working to reshape his party from within, Nunn is also
exerting his influence over the Reagan Administration, to the Democrats'
advantage. Shortly after returning from his October summit meeting in Iceland
with Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev, President Reagan went on the road for
Republican candidates, bashing the Democratic Party as a threat to his Strategic
Defense Initiative, or Star Wars, program, and demanding that Democrats declare
where they stood on defending America.

A Democratic strategist called Nunn and urged him to lead a counterattack. The
Senator demurred. ''Nunn said it was too important an issue for Democrats to try
to take political advantage of,'' the strategist recalled.

But the next day, Nunn delivered a speech on the Senate floor that threw the
President on the political defensive on arms control and sharpened the debate
over the Reykjavik meeting with Gorbachev. He became the first member of
Congress with substantial standing to question whether Reagan understood the
implications of the proposals he put on the table in Iceland, particularly the
offer to eliminate all strategic nuclear missiles and ballistic missiles from
Europe.

''It is obvious that this proposal has not been thought through adequately,''
Nunn later told reporters. ''If a liberal Democrat had proposed such an
agreement, the impeachment petitions would already be circulating.''

Nunn says that the impression of him as a reluctant partisan stems largely from
hisrefusal to politicize national-security issues. ''I can't think of any major
problem that can be solved with partisanship,'' he said. His break with the
President on arms control, he says, was based on policy, not politics.

The most significant change in Sam Nunn has been his willingness to campaign on
behalf of fellow Democrats. One of those who benefited from his political
coattails in 1986 was Representative Wyche Fowler Jr., a liberal from Atlanta,
who defeated Senator Mack Mattingly, a Republican, at least partly on the
strength of Nunn's endorsement and active campaigning. It was the first time
Nunn, a man once known as Selfish Sam for his reluctance to involve himself in
other campaigns, had put his prestige on the line for another Georgia Democrat.

Nunn also campaigned actively on behalf of other Democratic candidates across
the country, including the liberal California Senator Alan Cranston and Colorado
Representative Timothy E. Wirth, who won Gary Hart's vacant Senate seat. Wirth
credits Nunn with protecting him against his opponent's attempt to make Star
Wars an issue in that race.

Why has Nunn suddenly taken a role in national Democratic politics? ''People
have said I did this because I was running for President,'' he said. ''The truth
of it is, this is really the first time anybody invited me to their states to
campaign.'' BUT NUNN'S INTEREST IN the Presidency has clearly motivated his
shift away from caution. Nunn declared last summer that he would consider a
Presidential race; at the time, his statement stirred little interest. But when
the November elections were over and Democrats again controlled the Senate, Nunn
was suddenly being taken seriously as a prospect for the White House.

''In voting for a President, people tend to react to the last President,'' said
Hamilton Jordan, who served as President Jimmy Carter's chief of staff and main
political strategist. ''After Ronald Reagan's 'chairman of the board' approach
to the Presidency, I think the American people will hunger in 1988 for a
hands-on chief executive with proven Federal experience and the ability to
tackle the tough issues of arms control, budget and trade.'' Sam Nunn, predicts
Jordan, ''will (Continued on Page 31) fit both the mood and the need of our
country.''

Nunn, who has not formed a campaign committee, begun fund-raising efforts or
sought expert advice for a Presidential run, has promised his supporters a
decision by the end of this month on whether he will form a Presidential
exploratory committee.

''A key question is whether I could make a greater contribution to Georgia and
the nation as chairman of the Armed Services Committee or as President,'' he
said.

His admirers are telling him he is in the enviable position of having the
Presidency seek him, and that 1988 is his year. Eight Southern states, including
Georgia, are scheduled to hold primaries on March 8, and some political
strategists say that if Nunn survives the New Hampshire primary, a Southern
sweep could catapult him to the front of the pack.

Some political professionals question whether Nunn would be able to recreate the
coalition of Southern whites and blacks that came together behind Jimmy Carter's
Presidential bid in 1976. Nunn, for instance, does not apologize for his early
support for George Wallace.

''I frankly admired Wallace,'' he said, ''not because of his racial views, but
because of his willingness to stand up and shake a fist at Washington
occasionally. There's something therapeutic about that in the South.''

Moreover, one of the 1988 contestants is likely to be the Rev. Jesse Jackson, a
sharp critic of the effort by Nunn and other Democrats to yank the party to the
right.

But there are indications that the growing political pragmatism of Southern
blacks could work in Nunn's favor, even against the emotional appeal of a
Jackson candidacy.

Despite his 1972 embrace of Wallace, Nunn has been spared the taint of
intransigence on civil rights that marked an earlier generation of Southern
politicians. Although not a vocal opponentof segregation, Nunn, as a young
lawyer in the 1960's, did help to organize a biracial committee to open lines of
communication between blacks and whites in Perry, his hometown.

Nunn has built a close political relationship with his state's black leaders,
many of whom are trying to persuade the Senator to run for President. Among them
are former Atlanta Mayor Maynard Jackson, who supported Jesse Jackson in 1984,
and John Lewis, a veteran civil rights activist elected last November to
Congress from Atlanta's Fifth District.

''Southern politicians have a way of growing and broadening themselves when they
reach the national political scene,'' said Lewis. ''I think Sam Nunn is trying
to broaden his concerns and base, and if he runs for President, I'll be out
there working for him.'' FOR ALL THE PRESIDEN-tial talk, Sam Nunn embodies a
political irony: few Democrats are more respected and at the same time seemingly
more out of step with their party. Although he has criticized President Reagan
severely on arms control, Nunn is one of his strongest supporters among Senate
Democrats. According to Congressional Quarterly, in 1985 Nunn voted with the
President on contested issues more than any other Democrat; and he tied
Alabama's Senator Howell Heflin as the Democrat who voted conservative most
often.

On defense, Nunn opposed the effort of 49 of his Senate colleagues to cut $2
billion from Reagan's budget request for Star Wars, although he repeatedly
criticized the President for trying to sell it as a ''population shield,'' a
notion that the Senator says ''borders on the absurd.''

Nunn also continues to support Reagan's effort to aid Nicaraguan rebels, and was
instrumental in forging Congressional approval last spring of the $100 million
aid package to the contras. Even now, after the disclosure that profits from the
secret arms sale to Iran had been diverted to the contras, Nunn has not shifted
his position.

''Our strategic interest in Nicaragua hasn't changed,'' he explained. ''I hope
we will find a way to debate the issue on its merits.'' Still, on the contra-aid
issue he remains cautious, refusing to say whether he will take the lead on it
in the Senate in 1987. ''It will depend on what the Administration does,'' he
said.

Some liberal Democrats contend that Nunn could quickly and dramatically broaden
his political base by using his influence to oppose Reagan on these issues. Nunn
dismisses the criticism. ''I've never dealt with national defense in a political
way and I'm not about to start now,'' he said. ''My critics do me a favor by
exaggerating my influence and then knocking me down for not exercising it.''

The fact that he is even answering his critics, rather than going quietly about
the business of building influence, marks a change in Sam Nunn. But if he
embarks on a national campaign, Nunn will be tested as he never has been before.
Will he remain the reluctant politician, or will he aggressively seek the mantle
of national leadership? ''If I decide to run,'' Sam Nunn said recently, ''there
will be no question that I will have fire in the belly.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Sen. Sam Nunn (Benno Freidman) (page 24); photos of Sen. Nunn
(pages 26-27)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
Thailand Closes Big Refugee Camp

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim, Katherine Roberts and James F. Clarity

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 237 words


Khao I Dang, the sprawling refugee city of bamboo and thatch that once sheltered
140,000 Cambodians, was closed last week by the Government of Thailand. Its
27,268 remaining residents must now leave the United Nations-supervised camp,
which appeared in the film ''The Killing Fields.'' For most of those still at
Khao I Dang, hope of resettlement in the West was dashed. Reclassified as
''displaced persons'' to be eventually returned to Cambodia, they will be sent
to camps run by resistance groups.

Thailand had been trying to close Khao I Dang for months but delayed while
waiting in vain for the West to take more of the refugees from its Vietnam
-dominated neighbors. Most of those remaining lack family connections abroad and
suitable work skills or are suspected of ties to the Khmer Rouge, which ruled
Cambodia in a reign of terror in the late 1970's. The State Department said it
was concerned about the closing.

Prasong Soonsiri, secretary general to the Thai Prime Minister, said 120,620
Cambodians, Laotians and Vietnamese who had been counted as refugees remained in
Thailand, including tens of thousands of children born in the camps. More than
500,000 have been resettled abroad and 44,000 sent home, he said,
''voluntarily.'' An additional 267,453 Cambodians who have never been accepted
as refugees were pushed into Thailand during fighting between guerrillas and
Vietnam-backed Cambodian forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE IMPORTANCE OF BEING LEARNED

BYLINE: By Emily Grosholz; Emily Grosholz, who teaches philosophy at
Pennsylvania State University, is the author of ''The River Painter,'' a volume
of poems.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1910 words



  TIME AND THE WHITE TIGRESS
  By Mary Barnard.
  Illustrated by Anita Bigelow.
  79 pp. Portland, Ore.:
  Breitenbush Books. Cloth, $20. Paper, $8.95.

CIVIL BLOOD
  By Jill Breckenridge.
  Illustrated by R. W. Scholes.
  212 pp. Minneapolis:
  Milkweed Editions.
  Cloth, $19.50. Paper, $9.50.

ARTS & SCIENCES
  By Albert Goldbarth.
  107 pp. Princeton, N.J.:
  Ontario Review Press.
  Cloth, $17.95. Paper, $8.95.

MANY poets in the United States now seem to assume that their art does not
require much book learning, and may even suffer from it.

They have not been deprived of education themselves, but perhaps they feel they
can write on behalf of the unlettered and unrepresented, even though the
intellectual naivete of their work vitiates its social and political impact.
Three new books of poems are distinctive in their erudition. Mary Barnard
published a volume of essays on early astronomical systems (''The Mythmakers'')
20 years before distilling her research in the poems of ''Time and the White
Tigress.'' Jill Breckenridge spent eight years studying the historical record of
the Civil War in order to write the narrative poem ''Civil Blood.'' And Albert
Goldbarth inspected a rich, if fragmentary, assortment of ''curiosities,'' from
Leonardo's map of the river networks of Tuscany to biographies of Christopher
Columbus, to write the candidly titled ''Arts & Sciences.''

The 12 sections of Ms. Barnard's book treat common themes in astronomical
systems of the north temperate zone - Babylonian and Egyptian, Greek and Roman,
Chinese, Mayan and Islamic. The 60 pages of poems, with handsome linocuts by
Anita Bigelow, are supplemented by almost 20 pages of notes. The notes are a
useful ornament, not an intrusion. They explain that people have seen the
''sphere of the fixed stars'' divided by great circles - in which the Earth and
the celestial bodies, including the visible Milky Way, all move and which have
been used to explain the seasons and the changing position of sunrise on the
horizon; that, for settled tribes, reliably indicates solstice and equinox. In a
sky thus ordered, constellations precipitate like crystals - the Great Bear,
which never sets around the fixed point of the North Pole; the zodiac, which
populates the ecliptic plane, spinning backward through its houses.

Ms. Barnard also provides a great deal of information in her poems, but her
explanations of how customs and calendars, mythology and mathematics, arise in
relation to stargazing are not in the least prosaic. On every page her habitual
iambic pentameter, slightly roughened for variety's sake, builds to passages of
great lyrical purity. In the fifth section, for example, she describes how
discrepancies resulting from the superposition of solar on lunar year-counts
generate festival days during which, paradoxically, time ceases in order to
realign itself:

The thirteenth moon remained as a handful of days
when time stood still, and the moon caught up with the
   sun -
a dozen days at the year's end; this was the epact,
an interregnum, when, through a twelve-day chink
in the calendar, beings from outside time slipped in,
when mummers paraded, chain-dancing from door to
   door,
when Father Liber was king and the servant was
  master.

Human ritual behavior is the heart of our sociability, in which we affirm our
loves, limit our capacity for destruction and re-create the forms of common
life. Ms. Barnard reveals how thoroughly ritual has always depended on
astronomical arrangements of the world:

at last
the universe is in order. We know where we are.
When we build our hogans and temples, or bury our
  dead
we know how to place them in space and in time. Her depiction of archaic
astronomy as the orderly matrix of ritual is passionately compelling.

Yet she never lets us forget how arcane and impersonal a study astronomy is. Our
ancestors were not studying false objects, gods and goddesses, the stars, or
really any objects at all. They were discovering and inventing systemic
patterns, orientations and rangings that cannot be seen but only inferred.

The planet is never the goddess.
The brilliant, mysterious point of light
appearing and disappearing,
always keeping close to the sun,
is but one epiphany
marking the times of her ascendancy. The principles of order brought to life in
Ms. Barnard's book are at once highly abstract and of the greatest human import,
and this must account for the warmth and drama of her wholly impersonal style.
''Civil Blood'' by Jill Breckenridge is a long narrative poem, with some
interludes of prose, about two men, Cabell and Jacob, caught up in the Civil
War. Cabell is based on John Cabell Breckinridge, an ambivalent Kentucky
slaveholder, Vice President of the United States under President Buchanan and a
Confederate general. Jacob, Cabell's slave and childhood companion, seems both
less typical and less individuated than Cabell, though perhaps he is also based
on a real person. In the first and most lyrical of the book's four sections,
their two voices alternately tell stories of childhood, early manhood and
marriage, and of the outbreak of the war. The second part concerns the war
itself, reported mostly in Cabell's voice, with authorial asides and documentary
ventriloquism. The final parts trace Cabell's escape from the defeated South and
his exile, pardon and eventual return to Kentucky, where he and Jacob, who has
also come home, live out their days.

Cabell's story has the force of verisimilitude, although it hovers uneasily
between literary narrative and historiography. As if resurrected from patchy
historical records, it includes tangential allegiances and twists of fate only
loosely related to its general drift. Yet in certain cases, Ms. Breckenridge
observes the dramatic unities by consciously distorting historical fact.
Cabell's half-dozen military engagements are conflated into a single archetype,
the description of which contains some of the author's most powerfully critical
writing. Here she recounts the slaughter of horses in terms that recall the
formulaic and yet horribly graphic battle scenes of the ''Iliad'': ''over the
hard ground toward the stream where a hundred artillery horses tied halter to
halter lower their big heads to drink, and I must shoot them, every one, kill
the dapple gray, who goes down on one knee, kill the bay, who, mouth open,
rears, black mane and tail flying, sprays blood from its mouth in a final red
flag. . . .''

The figure of Jacob is less plausible than Cabell, especially when read in the
context of 19th-century slave narratives. The poignant testimony of Frederick
Douglass's experience with the Aulds of Baltimore is that the institution of
slavery, ''the fatal poison of irresponsible power,'' corrupted even the
kindliest souls, making them petty tyrants with whom true intimacy was
impossible. Ms. Breckenridge portrays the psychology of domination very well
when Cabell and Jacob get into mischief together as children. Cabell blames
Jacob, who is beaten, and then rebuffs his pathetic attempt at reconciliation:

He tries a little smile
on me, but I'll have none
of it, scowl hard at him
over the candle's pale flicker,
a look I hope he knows
means he must never
do such a thing again.
Never again.

Yet after his wife and child are killed in an unsuccessful attempt to escape,
Jacob's primary emotional bond is to Cabell, whom he follows around for the rest
of his life. Resettled in postwar Kentucky, Jacob mentions that he taught
reading and writing to his fellow freedmen until stopped by the Klan, but his
''master'' is his only living intimate. What Douglass tells us, by contrast, is
that his fiercest love and longstanding devotion belonged to the fellow slaves
with whom he risked his life to share the potent secret of literacy. Albert
Goldbarth writes long poems with long lines full of descriptive detail. In
''Arts & Sciences,'' whenever he begins an argument or narrative, he is sooner
or later diverted by the superabundance of language and the cornucopiousness of
the world. The people in his poems (one is always himself) either produce
clutter or notice dozens of modulations in the objects or situations surrounding
them - or, if they don't, he notices for them. His poems always have multiple
topics. Thus a poem about Leigh Hunt's collection of famous locks of hair
includes John Bartram, an 18th-century New World collector for a London
merchant-botanist, and it interrupts and elaborates his tale with lists of his
finds: ''shooting star, white osier, bittersweet, steeplebush, / arrowroot,
river birch, witch hazel, sassafras.'' The list continues for eight more lines.

To make works of art out of such heterogeneous material, a poet needs a strategy
of unification. Mr. Goldbarth's usual strategy is to construct his poems as what
Alastair Reid calls garlands. He starts off with one topic, moves on to a second
and third through a some-Continued on page 24 times illuminating, sometimes
arbitrary process of association, and keeps moving. By the time a reader has
arrived at the last topics, he or she has forgotten all about the first, to
which Mr. Goldbarth invariably returns just at the end so that the shock of
recognition produces an impression - sometimes an illusion -that there is a
unity in the assemblage.

When successful, Mr. Goldbarth's end-linked collages generate suggestive
symmetries and important questions. In ''The Elements,'' he begins by describing
the composition of a Dutch still life with loving subtlety:

If the dull swell of a herring on a plate picks up
  red chevrons meaning a candle (out of sight) is lit,
the crystal of burgundy weighting another corner is
  given
  a small red heart of light at its center so
everything, in shape and weight, is balanced. Then he switches to brutal and sad
vignettes of Vietnam, before he returns to the painting in a series of questions
about how the ''order and abidingness'' of art bear on human suffering.

Elsewhere even Mr. Goldbarth seems uncertain about where his digressive circling
leads. One section of a long prose poem ends: ''There are drawings on walls from
then we still can't read, long letters to God or amatory verses to somebody's
rosebud lips. And this could be a battery cell from the year of Christ's birth.
Miltie's. The Rialto. Nobody knows what it means.'' The next, final section of
the same poem gives examples of various kinds of social behavior in animals and
in people, which, his juxtaposition of them suggests, all constitute the same
togetherness under the rubric of ''committees.'' Mr. Goldbarth must have read
quite a bit of natural history to find these examples, but he has missed an
important function of science, and discursive thought generally, which is to
make discriminations when and where they are needed. Why confound the
differences between flocking animals and animals that bond as individuals,
between the inherent rituals that link certain animals and the learned, much
more fragile and constructive, rituals that unite people? Poetry can no more
dispense with discrimination than science can. If, without compromising his own
sense of reality's ambiguous richness, Mr. Goldbarth could make his poems more
orderly and spare, they would more often be greater than the sum of their parts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mary Barnard (Mary Randlett); photo of Albert Goldbarth (Getty
Gottlieb); photo of Jill Breckenridge (Chad Breckenridge)

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: January 4, 1987

SECTION: Section 8; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words


Fiction
1         1    17 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                  horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in a small
                  Maine town.
2         2     9 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                  Iran during the month following the Shah's departure.
3         3    23 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.)
                  Without using nuclear weapons, the West staves off the
                  Russians in World War III.
4         4    10 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf,
                  $18.95.) Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal
                  double murder.
5         6    12 HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon
                  & Schuster, $18.95.) A top New York model encounters three
                  of Los Angeles's most dynamic men.
6         5    14 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton
                  Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family relationships in South
                  Carolina's low country and New York City.
7         7    10 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                  Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over Vietnam.
8         9    25 WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $17.95.)
                  A rich orphan comes of age while she travels the world.
9        12     6 THE POLAR EXPRESS, written and illustrated by
                  Chris Van Allsburg. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) A small
                  boy's Christmas Eve train ride to the North Pole and the
                  magical events that follow.
10        8    12 FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
                  $16.95.) In the fifth volume of the ''Foundation'' series,
                  the hero continues his search for the lost planet Earth.
11       10    25 LAST OF THE BREED, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam,
                  $17.95.) The adventures of a United States Air Force major
                  in Siberia.
12       11    13 THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New
                  York family begun in ''Evergreen.''
13       13    18 THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random
                  House, $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and greed
                  mark a young woman's life in 18th-century England and
                  France.
14              9 PERFUME, by Patrick Suskind. (Knopf, $16.95.)
                  An olfactory vampire kills people to steal their scents.
15             23 A PERFECT SPY, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $18.95.)
                  The tale of Magnus Pym, a British secret agent, and his
                  father, Rick, a flamboyant con man.

                  Nonfiction
1         1    35 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday,
                  $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from the television star
                  and father of five.
2         3    13 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.)
                  From Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized biography of
                  Frank Sinatra.
3         4    15 McMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi. (Warner,
                  $16.95.) The autobiography of the quarterback for the
                  Chicago Bears.
4         2     9 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                  Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as recorded
                  in pictures by 200 photojournalists.
5         5     7 WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Putnam,
                  $16.95.) A new collection of columns by the journalist and
                  television personality.
6         6    33 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot. (St.
                  Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire veterinarian
                  about his favorite animal.
7        10    14 ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with
                  Dave Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on football
                  by the television commentator and former coach of the
                  Oakland Raiders.
8         8     5 THE CHRISTMAS DAY KITTEN, by James Herriot. (St.
                  Martin's, $9.95.) An illustrated true story.
9         9    43 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House,
                  $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in pictures
                  and rhyme; the first Dr. Seuss book for adults.
10              1 ACROSS CHINA, by Peter Jenkins. (Morrow,
                  $18.95.) The author leaves his Tennessee farm to find
                  adventure on the other side of the world.
11       12    10 ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Random House,
                  $18.95.) The comedian's autobiography, beginning with her
                  impoverished childhood in Hollywood.
12       11     6 PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon
                  Eisenhower. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A biography of the
                  wife of the 37th President written by her daughter.
13              1  A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
                  (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season spent with
                  the coach Bob Knight and his Indiana University basketball
                  team.
14        7     6 LIFE: The First Fifty Years, 1936-1986. (Little, Brown,
                  $50.) The past half-century as seen in the magazine's
                  photographs.
15       13    13 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow,
                  $19.95.) The crisis in the American automobile industry and
                  Japan's role in it.

                  Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1         1    10 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.
                  (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at moderate cost.
2         2    47 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow,
                  $14.95.) A television chef's inexpensive dishes.
3         4     2 BETTER HOMES AND GARDENS NEW COOK BOOK. (Meredith,
                  $16.95.) The ninth edition; ring-bound.
4         3    10 BE HAPPY YOU ARE LOVED, by Robert H. Schuller.
                  (Nelson, $15.95.) Inspiration from a California clergyman.
5         5     3 BETTY CROCKER'S COOKBOOK. (Golden Press/Western
                  Publishing, $19.95.) New, revised ring-bound edition.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ROCK OF AGES: The Rolling Stone History of Rock & Roll, by Ed Ward, Geoffrey
Stokes and Ken Tucker. (Rolling Stone/Summit, Cloth, $24.95. Paper, $14.95.) In
separate sections, three journalists who share a deep affection and affinity for
their subject cover rock from birth in the 50's to almost yesterday.

BROTHER ENEMY: The War After the War, by Nayan Chanda. (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $24.95.) The author, who has reported on Vietnam for 15 years,
offers much insight on the failure of the victors in war to cope with the
demands of peace.

THE MOTHER OF DREAMS: And Other Short Stories. Portrayals of Women in Modern
Japanese Fiction, edited by Makoto Ueda. (Kodansha, $19.95.) All established
authors, the writers collected here deal with the power of social roles -
maiden, wife, mistress, mother - and the high cost of violating them.

MRS. CALIBAN, by Rachel Ingalls. (Harvard Common Press, $12.95.) First published
in 1982, recently revived by British critical attention, this brief, affecting
American novel portrays a desperate woman who escapes reality through
derangement.

CHEKHOV, by Henri Troyat. (Dutton, $22.50.) A distinguished biographer of
Russians unfolds, step by step, Chekhov's cool determination to fulfill his aim
as a writer.

MARILYN, by Gloria Steinem. Photographs by George Barris. (Holt, $24.95.) A
thoughtful, absorbing biography of Marilyn Monroe, an unusually intelligent
woman the greatest of whose many misfortunes may have been her desire to please.


THE CENTURY'S DAUGHTER, by Pat Barker. (Putnam, $16.95.) This cheerfully
political novel encapsulates the miseries of the century in the final year of an
aged working-class Englishwoman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WINNING THE MINDS OF SOUTH AFRICA

BYLINE: By Samuel G. Freedman

SECTION: Section 12; Page 43, Column 1; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 3055 words


WHEN Phumzile Zulu was a college student in South Africa, she was part of the
battle against apartheid. Now, as a graduate student in New York, she is part of
another, related struggle - the one between West and East for the allegiance of
the young adults who may be South Africa's future leaders.

Ms. Zulu is the first of an anticipated 100 South Africans to attend college in
the United States under a special private scholarship program. It was created
two years ago at the suggestion of Desmond M. Tutu, the Anglican Archbishop of
Cape Town and the recipient of the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize. It is operated by the
Phelps-Stokes Fund, an organization with a 75-year history of education work
with Africans.

What the Bishop Tutu Southern African Refugee Scholarship Fund offers is
something less obvious than a free college education. While the phrase ''hearts
and minds'' may have been discredited in the Vietnam War, hearts and minds are
precisely the goal of the scholarship program, all the more because of the
alternatives. Foremost among them, at least from an ideological standpoint, are
the 400 scholarships that Eastern bloc countries annually give to exiled members
of the African National Congress, the outlawed opposition organization.

''This is a way for America to make a concrete contribution to change in South
Africa, especially at a time when many South Africans are feeling dismayed with
the West,'' said Mpho Tutu, the Archbishop's daughter, who serves on the
scholarship program's board of directors.

In the case of Phumzile Zulu, the scholarship program supports her work toward a
doctorate in education at New York University and nourishes her dream of doing
casework with mentally retarded children. Beyond that, the chance to live and
study in the United States has deeply changed her view of a nation criticized by
many South African blacks for not doing more to force political change in South
Africa.

''When people used to ask me what I thought of America,'' Ms. Zulu said during
an interview at her apartment in the South Bronx, ''I'd say that the gun that
shot the first child in Soweto in 1976 was of Western origin, so how can I talk
to such people. But when I came here and met the Americans, I saw that some were
real brothers and sisters. They know their struggle is ours and our struggle is
theirs.''

It is no coincidence that exiled students form the target group for the Bishop
Tutu scholarships, as well as for other scholarships offered by the American
Government, the Eastern bloc and such nations as West Germany, Switzerland and
Nigeria. The South African schools have become centers of opposition to
apartheid, and black students have emerged disproportionately as the both the
leaders and the casualties of the insurrection.

Initially at issue, in the narrow sense, was the education system known as
''Bantu education.'' As one of the pillars of apartheid, Bantu education sought
to segregate students along the same racial lines that the passbook, influx
control and immorality laws segregated the rest of society. Even the system of
black colleges was broken down according to tribal lines, generally conforming
to the South African regime's creation of ethnic ''homelands.''

In practice, ''Bantu education'' periodically gave way to the contradictions
that show up throughout apartheid. Some black, Indian and mixed-race students
attended overwhelmingly white colleges and the Government put $250 million into
building medical and technical colleges for nonwhites. But significant gaps
remained between white and nonwhite education. The cost of educating one student
was about eight times as high for a white as for a black, with mixed-race and
Indian students in between. The student-teacher ratio, 19 to 1 for whites, stood
at 40 to 1 for blacks. THE simmering resentment against Bantu education burst
into public protest in 1976.

Students in Soweto, the sprawling township outside Johannesburg that is home to
more than one million blacks, began a school boycott to protest mandatory
instruction in Afrikaans, which they considered the language of oppression. The
boycott spread to nonwhite townships across the nation, and soon burgeoned from
civil disobedience into pitched battles between students and security forces, in
which hundreds of young people died.

Nonwhite education in South Africa has never been the same. And the cycle of
protest, violence and repression has escalated markedly since President P.W.
Botha in 1984 declared the first of two states of emergency. The South Africa
Foundation has estimated that at any given time, 220,000 black students out of
7.6 million nationwide are boycotting their schools. In Soweto last year, only
350 of the 6,600 eligible high school students took the required pre-graduation
examination known as matriculation. The Botha regime has ordered more than 80
black schools to be closed in the last several months, saying they will not
reopen until pupils prove they are ready to be educated.

Many young people, particularly the student leaders most active in protests
against apartheid, chose to flee the country. Officials of the Phelps-Stokes
Fund estimate that between 250,000 and 700,000 South Africans and South-West
Africans between the ages of 18 and 24 have left the country, most of whom live
in refugee camps in Botswana, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has determined that 10,000 of these exiles are
prepared for college, if given the chance to attend. Given this situation, with
education in South Africa fitful and unequal at best, and with hundreds of
thousands of former students now in exile, concern has risen that there could be
a vacuum of black leadership if the time comes when political power is truly
shared among the races.

Within a few years of the Soweto protests, several scholarship programs emerged
in this country to aid South African students. The total number of South
Africans studying in the United States, 1,100 in the 1980-81 academic year, rose
to 1,790 for 1986-87. (Britain, traditionally the most popular Western
destination for South African students, tallied 3,000 in the current school
year.) SENTIMENT continues to grow on many American campuses for providing aid
to South African students. In one case - the scholarship program operated by the
Institute of International Education - the number of American colleges and
universities willing to give scholarships to South Africans actually exceeded
the number of students for whom the institute could afford to supply living
expenses. In part, educators say, many American institutions want to demonstrate
their interest in the South African issue and to put their resources behind that
interest. At the same time, some colleges may be supporting a scholarship
program as a substitute for divesting themselves of stock in corporations with
ties to South Africa.

The Institute of International Education, a private nonprofit organization with
offices near the United Nations, has since 1979 run the largest single American
scholarship program. Underwritten by both public and private sources, it has so
far given free American educations to more than 500 black, mixed-race and Indian
students, all of whom were selected while attending colleges or secondary
schools in South Africa.

''We feel that we could contribute to progress and peaceful transition in South
Africa by training black leaders for the future,'' said Richard Krasno, the
organization's president and chief executive officer. ''And it was a matter of
preference to select South Africans who were not refugees. We knew that many
talented people had gone into exile with hopes of returning someday. But we
thought it would be most useful to concentrate on that group of people who could
go back immediately.''

So far, 275 of the institute scholars have returned to South Africa, with 230
still studying here. The program, Mr. Krasno said, qualifies as a success on
several grounds - the 99 percent pass rate of the scholars in American colleges,
the return of virtually all the scholars to South Africa after completing their
studies, and the ability of most of them to find work in South Africa despite a
nonwhite unemployment rate that some observers have estimated is as high as 40
or 50 percent.

As the institute was beginning to support South African residents, the State
Department started a similar program for refugees, and selected the
Phelps-Stokes Fund to operate it. This later became the model for the Bishop
Tutu fund, which it resembles in all respects except its funding sources.

Shortly after winning the Nobel Peace Prize, Bishop Tutu addressed a luncheon of
the Phelps-Stokes Fund, of which he is a trustee. He declared that there was a
need for another scholarship program, one that did not depend on cooperation
from South African institutions and agencies, as the institute's program does,
or on public financing, as the State Department program does.

Bishop Tutu, who was already a member of the South African advisory board for
the institute program, had long shown a keen interest in the education of South
African refugees. ''I very rarely speak for my father,'' said Mpho Tutu, a
senior at Howard University in Washington, ''but in this instance, I can say
that this is very important to him. He has never been able to stress too much
the importance of education for any young person. And these students have
already demonstrated their leadership potential, or they wouldn't be in exile.''

Ms. Zulu's story is fairly typical of such exiles. She entered college as the
daughter on whose education an apolitical family had pinned its hopes, and a
good deal of its money. She intended to study pharmacy but said she could not
because she was a Zulu and the pharmacy major was offered only by a college
reserved for members of the Sotho tribe. She instead studied psychology and
criminology at the University of Zululand - until the boycott that began at
Soweto spread to her college.

''Before we even knew it, school was closed down, '' she said. ''The protest
started at 6 in the morning, and I'm telling you that in two hours, the campus
was green with soldiers. And by 11, school was closed and we were ordered
home.'' Ms. Zulu traveled for two days to reach her home in Durban. Her mother
implored her to continue her studies, so when school reopened Ms. Zulu began her
required psychology fieldwork in the Transvaal region. After a few months she
was summoned home for a memorial on the fourth anniversary of her father's
death. There she was arrested without a specific charge.

Over the next year, Ms. Zulu said, she was moved through five prisons. She was
interrogated at the outset and sometimes beaten, she said, but primarily she was
left in an isolation cell. She was released with no more explanation than she
had been given when she was arrested in the first place. Once again, Ms. Zulu
recounted, her mother beseeched her to finish her degree. She returned to the
University of Zululand to find a black president in office but the campus in
turmoil over his expulsions of several students for becoming pregnant - even
though, Ms. Zulu said, many of the students were married. Ms. Zulu helped to
organize a sit-down strike, and the president called in the police and dogs to
break it up. The next day, she said, the university was ordered closed and the
students were sent home. Back in Durban, Ms. Zulu was arrested for the second
time. She was 21 years old.

The authorities interrogated her, and after a few days released her. Before the
arrest, she had decided to leave the country and had obtained a travel document
allowing her to enter neighboring Lesotho. But now the document was canceled.
Ms. Zulu made for Mozambique, where she joined the African National Congress.
She taught for two years at a congress school in Tanzania, and in the early
1980's traveled as a representative of the congress to the United States. It was
here she met representatives of the Phelps-Stokes Fund, and she received one of
the fund's State Department scholarships enabling her to attend Lincoln
University, in Pennsylvania.

By the time Ms. Zulu had earned her bachelor's degree in psychology at Lincoln,
the Bishop Tutu scholarship program was being developed. Eight colleges pledged
full tuition and room and board for a four-year period, while 13 more donated
four years of tuition. These institutions range from large schools such as New
York University and the University of Connecticut to small, predominantly black
schools such as Fisk University in Nashville and Spelman College in Atlanta. THE
bigger problem was raising money.

Even with the colleges' contributions, the program fund needed about $3 million
to support the anticipated 100 scholars, said Bernice Powell, its director. So
Phelps-Stokes officials sought out the corporations still conducting business in
South Africa. The initial donors included the Coca-Cola Company, which has since
announced its intention to sell its South African holdings, and Mobil
Corporation, which retains its South African ties.

Ms. Powell said there was no conflict in Phelps-Stokes officials espousing
American disinvestment while also seeking contributions from corporations that
have refused to get out of South Africa. ''Those are the corporations that have
the greatest interest in South Africa,'' she maintained. ''However they feel
about disinvestment, they have the greatest stake in educating the young people
in South Africa and Namibia.''

John Lord, the press relations coordinator for Mobil, concurred. ''We think our
presence is a positive force for constructive change,'' he said. ''A priority
goal of Mobil's programs for South Africa is upgrading the education of black
South Africans at all levels, both in and out of the country, but overwhelmingly
within South Africa. Mobil's support of the Bishop Tutu fund is part of that
program. Students under the fund are awarded assistance based on merit, not
politics.''

The fund-raising effort has reaped $1 million to date, most of it from
businesses and the rest from the Rockefeller and Spencer Foundations. The money
has been enough to put 20 students into U.S. colleges. A few, like Ms. Zulu,
were already living in the United States, but the remainder were selected out of
refugee camps, the likely source for the 80 scholars yet to come.

Ida Wood, vice president of the Phelps-Stokes Fund, recruits students for both
the Bishop Tutu and State Department programs. Twice annually for the last eight
years, she has traveled to refugee camps in Africa, selecting nearly 250
recipients for scholarships. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees supplies
her with a roster of South African exiles who are considered ready for college
or who had begun their studies before fleeing. MS. WOOD interviews the
prospects, looking for those capable of adapting to life on an American college
campus. Then she administers a two-hour examination based on the Scholastic
Aptitude Test but modified by the University of Botswana to reflect the culture
of southern Africa. The students who score well get a second interview, and then
Ms. Wood chooses the recipients. Each student signs an agreement to return to
Africa after college.

The scholarship program's staff tries to match a student's interest with a
college's strength. Among the first group is an engineering major at the
University of Hartford, a nursing student at St. Joseph's College in West
Hartford, a business student at Benedict College in Columbia, S.C., and an
education major at Oberlin College in Ohio.

Like many students in the program, Ms. Zulu presumed that her education was over
the day she left South Africa. But when she began teaching at the
icicanatational ngngress school in Tanziaia, she ltlt the desire to resume
hertutudies so she ululd become a beerer and me e spe=cicialized tchcher. ''I
was able to see the need for educators,'' she said. ''There were children
without teachers, children without parents, children who were anti-authority. I
was thinking of an alternative education system to help these children. If
nobody thought of building a school for these children, where would they be?
Scattered all over the world.''

As a graduate student in New York University's Department of Educational
Psychology, Ms. Zulu has centered her coursework on educating the profoundly
retarded. For the required practicum, she is doing program coordination for
United Cerebral Palsy. She said she expected to complete her master's degree
this spring and then to begin writing her doctoral dissertation, in either
program development or program coordination for the profoundly retarded.

There is, she said, no comparison between the education she has received in the
United States and the one she began, and under other cirumstances might have
completed, in South Africa. ''When I came here,'' Ms. Zulu said, ''it was the
first time I understood what education is really about. In South Africa,
education is supposed to be tough for blacks to get. Information is hoarded.
You're not encouraged to think. Your development is arrested. Here, I've been
given room for my personal thinking, my creativity. That's the most important
thing.''

Her scholarship also has enabled Ms. Zulu to attend an integrated school for the
first time in her life, which has made for another kind of education. ''I've
learned that the political problem is not color,'' Ms. Zulu said. ''I've found
out that if I have a problem a white student will help me, and if a white
student has a problem I will help in return. Nobody is superior and nobody is
inferior.''

WHERE TO GET HELP

Specific information about programs offering financial assistance to black South
Africans can be obtained from the following organizations:

* African-American Institute, 833 United Nations Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10017;
phone (212) 949-5666.

* South African Education Program, Institute of International Education, 809
United Nations Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10017; (212) 984-5360.

* The Phelps-Stokes Fund, 10 East 87th Street, New York, N.Y. 10128; (212)
427-8100.

* United Nations Educational and Training Program for Southern Africa, 1 United
Nations Plaza, Room 3275, New York, N.Y. 10017; (212) 754-5515.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Phumzile Zulu (NYT/Nancy Kaye)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW DIRECTIONS IN GEOGRAPHY

BYLINE: By John Noble Wilford

SECTION: Section 12; Page 87, Column 1; Survey of Education Desk

LENGTH: 2113 words


GEOGRAPHERS sometimes feel that no one understands them. People who remember how
difficult it was to memorize the states and capitals in grade school and how
dull it was to learn of flax production in Poland find it unbelievable that
grown men and women make a profession of the field. In his book ''The Geographer
at Work,'' Peter Gould, professor of geography at Pennsylvania State University,
writes of the social awkwardness that his calling engenders. Often, when
introduced at a party as a geographer, he hears the puzzled response, ''Oh,
really? A geographer . . . And what do geographers do?''

Spurred by new technologies and a hot job market, geographers and teachers of
geography are working to change all that. They have been encouraged by the
growing strength of geography as a discipline in many colleges and graduate
schools. But they acknowledge that they have their work cut out for them in
their efforts to raise the standards of teaching geography in the elementary and
secondary schools. Geography has been in the shadows for so long that it should
come as no surprise that most Americans are unaware of the dramatic
transformation of the geographer's role in recent years. Geographers nowadays
are concerned not only with where things are, but also why they are there. They
make maps to interpret and illustrate economic, social and political trends in
the world. And they study the sources of social and political conflict between
regions, changing patterns of population growth, the relationships of the
industrialized and underdeveloped worlds and the spatial differentiation of the
world in terms of agriculture, industry and people's general well-being.

Making this possible are the new technologies of remote sensing and electronic
data processing. The result is what some experts call the ''new geography,''
more scientific in its methods and more responsive to the needs of modern
societies. Remote sensing, by airborne and space-borne radar and by instruments
known as multispectral scanners, provides a new means of rapidly and repeatedly
gathering prodigious amounts of information for making and revising maps. The
enormous appetite of computers for ingesting and digesting data makes it
possible to convert remote-sensing images into maps showing not only the
familiar land forms, but also the world's crops and forests, geological
formations and natural resources, ocean currents and mountains and plains
beneath the seas.

But little of this is being taught in most elementary and secondary schools, and
students, as a consequence, have appallingly little notion of where major
countries are to be found. According to officials of the Association of American
Geographers, an organization of professional geographers based in Washington, at
least 90 percent of those teaching geography lack adequate training. The
discipline has declined so much at the beginning level, the association notes,
that geography is no longer taught as a separate subject in most schools but is
instead incorporated into courses in social studies and earth science.

Said Bill Honig, California's Superintendent of Public Instruction, in his
keynote speech at a recent symposium at the University of California at Los
Angeles: ''You have to realize just how bad the situation is. Our students are
more illiterate in geography than in anything else.''

Students used to get a course or two in the fourth or fifth grade and then some
more in high school. But since the war, geography instruction has been absorbed
in earth sciences or social sciences. The result has been a general neglect of
geography, in part because many social studies teachers are history majors who
prefer to spend class time on their own specialty.

To counteract this trend, Salvatore J. Natoli, deputy executive director of the
geographers' association, is leading a coalition of organizations - the
Association of American Geographers, the American Geographical Society, the
National Council of Geographic Education and the National Geographic Society -
in a sweeping review of how geography is taught in schools and how instruction
can be improved in both quality and quantity.

Two years ago the coalition published guidelines for geographic education from
kindergarten through the 12th grade that were sent to state education leaders,
identifying the important concepts and skills that should be taught. As a
beginning, the coalition believes that students should learn to recognize a
globe as a model of the earth and to use simple maps. In grades 3 and 4, they
should learn to locate and describe major geographical features and regions and
how they change through time. Then they should concentrate on American geography
and the use of more complex maps. In high school they should be offered a range
of courses in political, historical, cultural and economic geography.

''If we are going to make any impact on a curriculum we have to start at a local
level,'' Dr. Natoli explained. ''We are trying to develop support networks
between college professors and local teachers. We already have a network of 400
college people nationally who are seeking to improve geography programs in the
schools.'' As part of this approach, teachers are being offered more intensive
summer courses and in-service training. The coalition also is seeking to
establish more rigorous teacher-certification requirements.

Lately, there have been some encouraging signs. Some states, including South
Dakota and California, have instituted geography requirements for graduation.
The National Geographic Society has budgeted $4 million to improve education in
geography, participating in pilot-school programs in Washington and Los Angeles
and sponsoring workshops so that high school instructors can learn to teach
geography more effectively and then to spread those techniques at workshops of
their own back home. A STARTLING bit of contrast to the lower-school experience,
however, is that geography is on the rise on the college and graduate level
after often being dismissed for years as a second-rate academic pursuit.
Geography has risen in stature in large part because the new technologies have
expanded the analytical range of the field, from which scholars at the college
level are better able to benefit than are secondary-school instructors.

In the United States, some 6,000 to 7,000 students now graduate each year with
bachelor's degrees in geography, learning a wide range of analytical,
mathematical, graphic and computer techniques. About 750 more receive master's
degrees and 175 earn doctorates. All these totals are records. Moreover, in the
last six years 20 undergraduate programs have been added across the nation;
one-fourth of American universities now are offering majors in the field.

Many geographers believe that the University of Minnesota and Penn State are
leaders in the field, followed by the University of California at both Berkeley
and Los Angeles and the Universities of Wisconsin, Illinois, Washington, Georgia
and North Carolina. The University of California at Santa Barbara has a growing
department concentrating on remote sensing in the survey of earth resources.
Waldo Tobler, a professor at Santa Barbara, is recognized as having inspired a
generation of cartographers to follow a path of creative and imaginative
mapmaking. Working with computer graphics, cartographers today can take masses
of numerical data and swiftly display them as three-dimensional maps, revealing
the spatial distribution of almost anything from disease to single-parent
households.

Among the private universities, Johns Hopkins has a strong program combining
geography and environmental engineering, and Clark University, in Worcester,
Mass., is well regarded for its traditional emphasis. Syracuse University
concentrates on geopolitics and cultural geography and is now establishing an
Advanced Graphics Research Laboratory for studies in remote sensing,
computerized cartography and information systems.

But there have been some serious setbacks as well. The University of Chicago,
which used to be a leader, is dismantling its geography department, and so is
Columbia University. Both programs had grown weak from neglect, according to
many geography professors, and are being sloughed off as part of a retrenchment.
In an impassioned article in the student newspaper last spring, Neil Smith, an
assistant professor of geography at Columbia, complained that the university
administration had bled the department of resources and ''now we are deemed too
anemic to be supported.''

In response, the Columbia administration said it decided, after a study of
faculty and curriculum in the late 1970's, to freeze the geography department's
number of tenured faculty positions. Dr. Donald Hood, vice president for arts
and sciences at Columbia, said: ''We're not abandoning the teaching of
geography. But to bring the department up to the level of excellence would have
required a substantial investment of resources, and we are not prepared to do
that.'' MANY who major in geography are taking a distinctly practical approach.
There is an increasing demand for geographers in the job market. Mark Momonier,
a professor of geography at Syracuse, said, ''The demand for geography graduates
has been hot for five or six years.''

The Federal Government, mostly the Defense Mapping Agency, has been hiring about
350 new cartographers a year. State and local governments have been seeking
geographers for regional planning, transportation and other agencies.
Corporations are using computerized mapping as a tool in marketing and
geographical analysis in selecting plant sites and distribution networks.

Dr. Peter Gould of Penn State observed that many students were attracted to
geography because of a renewed sense of ''stewardship'' for the land and
resources of the world. This concern for the social condition, he said, was
strong among geographers a century ago and may again be ''one of the great
strengths'' of the profession in the years ahead.

A QUICK QUIZ IN GEOGRAPHY

How much geography do you know? The following questions were among those given
to students in the fourth through ninth grades participating in the first
National Geography Olympiad and were taken by 6,920 students in 501 schools
nationwide. The contest, which awarded medals for local winners, was sponsored
by the National Council for Geographic Education, a nonprofit organization based
in Macomb, Ill.    (Answers appear at the bottom.)

1. What time will it be in New York City when it is 8 P.M. in Los Angeles?
   a. 5 P.M.
   b. 6 P.M.
   c. 10 P.M.
   d. 11 P.M.

2. Which of the following countries is closest to the equator?
   a. The United States
   b. Norway
   c. Mexico
   d. Spain

3. The most important source of moisture for the earth's atmosphere is:
   a. Oceans
   b. Major lakes and rivers
   c. Green plants
   d. Exposed soil surfaces

4. Citrus fruits and commercial vegetables are produced in vast quantities on
irrigated land in:
   a. Central Oklahoma
   b. Southern California
   c. Southern Louisiana
   d. Eastern California

5. The production of major crops is dependent on summer monsoon rains in:
   a. Burma and Thailand
   b. Northwestern Europe
   c. The Nile Valley
   d. Southeast Australia

6. Which of the following states is bordered by both the Mississippi and Ohio
Rivers?
   a. Kentucky
   b. Indiana
   c. Georgia
   d. Louisiana

7. Which pair of nations share a border with the Soviet Union?
   a. China and Vietnam
   b. Iran and Afghanistan
   c. West Germany and France
   d. Canada and the United States

8. Which pair of nations below is correctly associated by common religion?
   a. Peru and Italy
   b. Argentina and Britain
   c. Colombia and India
   d. Egypt and South Africa

9. Which pair of nations below has the highest population density?
   a. United States and Argentina
   b. Britain and Japan
   c. Australia and Brazil
   d. South Africa and Canada

10. John lives in a city of 100,000 people 200 miles from a metropolitan area of
four million. Which of the following probably would not be a reason for John to
travel to the metropolitan area?
   a. To purchase a new car
   b. To participate in a national convention
   c. To attend a professional football game

  d. To have dinner and attend the theater



Correct answers are (1) d; (2) c; (3) a; (4) b; (5) a; (6) a; (7) b; (8) a; (9)
b; (10) a.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of cartographer at work (Sygma/Erich Hartmann)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE YEAR IN REVIEW: The World;
Terror and Arms Deal, But Also Hopes of Peace

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER

SECTION: Section 13; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 715 words


THE ANCIENT RHYTHMS OF warfare and peacemaking, of catastrophe and
reconstruction, of subjugation and liberation ran through 1986 like the powerful
crosscurrents of a weary sea. The danger and the hope of modern times seemed
concentrated in this span of a year.

In a contradictory spirit of conciliation and suspicion, the nuclear superpowers
restored some peripheral elements of detente but failed to find enough common
ground to conclude a treaty limiting or cutting strategic arms. Their
competition around the world magnified regional conflicts, fueling ethnic,
religious and national strife in parts of Africa, Asia and Central America.
Iran, revealed as the clandestine recipient of arms from the Reagan
Administration, continued its grinding war with Iraq in one of the world's
strategically crucial regions, the oil-rich Persian Gulf. Each side in that war
received support from both the Soviet Union and the United States: Soviet arms
to Iraq, East European and North Korean arms to Iran; American arms to Iran,
American intelligence information to Iraq.

Israel and Jordan groped inconclusively toward accommodation, falling short of
an agreement to negotiate formally on the future of the West Bank but managing
an unstated policy of coordination in overseeing the occupied territory.
Terrorism, the angry weapon of the weak, found targets in Europe, the Middle
East and elsewhere, provoking the United States into air strikes on Libya, which
Washington accused of aiding the attackers. The war in Nicaragua, conducted by
rebels with American weapons -supposedly purchased partly with profits from the
Iran sales - bled the Central American country without changing its pro-Soviet
political orientation. Guerrillas in Afghanistan, also with some American arms,
continued to resist the Soviet war against their mountainous nation, despite
incremental moves in the diplomatic sphere toward a possible settlement.

The most serious nuclear accident in history occured at the Soviet Union's
Chernobyl power plant, spreading radioactive fallout across wide stretches of
Eastern and Western Europe. Simultaneously, Mexico City residents began to
rebuild from a devastating earthquake that struck them late in the previous
year. While racism remained the ruler in an increasingly turbulent South Africa
and Gen. Augusto Pinochet kept his grip on Chile, authoritarian leaders were
ousted in Haiti and the Philippines, bringing the first, fresh scent of
democracy to Haiti and reinforcing the democratic impulses of the Philippine
people. Political opposition revived in South Korea, and students demonstrated
for democracy in China.

For the United States, confident in its democratic ideology, the forces of
history appeared to be running more favorably than a decade ago, in the
immediate shadow of the Vietnam war. To the Soviet Union, preoccupied with
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's attempts to reform the domestic economy, the world may
have looked more adverse, particularly with the quagmire of Afghanistan and the
elusive nature of arms control, Moscow's premier foreign policy goal. The gains
made at Mr. Reagan's meeting in Reykjavik, Iceland, with Mr. Gorbachev were not
enough.

The high politics played against the background of constant individual
suffering, of starvation in parts of Africa and deep poverty in most of the
world, corrosive hardships to which the rich and powerful nations of the globe
devoted little attention and practically no significant resources. And
ultimately, the kaleidoscope of the year's events was reflected in individual
human faces - of despairing, emaciated children and of rejoicing political
prisoners newly freed. These included Andrei D. Sakharov, Anatoly B. Shcharansky
and Yuri F. Orlov, three of the Soviet Union's prominent dissidents. And two
other men stood juxtaposed: Kurt Waldheim, the former Secretary General of the
United Nations who was elected President of Austria even after his wartime
membership in Nazi organizations was exposed, and Eli Wiesel, the eloquent
Holocaust survivor who won the Nobel Peace Prize. ''Sometimes we must
interfere,'' Mr. Wiesel said. ''Wherever men or women are persecuted because of
their race, religion or political views, that place must - at that moment -
become the center of the universe.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

JAPAN'S GROWING ROLE IN CHIPS WORRYING U.S.

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1754 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 4


America's semiconductor manufacturers, the linchpin of the nation's electronics
industry, are rapidly falling behind their Japanese competitors, according to
experts and Government documents assessing the situation.

Recent reports by a Defense Department study group and by the Central
Intelligence Agency found that the United States chip-making industry was in
worse shape even than had been previously thought.

While many experts have wondered whether the American industry could maintain
its technological lead over Japan, numerous authorities say the lead has been
lost in many areas. The question being asked is whether the American makers of
semiconductors - the tiny silicon chips that are the heart of computers and
other electronic devices - will survive at all, and in what form.

The draft of the report prepared for the Defense Department, for example,
concludes that the United States industry may ''very soon, in fact, be
competitive only in very small 'specialty' segments of the overall market.'' And
the assessment by the C.I.A. concludes: ''We believe the U.S. semiconductor
industry is at a crucial turning point in its history. It fundamentally cannot
compete in its present form.''

The C.I.A. assessment is one of many made to a panel established by the Defense
Science Board, a scientific adviser to the Pentagon. The panel was addressing
growing fears in the Government that the deterioration of the semiconductor
industry would leave the nation dependent on foreign companies for chips that
are vital to national defense and would lead to an overall decline in
electronics capability.

Moreover, experts say, the decline poses a serious commercial problem, both
because semiconductors are an important industry in their own right and because
they are the key to many other even larger industries that use the chips, such
as computers and telecommunications and medical equipment.

If the American manufacturers of such electronic equipment become dependent on
Japanese suppliers, it is feared, they will be at a disadvantage in competing
with Japanese companies in the same industry. The same Japanese companies that
sell chips used in computers also sell computers, which means they might have an
incentive to withhold the most advanced chips from the American market.

The American semiconductor companies were once the envy of the world for their
innovativeness and dynamism. But in the last four years they have lost 20
percent of their world market share.

Huge Losses for Companies

Numerous reasons are advanced for the decline. A slump in chip prices caused by
world oversupply and slow computer-industry growth has caused huge losses for
many of the companies. But the Americans have also complained that the Japanese
have deliberately priced their chips below cost to gain business and have kept
their market closed to outside suppliers. A recent United States-Japan
semiconductor trade agreement seeks to correct these problems, but there is
widespread doubt as to whether it will work.

Analysts say, however, that the American companies also neglected quality
manufacturing, licensed technology to the Japanese too freely and did not make a
strong enough effort to sell in Japan. And some say the entrepreneurial nature
of California's Silicon Valley, where many of the companies are based, worked
against the Americans because the constant exodus of executives to form new
companies produced many tiny concerns that could innovate but not last in
long-term competition with Japan.

Fears about the industry's decline were heightened by the recent announcement
that Japan's Fujitsu Ltd. would buy the Fairchild Semiconductor Corporation, a
leading supplier of chips to the military. The Government is deciding whether to
approve the purchase. $2 Billion Over Five Years The report of the Defense
Science Board's panel, to be released this month or next, is expected to
recommend almost $2 billion in Defense Department expenditures over five years
to help the industry recover. A draft of a summary of the report, as well as
minutes of one of the panel's meetings, were provided by sources who asked to
remain unidentified.

The Defense Science Board report concludes that the Japanese now have a
technological lead in most silicon products, with the exception of customized
logic chips and microprocessors. But even in those areas, the United States lead
is narrowing. Japan also leads in non-silicon products, such as opto-electronic
circuits that process light as well as electricity. In the materials and
equipment used to make chips, the United States and Japan are at par, with the
Japanese gaining, the report concludes.

A chart in the report shows that, out of 25 semiconductor products or processes,
Japan now leads in 12 while the United States leads in 5, with parity in the
other 8. The chart also shows, however, that the United States position relative
to Japan is declining in 19 of the 25 categories, including in 4 of the 5 in
which the United States now leads. In six categories the United States is
maintaining its position, but in no case is it gaining.

For the Defense Science Board, the concern over the industry's slide is more
immediately related to national security than to its commercial implications.
There is a growing fear that the nation will become dependent on foreigners for
chips used in weapons, satellites, supercomputers and other devices vital for
national defense.

In addition, the general decline in semiconductors could weaken the entire
American electronics industry so that it would no longer be in a position to
advance rapidly. The United States depends on advanced electronics to offset any
advantage the Soviet Union might have in numbers of troops or weapons.

'Widespread Effects'

''This is not another case of citrus, tobacco or pasta,'' the C.I.A. said in its
presentation to the Defense Science Board early in 1986. ''The consequences of
losing a strong indigenous technology base in this industry could have, in our
judgment, widespread effects on this country's ability to maintain technical
superiority in advanced weapon systems over the U.S.S.R.''

The C.I.A. assessment was presented by Timothy L. Stone, who at that time was
chief of the technology and industrial competitiveness division of the agency's
Office of Global Issues. Mr. Stone left the agency last summer and is now in
strategic planning at Motorola Inc., which makes semiconductors.

The Defense Department report and the minutes of the study group's meeting
indicate a concern that, even though Japan is an ally, it might not want to sell
the latest technology to the United States. This could be because the Japanese
do not want to show their best technology to companies that also compete with
them in nonmilitary areas. There could also be political or ethical reasons.
Some allies refused to sell equipment to the United States during the Vietnam
War, for instance.

Specific Examples Given

According to the minutes of the Defense Science Board meeting, held last
February in Arlington, Va., the examples of foreign dependency, and the concerns
attached to such dependency, include the following:

* The National Security Agency, which is charged with electronic eavesdropping
and communications security, buys ceramic packages for 171 of 195 customized
chips from one Japanese company, Kyocera, which dominates the market. The
packages are used to house and protect computer chips in crucial applications,
such as military ones. At one point, Kyocera, without warning, discontinued
making the ceramic package for one key component, according to a presentation
given to the panel by James R. Philblad, deputy chief of the N.S.A.'s
communications security acquisition group. Now the N.S.A. is trying to develop
more American sources for the packages.

* Japanese semiconductor companies that also make supercomputers are not
supplying their best chips to American supercomputer companies, according to
Norman Kreisman, an Energy Department official involved with supercomputers. The
machines, the fastest computers in existence, are used for weapons design and
code-breaking, as well as for weather forecasting and other civilian
applications. Lloyd Thorndyke, the president of ETA Systems, a supercomputer
manufacturer, said that, since supercomputers depended on using the most
advanced components, it was quite likely that the most advanced supercomputers
would eventually come from Japan unless the Government helped the American chip
industry.

* Of 3,000 unique chips needed for America's military space program, 93 are
supplied by foreign companies, all but one Japanese, because there is no
American supplier, according to James J. Egan, an official with the Aerospace
Corporation. There is concern that there could be no American suppliers for the
next generation of high-speed chips made out of gallium arsenide, which are used
in communications satellites, high-speed computers and fiber-optic
communications systems.

Some experts say that, in the future, many companies will form links with the
Japanese to survive. Motorola recently entered a cooperative agreement with the
Toshiba Corporation. Many start-up companies in Silicon Valley no longer do
their own manufacturing but contract with Japanese or South Korean companies for
that. In return, the American companies often give their technology to the other
company.

Fewer Larger Companies

Other United States companies are likely to merge with each other or go out of
business, leaving fewer larger manufacturers as well as, perhaps, numerous
smaller ones in niche areas.

Drastic actions might be required to reverse the decline. About half of the
roughly $2 billion that the Defense Science Board report urges the Defense
Department to spend over the next five years would be used to finance
establishment of an industry consortium to produce memory chips and improve
manufacturing techniques.

In addition, the report urges the department to spend $50 million a year to set
up university centers for excellence in semiconductor science and engineering.
It also urges increases in department spending on semiconductor research and
development, by 25 percent a year for four years, which would cost $60 million
in the first year and $250 million in the fourth year. And it recommends that
the department provide a discretionary fund for its semiconductor suppliers of
$50 million a year.

Next: American companies plan an ambitious cooperative venture.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: FIRST OF TWO ARTICLES ON THE SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY.

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Let's Not Go Back to Eisenhower Foreign Policy

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 407 words


To the Editor:

''There is a model in history for a Republican President and a predominantly
Democratic Senate working well together: the Eisenhower years,'' Anthony Lewis
writes (column, Dec. 4). ''I think Americans want it now,'' he adds. ''I think
the Democrats in the Senate would support the President in that kind of foreign
policy. It is up to Mr. Reagan.''

Here are some of the foreign-policy gems of the Eisenhower years:

* The basis was laid for the later tragic invasion of Vietnam. When the French
surrendered at Dienbienphu on May 7, 1954, the U.S. was footing 78 percent of
the war's financial burden. We had offered, and the French rejected the idea, to
use an A-bomb to relieve Dienbienphu.

A 19-nation peace conference ended the war. There would be North and South
administrative zones for two years, with an election in 1956 for an all-Vietnam
government. The U.S. did not formally sign the treaty and developed a puppet
South Vietnam government. Eisenhower said he could not allow the election
because the Communist ticket of Ho Chi Minh would get 80 percent of the vote.

* On June 29, 1954, an operation guided and funded by the Central Intelligence
Agency overthrew the democratically elected Government of Jacobo Arbenz in
Guatemala. The military and a rich elite have since controlled the Government,
sometimes with genocidal campaigns against the majority Mayan Indians and with
heavy U.S. arms and training support.

* In 1953, a C.I.A.-engineered coup overthrew the Government of Prime Minister
Mohammed Mossadegh of Iran. He had nationalized foreign oil companies, who then
set up a consortium of three British and five U.S. oil companies. The Shah was
restored.

* In 1960, plans were developed for the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba. Work was
so far advanced, including training bases in Guatemala, when Kennedy became
President that he was drawn into going ahead.

* The C.I.A. was again involved in U.S. support to overthrow the Lumumba
Government of the Republic of the Congo in 1960. The mineral-rich province of
Katanga led the revolt. Patrice Lumumba was assassinated.

Poor, third-world nations may have a longer memory than Mr. Lewis. The Senate
should not be looking back to the failed policies of the past, but searching for
new, nonviolent responses to the human needs of these millions and their longing
for a place in the sun.

GEORGE F. MARKHAM
  Northampton, Mass., Dec. 18, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

I Think Reagan Is a First-Rate President

BYLINE: By Barry Farber: Barry Farber, who was the Conservative Party's
candidate for Mayor of New York City in 1977, is a talk show host on WMCA, a
Manhattan-based radio station.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


One of the top shows in Broadway history, South Pacific,'' had a top song,
''There Is Nothing Like a Dame,'' and the top lyric in that song went like this:

''So suppose a dame ain't bright, Or completely free from flaws, Or as faithful
as a bird dog, Or as kind as Santa Claus, It's a waste of time to worry Over
things that they have not Be thankful for The things they've got!''

The enemies of President Reagan, with motives ranging from noble to wretched,
are active and articulate. Most of his defenders are embarrassed and floundering
- or are silent.

I am one of his unembarrassed defenders who voted for him twice and now asks
himself, in light of what's happening, ''Would you do it again?'' Yes, I would.
Different Presidents, for better or worse, for important or unimportant, come
with different characteris tics.

Franklin D. Roosevelt was admired for, among other traits, his ability to
overcome physical paralysis and maintain a Presidential schedule. John F.
Kennedy was admired for playing touch football.

Harry S. Truman probably could not have identified the six republics that make
up Yugoslavia, but his decision to jump to the aid of Mar shal Tito accelerated
the fragmentation of the Soviet bloc. The notion of a President helping a
Communist in 1948 makes the sale of arms to Iran today seem like an embassy
party cookie push.

They said some of the same things about Dwight D. Eisenhower that they're now
saying about Ronald Reagan: no grasp of the issues, not really emotionally
involved, more comfortable reviewing troops than facts.

President Eisenhower's ''master of ceremonies'' administrative style made him
vulnerable to insult by critics. Yet that ability, exercised in running an army
and a democracy, served the nation well, and historians have been kinder to him
than his contemporaries were.

Jack Kennedy's short and cruelly terminated tenure may have fallen short in the
solid accomplishment department, but who can forget his power to animate us all
and give us the feeling that we were again a national ''somebody'' going
somewhere?

Lyndon B. Johnson grasped every issue firmly and clearly, but that didn't
reverse or even stem the debacle of his Vietnam policy.

Richard M. Nixon was unloveable, but he opened the channel to China.

Jimmy Carter loved detail. The comics tell us he even knew who was using the
tennis courts, but that quality, though laudable, didn't net his country or his
image the rewards that many people think such ability deserves.

My reaction when Ronald Reagan is criticized is not the standard, ''You never
liked him, and you've been out to get him for six years.'' Nor do I say, ''It
was all Oliver North's fault,'' and point out that Mr. Roosevelt did devious
things, too.

I simply invoke the ''South Pacific'' defense: What does he have? What does he
have not?

Mr. Reagan, I'm sure, does fall asleep at Cabinet meetings. I can see him
nodding. I'm sure he despises detail. He has always had plenty of people around
him as movie star, union chief, governor and President to handle the details.
That's got to mean some big ones roll right between his legs.

I'm sure Ronald Reagan is now bewildered and hurt, and feels that he is getting
a rotten shake and that everybody should look at his six good years and lay off.

You are perfectly free to value Jimmy Carter's grasp over Ronald Reagan's yawns,
Richard Nixon's accomplishments over Franklin Roosevelt's charm, Lyndon
Johnson's truculence over Jack Kennedy's elegance.

I happen to value Ronald Reagan's Kennedy-like ability to inspire, his Ike-like
ability to be the genial daddy of the mall, his Trumanesque toughness to tyrants
in all words and some deeds, his Nixon-like willingness to try bold foreign
policy initiatives and his Rooseveltian knack of remaining popular through it
all.

Call me wrong, even doltish, but I feel a new pride in this country, a new
respect for this country, a new hesitancy in Moscow to commit aggression, a
welcome paralysis among Moscow's client states to pursue subversion, and
economic optimism to match a rising Dow.

Democracy means we choose. It means you're free to be worried about the things
he ''has not.'' And it means that I, meanwhile, can keep on being grateful for
the things he's got!

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 6, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

On Nixon and Watergate, Reagan and Iran

BYLINE: By George McGovern; George McGovern, the Democratic Party's Presidential
candidate in 1972, is lecturing and writing.

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 699 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It has been a matter of special interest to me to note the comments of my old
nemesis of 1972, President Richard M. Nixon, on the Reagan Administration's
political crisis. Basing himself partly on his experience with the Watergate
scandals, he has offered three basic observations.

First, Ronald Reagan's policies are sound (arms shipments to soften up relations
with Iran and military aid to the contras), but subordinates fouled up the
execution. Second, unlike Watergate, handled ''abysmally,'' Mr. Reagan is
managing the affair ''expeditiously.'' Third, Mr. Reagan can restore his
leadership by successful arms control negotiations at the summit.

I disagree with points one and two but agree with the third.

First, I believe that Watergate and the Reagan crisis grew more out of mistaken
policy at the top than clumsy execution below. In each case, the demands of the
''national security state'' unfolding in secret were allowed to override the
Constitution and Federal statutes as well as fundamental American values and
common sense.

Watergate was a desperate effort to control the political fallout from a badly
flawed policy in Vietnam and Cambodia. How else was it that an experienced
President such as Mr. Nixon could be led into a web of wiretaps, bugging,
break-ins and bribes, of ''plumbers'' trying to plug national security leaks?

Much of this began in the name of national security to protect a misconceived
policy in Indochina, including the secret bombing of neutral Cambodia - a policy
that was not only illegal but foolish in that it helped topple the moderate
Prince Norodom Sihanouk and bring on the crazed Pol Pot.

Similarly, mistaken policy at the top seems to have led to the misdeeds of
Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North. Mr. Reagan approved arms for Iran, and he left
little doubt that he was desperate to find ways of getting around the
Congressional ban on arms for the contras in Nicaragua.

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger has called the arms-to-Iran policy
''absurd.'' Arming the Nicaraguan guerrillas is also mistaken, not least because
it has aggravated rather than moderated the repressive proclivities of the
Nicaraguan Government. Beyond this, every poll indicates that the American
public has no stomach for a military involvement in Central America. Nor does
Congress. Mr. Reagan's and Colonel North's disagreement with the majority view
has, with a kind of ''Rambo'' fanaticism, led to embarrassing and illegal acts.

As for Mr. Nixon's second point, I do not see how the handling of this crisis by
the President and his men can be described as ''expeditious.'' Why has Mr.
Reagan not called Colonel North and Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter into his
office, demanded the low-down on any policy execution not known to him and then
told the nation what has been going on?

As for point three, I fully subscribe to Mr. Nixon's view that Mr. Reagan can
salvage his Presidency if he will carefully prepare himself and then go back to
the summit with Mikhail S. Gorbachev. The President needs to consult closely
with his advisers at home, our allies abroad, the Congressional leadership and
former Presidents Nixon, Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter, whose pool of wisdom
should be drawn on more than it is.

Building on the discussions at Reykjavik, Mr. Reagan should consider the
following three steps: A mutual halt in nuclear testing, which has been observed
unilaterally by the Soviet Union since Aug. 6, 1985; a decision to scrap a few
of our older weapons so that we can stay within the SALT II ceilings, as Moscow
thus far has done; an agreement to confine ''Star Wars'' to research for the
next decade in return for Soviet agreement to a mutual, verifiable 50 percent
reduction in strategic and intermediate nuclear weapons over the next five
years.

If Mr. Reagan will make a clean breast of the Iran-Nicaragua affair and
undertake a genuine strategy for peace, he can finish his Presidency not as a
crippled duck but as an eagle carrying the highest hopes and most fervent
prayers of the American people. Such an initiative would put new meaning into
the New Year and insure this wounded but popular President a higher place in
history.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI REPORTS CHINESE ATTACK

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 168 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 6


Vietnam said today that its troops had repulsed a Chinese border attack.

The official Vietnamese press agency, in a report monitored here, three Chinese
attacks were foiled Ha Tuyen Province on Monday, ''putting out of action almost
500 land-grabbers.'' Vietnam uses this phrase to describe Chinese casualties.

China did not report the clashes. It was the largest number of Chinese
casualties claimed by Vietnam since 1979. The two sides often trade charges of
border aggression and at times exchange fire across the border.

The Vietnamese press agency said the fighting this week began when Chinese
troops, taking advantage of overcast skies, fired 14,000 artillery and mortar
rounds at hilltop positions inside Vietnam. Under the support of the shelling,
the Chinese troops stormed across the border, the report said.

''The local armed forces promptly intercepted the aggressors,'' the agency said,
adding that the Vietnamese seized ''a considerable quantity of weapons and other
war equipment.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CAMERAMAN TELLS OF INTIMIDATION

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 315 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 6


An assistant camera operator for the movie ''Twilight Zone'' testified today
that he did not voice his concern about the safety of a scene to film makers
because he felt intimidated by the director, John Landis.

The assistant, Randall Robinson, was a passenger on the helicopter that crashed
in the filming of a Vietnam War scene for the movie on July 23, 1982, killing
the actor Vic Morrow, 53 years old, and two children, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee
Shinn Chen, 6.

Mr. Robinson had also been in the aircraft in the filming of a sequence three
hours before the fatal flight. Special effects explosions, which led to the
crash, buffeted the helicopter in the earlier flight, according to Mr. Robinson
and to previous testimony.

But Mr. Robinson testified that one reason he never personally expressed his
reservations to Mr. Landis was because of the film director's standing in the
motion picture industry.

''He was a director of some stature, and I was intimidated,'' Mr. Robinson said
under questioning by Lea Purwin D'Agostino, Deputy District Attorney. Mr.
Robinson said was hired just two days before the crash.

Mr. Landis is on trial for involuntary manslaughter. Also charged are George
Folsey Jr., the film's associate producer; Dan Allingham, the unit production
manager; Paul Stewart, special effects coordinator, and Dorcey Wingo, the
helicopter pilot. The trial resumed this week after a holiday recess.

Mr. Robinson testified that he was also intimidated by an incident the night
before the crash when he heard Mr. Landis and the movie's assistant director,
Elie Cohn, shouting about the positioning of the helicopter.

''There was a particular tree they wanted us to come out from behind, and they
had a big frame they wanted us to drop into,'' Mr. Robinson testified.
''Whenever we would not come into the frame they would get real angry and scream
at Dorcey.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AIR FORCE IS CUTTING FIGHTER UNITS IN NUCLEAR SHIFT

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


The Air Force is cutting back units of fighter planes that would be employed in
non-nuclear conflicts because nuclear weapons are consuming an ever-increasing
share of its budget, Air Force officials said today.

Since many members of Congress, especially Democrats, have already criticized
the Reagan Administration as favoring nuclear weapons over conventional forces,
the proposed shift seemed likely to generate vigorous debate in hearings and
votes on the new military budget.

President Reagan proposed on Monday to increase the Air Force's budget from
$93.8 billion this year to $100.4 billion in the fiscal year 1988, which will
begin Oct. 1, and to $107.2 in 1989.

At the same time, however, the Air Force has announced that it plans to
eliminate a tactical fighter wing of several squadrons at Nellis Air Force Base
in Nevada, a fighter interceptor squadron at Griffiss Air Force Base in upstate
New York and another fighter interceptor squadron at Minot Air Force Base in
North Dakota.

Cuts in Personnel

The Air Force has given up its long-term goal of 40 tactical fighter wings and
has accepted the current 37 wings as the limit of what is politically
acceptable. In addition, the service plans to shrink itself by 8,000 men and
women, to 599,000, then increase to 601,000 in 1989.

In each case, the Air Force asserted, ''Reduced budget levels make it impossible
to sustain current force structure levels.''

While the fighter units are being eliminated from the Tactical Air Command, the
Air Force is putting into operation the first nuclear weapons planned in the
strategic modernization program Mr. Reagan announced in 1981, and is asking for
more of the same.

The first 10 MX intercontinental missiles have been deployed at Warren Air Force
Base in Wyoming and the first 16 B-1 bombers have been delivered to Dyess Air
Force Base in Texas. About half the planned renovations in the strategic
communications network have been put into place.

In the next several years, 40 more MX missiles that have been approved must be
paid for, as must be done for 84 more B-1 bombers and the remaining segments of
the communication network. The Air Force has asked for 50 more MX missiles and
is developing the costly Stealth bomber, which is designed to evade detection by
radar.

On top of that will come expenses for the expanding the research program to
develop a space-based defense against nuclear missiles.

As those programs advance, the Air Force plans to deactivate the 474th Tactical
Fighter Wing in Nevada early next year and to assign its 66 F-16 aircraft to a
reserve unit. Nearly 2,000 airmen will be dropped from the rolls, the Air Force
said.

In upstate New York, the 49th Fighter Interceptor Squadron will be disbanded
late this year and its 18 F-16 aircraft will be removed from service. Another
500 airmen will be cut from the force, the service said.

In North Dakota, the Fifth Interceptor Squadron will go out of action in the
spring of 1988, with its 18 F-15 air defense fighters being sent to a reserve
unit. More than 600 people will be dropped as a result of that move.

The Military Airlift Command will deactivate the 16th Tactical Airlift Squadron
at McChord Air Force Base in the state of Washington late this year and send its
six C-130 transports to a reserve unit; more than 700 people will be cut from
the Air Force.

Similarly, a weather reconnaissance squadron in Guam and an air rescue squadron
in California will be eliminated this year with a loss of 560 people from the
service.

The Air Force will modernize some fighter units. The Fourth Tactical Fighter
Wing at Seymour Johnson Air Force Base in North Carolina will replace its 72 F-4
aircraft, of Vietnam vintage, with new F-15 fighters in early 1989.

In Alaska, the 21st Tactical Fighter Wing, which helps to guard the approaches
to the United States across the Arctic Ocean, will have six more F-15's assigned
to it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 7, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

COMPANY NEWS;
A Work Force Of Immigrants

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 4, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 207 words

DATELINE: FORT WORTH, Jan. 6


From the looks of the mostly female workers assembling and testing Tandy's new
1000 SX personal computer along a pair of 400-foot production lines, this plant
could be situated in Malaysia or the Philippines, rather than five miles north
of Tandy's headquarters here.

Kenji Nishikawa, a 43-year-old electrical engineer from Tokyo who has been
involved in design and production in Tandy's computer unit since its inception,
is the manager who oversees the plant. Its workers come from 20 countries, and
many are recent immigrants to Fort Worth from Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia.
Because many are still learning English, the training manual relies on
photographs rather than written instructions.

Mr. Nishikawa said employees worked seven-day weeks shortly after production
began in late September. Then a parts shortage forced him to cut back to
five-day weeks in December. Suppliers currently are shipping parts for computers
originally scheduled for April assembly, he said.

The company gives no current daily production figures, but based on outputs
posted one recent afternoon on a video monitor, it probably is close to 1,200
units. That roughly conforms with the six-week wait that Radio Shack salespeople
are quoting to customers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WARNING ON ACCIDENT ON FILM SET DESCRIBED

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 301 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 7


A camera operator testified Tuesday that the director of the movie ''Twilight
Zone'' responded to a warning about the impact that special effects explosions
might have on the film's helicopter by saying ''we may lose'' the aircraft.

The camera operator, Steve Lydecker, testified that the director, John Landis,
made the remark about the aircraft two days before a fatal crash. He said the
remark was made in a conversation the two had on a filming location about 40
miles north of Los Angeles.

The special effects blasts later disabled the helicopter in the filming of a
Vietnam war scene July 23, 1982, sending the aircraft into a crash that killed
the actor Vic Morrow, 53 years old, and two children, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee
Shinn Chen, 6.

Mr. Landis has been charged with involuntary manslaughter in the deaths, along
with George Folsey Jr., the film's associate producer; Dan Allingham, the unit
production manager; Paul Stewart, the special effects coordinator, and Dorcey
Wingo, the helicopter pilot.

Mr. Lydecker testified ''it was my concern'' that the special effects explosions
scheduled for the Vietnam war scene might ''carom'' off a cliff rising up behind
a mock village and bounce ''back over the helicopter.''

He said that Mr. Landis's ''reply to me was, 'We may lose the helicopter.' ''

In an interview with reporters, Mr. Lydecker said he thought that Mr. Landis was
joking, but the Los Angeles Deputy District Attorney, Lea Purwin D'Agostino,
said that Mr. Landis had a propensity to joke about ''anything that was
dangerous.''

Mr. Landis's principal attorney, James F. Neal, characterized Mr. Lydecker's
testimony as ''absurd.'' But the camera operator did not retreat from his
testimony on his conversation with Mr. Landis when he was cross-examined today
by Mr. Neal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 8, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA REPORTS ATTACKS BY HANOI

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 250 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Jan. 7


Chinese frontier guards drove back several Vietnamese attacks across the border,
destroying a company of Vietnamese soldiers today and ''wiping out'' another 200
enemy troops, Xinhua, the official Chinese press agency, reported.

An official Vietnam News Agency report, monitored in Bangkok, had reported that
500 attacking Chinese troops were killed or were wounded early Monday in
fighting along the rugged border. It charged today that Peking was making
''painstaking preparations'' for new invasions.

Neither country mentioned casualties to its own forces, and the conflicting
claims could not be independently verified. The two nations rarely allow foreign
journalists to visit their 800-mile border, scene of several reported skirmishes
since China briefly invaded Vietnam in 1979.

Xinhua, quoting unidentified military sources, said Chinese frontier guards in
Yunnan had repulsed repeated assaults by Vietnamese troops since Monday.

From early Monday to this morning, Vietnamese troops launched a dozen attacks on
Chinese positions at the Laoshan border area, Xinhua said.

Vietnam's press agency had said China had suffered 500 casualties when an
artillery-backed Chinese division tried to seize four hilltops in Vietnam's
northern highlands of Vi Xuyen district in Ha Tuyen province. Two Chinese
regiments were ''decimated'' in the fighting early Monday, it said.

It was the largest number of Chinese casualties claimed by Vietnam in any single
skirmish along the border since 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 9, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW FACE;
BABY-FACED SOLDIER OF 'PLATOON': KEVIN DILLON

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 6; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 527 words


ONE of the most terrifying moments in the film ''Platoon'' belongs to the
21-year-old actor Kevin Dillon who plays Bunny, a swaggering, baby-faced young
American soldier. When the platoon descends upon a Vietnamese village that may
or may not be an enemy stronghold, the seething powder keg of a young man
indulges his berserk lust for violence by savagely beating a peasant with his
rifle butt. The savagery only kindles Bunny's appetite for a mass murder that is
barely averted.

''When I did that scene, I was flipping out, because the poor guy I was doing it
to was a Filipino they had picked up somewhere,'' Mr. Dillon said the other day.
''He was deaf and blind in one eye and missing a leg. I felt bad for the guy,
because he was a nervous wreck the whole time, and I wasn't sure if he knew we
were just filming a movie. That scene was so intense that my mom couldn't bear
to watch it.''

Discovered at 'Tex' Opening

Mr. Dillon, who is too young to remember the Vietnam War, even when parts of it
were broadcast on the news, studied for his role by reading ''Run Between the
Raindrops,'' a novel by Capt. Dale Dye, the retired Marine captain who
supervised the cast's 13-day field training. After some initial trepidation, Mr.
Dillon enjoyed the grueling training period, which he described as ''just like
playing G.I. Joe.''

''I see Bunny as a lost kid who doesn't know wrong from right,'' said Mr.
Dillon, who has received critical acclaim for his performance. ''I figured he
came from a bad family, from a bad neighborhood and maybe had no mother and a
drunken father.''

Two years younger than his brother Matt Dillon, Kevin bears a striking
resemblance to his more famous sibling. One of six children (five brothers and a
sister), he lives with his family in Mamaroneck, N.Y. He was ''discovered'' four
years ago by an agent at the opening of his brother's movie ''Tex.''

''At the time, I hadn't thought about acting,'' he recalled. ''I was hoping to
attend the School of Visual Arts and had a portfolio built up.''

Has Completed Fourth Film

Mr. Dillon, who has had almost no acting training, loves his new profession. His
first movie, ''No Big Deal,'' was a low-budget G-rated picture, filmed in Staten
Island, about a teen-ager with an alcoholic mother. The movie, which didn't play
in theaters, went directly to Home Box Office, which presented it as an
after-school feature for kids. His second role was that of Rooney, the class
clown, in the comedy ''Heaven Help Us,'' which was set in a Roman Catholic boys'
school in Brooklyn in 1965. ''Platoon,'' written and directed by Oliver Stone,
is Mr. Dillon's third movie. And he recently completed the lead role in a
science-fiction film called ''Remote Control,'' involving video cassettes that
control people's lives.

In playing Bunny, Mr. Dillon thought up one of his character's more memorable
bits of business -in which he puts a beer can in his mouth and casually takes a
bite out of it.

''I learned it two years ago from a friend who was a marine,'' he said. ''But I
wouldn't recommend that anyone try it, because if you're not careful, you can
really cut up your lip.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kevin Dillon

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 10, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
Warning to Journalists

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Irvin Molotsky

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


Reed Irvine, chairman of Accuracy in Media Inc., is seeking contributions for an
advertising campaign to persuade journalists to ''take a more serious view of
their responsibilities'' in reporting the Iran arms affair.

Mr. Irvine likens the current reporting to that of the Watergate era, which he
says, in a fund-raising letter sent out today, ''resulted in death and disaster
for millions of people.''

Mr. Irvine says, ''Had the Watergate break-in never been discovered, or had it
been passed over as a minor news story, no great harm would have befallen the
nation.''

But journalists' attention so weakened the Presidency, he maintains, that it
resulted in ''the fall of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos to the Communists, with all
the subsequent bloodletting and oppression that took million of lives and drove
millions into exile.''

It also kept the President from ''taking measures that might have kept'' Angola
from ''falling to the Communists'' and put Jimmy Carter in the White House, he
says. In turn ''the Sandinistas took Nicaragua with Jimmy Carter's help.''

''The results of weakening or destroying Ronald Reagan's Presidency could be
even more disastrous,'' Mr. Irvine says.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 10, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SUFFOLK POLITICS: DEMOCRACY IN ACTION BUT CHAOS IN CONTROL

BYLINE: By PHILIP S. GUTIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: RIVERHEAD, L.I., Jan. 8


The recent organizational meeting of the Suffolk County Legislature had not
received advance billing as an entertainment event. But a crowd of 250 people,
many carrying brightly colored, often witty signs, clearly anticipated a show.
They were not to be disappointed. The chaos last Friday began soon after the
Pledge of Allegiance, when two legislators started shouting at each other across
the room, arguing bitterly about proper procedures and professional courtesy.
And soon, the organizational meeting became completely disorganized as a hasty
call for a recess from the Republican leadership drew howls of protest from the
crowd and cries of ''despicable'' and ''unlawful'' from many Democratic
legislators.

These scenes, county officials and political science professors said, could be
pulled from most meetings of the Suffolk County Legislature. The 18-member body,
now controlled by Republicans, is well known for political mayhem - leading many
prominent politicians in both counties on Long Island to call for its abolition.


'Served Rather Well'

But the Legislature, which has been the training ground for several United
States Congressmen, has also earned a reputation as a progressive body. It has
been in the forefront of nonsmoking legislation, bottle-return laws, the
purchase of undeveloped land to insure the preservation of open space and bans
on the use of certain detergents to preserve groundwater quality.

Therefore the quandary: Is the Suffolk County Legislature a ''zoo,'' a
''political organization gone mad,'' as some believe? Or is it one of the best
examples of the democratic process at work, as others think?

''In the few short years that the Suffolk Legislature has existed,'' said
Herbert D. Rosenbaum, a professor of political science at Hofstra University,
''it seems to me that give or take a few projects, the rapidly expanding Suffolk
County community has been served rather well.''

The Legislature was formed in 1970 after a county charter revision eliminated
the board of supervisors, which was made up of top elected town officials. The
elimination of the board of supervisors - a system still used in neighboring
Nassau County - came because many officials thought Suffolk was growing too
large too quickly for already overworked town officials to govern effectively.

''The fact, is that if you look at the Suffolk County Legislature, it is very
open'' said Howard A. Scarrow, a professor of political science at the Stony
Brook campus of the State University of New York. ''The adjective often used is
circus-like, but that is because the politicians must be re-elected and
therefore they must listen to their constituents.''

Some Unnecessary Bills

Professor Scarrow argues that because the Suffolk County legislators are elected
in much smaller districts and to fill only one post - unlike Nassau town
officials, who have both legislative and executive duties -they are more
responsive to their constituents.

The need to be responsive, Professor Scarrow added, results in a proliferation
of legislation, some of it, like bills condemning the Vietnam War, that are
clearly unnecessary or inappropriate. But in other situations, he said, the
county benefits.

An example is the opposition to the Shoreham nuclear power plant, whose opening
has been delayed. The opposition, he said, is largely coming from the
politicians in Suffolk County. ''I suspect that if we had a board of supervisors
system - like Nassau County - Shoreham might be opening today,'' Professor
Scarrow said.

''Compare the absolutely quiet situation in Nassau, where the politicians are
sitting on their hands, to all the screaming in Suffolk,'' he said. ''And why is
that? It's because we have a bunch of guys who want to get re-elected. It's not
the 10 or 20 miles difference between Nassau and Suffolk.''

''All the screaming'' has its detractors, though. John V. N. Klein, a former
Suffolk County executive and member of the Legislature who attended the
organizational meeting last week, acknowledged that many in the state view
Suffolk County ''as the Dodge City of politics.''

''But does that account for the kind of confusion and rancor that was manifest
at that organizational meeting?'' he asked. ''The answer is I don't think so.
That meeting was an absolute circus.''

Working With Legislature

Mr. Klein said that the public's perception of the Legislature ''falls much more
closely to the circus than to the progressive legislative body.''

''And if that continues,'' he said, ''I believe a move to abolish it is going to
be inevitable. And if it gets on the ballot, it will pass.''

Opponents of the Legislature seek a return to the Board of Supervisors. Many
town officials, not coincidentally, are part of that opposition.

Michael A. LoGrande, the current County Executive, had called for the
abolishment of the Legislature when he was the supervisor of the Town of Islip.
But now that he has moved into the county's top executive post, he has tempered
those statements and called for a ''spirit of communication with the
Legislature.''

As ''one of the early abolitionists,'' Mr. LoGrande said, he thought the town
supervisors should have more of a role in the county government. And while he
still pledges to work more closely with the town governments, he said his
''intent to work closely with the Legislature is sincere.''

'A Diverse Community'

Mr. LoGrande's intent may be sincere, but his experience at the organizational
meeting - held to elect officers and adopt rules - suggested that following
through might be difficult. He called the meeting a ''baptism under fire.''

While Mr. LoGrande and other officials say they do not know why the Legislature
is so raucous, some legislators point to the county's soaring economy, which has
changed what had been a largely rural, farming county into a manufacturing
center with a high-technology core and some remaining rural fringes.

''Suffolk County is such a diverse community,'' said Gregory J. Blass, a
Republican who was re-elected the Legislature's presiding officer despite a
challenge from his party's leadership. ''You have so many different issues that
are brought to light.''

Mr. Blass said he was convinced that the Legislature's fractious spirit
represented the best that democracy can offer.

''You have the combination of very strong personalities,'' he explained. ''You
have political party influence that is more balanced and thus more appropriate.
We have developed rules in the last year that allow issues to be addressed - not
just be bottled up in committee or unceremoniously dumped out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Philip Nolan, Michael A. LoGrande, and Gregory J. Blass
(NYT/Michael Shavel)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TWO U.S. COLONELS LINKED TO EFFORTS TO SELL IRAN ARMS

BYLINE: By STUART DIAMOND with RALPH BLUMENTHAL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 2947 words


Two United States Army colonels have been implicated in efforts to sell arms to
Iran for private gain while they were on active duty in sensitive European
assignments, one as early as 1983, according to military sources, arms dealers
and confidential documents.

The colonels, now retired, carried on prohibited dealings while assigned to the
United States embassies in Paris and London, where they were entrusted with the
official responsibility of monitoring international shipments of some of these
same American weapons, interviews and records show. In interviews, both denied
any wrongdoing.

United States military codes bar officers on active duty from using information
gained in the line of duty for private gain or even appearing to engage in a
conflict of interest with arms dealers. It is also against United States law to
sell arms to Iran. Military penalties range from oral reprimand to court
martial; criminal violations are punishable by fines and imprisonment under
Federal statutes.

Five-Week Investigation

The information emerged during a five-week investigation by The New York Times
and shows that efforts to sell arms to Iran involve a wider circle of military
officers than has so far come to light in accounts of dealings by Lieut. Col.
Oliver L. North, a former National Security Council staff member, and Richard V.
Secord, a retired Air Force major general. Both are central figures in the White
House initiative to sell arms to Iran and the diversion of funds to the
Nicaraguan rebels.

The Times also found that the private efforts of the other military men occurred
much earlier than the publicly acknowledged White House involvement, which began
in mid-1985.

Documents in the possession of The Times, and interviews with more than 100
people, indicate that more officials appear to have known of such efforts than
has been acknowledged. And the quantities of weapons involved also appear to be
far larger than those so far made public.

Billion-Dollar Deal

One of the officers - Col. Ralph Mark Broman, who served in Paris -was
associated with a company that was making arrangements to supply Iran with up to
a billion dollars' worth of weapons, including battle tanks, attack helicopters,
F-4 fighter jets, submarines, air-to-air missiles and other materiel made in the
United States, according to company documents and interviews with associates.

Eighteen months ago, the colonels' dealings came to the attention of Army
investigators examining whether American military officers were undermining
efforts to keep arms out of the hands of terrorists. The investigators concluded
that the colonels violated the conflict of interest laws involving the use of
inside information for private businesses while on active duty. The officers
also violated bans against business dealings with American defense companies
within two years of retiring, the sources said.

The findings were referred to staff members at the National Security Agency, the
Central Intelligence Agency and the Defense Intelligence Agency last February
but no prosecution resulted, officials said.

''They were not interested in pursuing it,'' said one Government official. He
said the inquiries proceeded slowly and have now stopped because of recent
disclosures about Administration weapons sales to Iran.

''Everything has come to a standstill,'' the official said. ''The investigation
is being closed.''

The weapons were said to have been earmarked for Iran from United States Army
stockpiles in Europe and other sources, using false documentation. It is unknown
how many of the weapons actually reached Iran. Iranian officials later
complained that they had been bilked of millions of dollars for weapons that
were not delivered.

The other officer - Col. William H. Mott 4th, who served in London - was a
founding partner of another company involved in defense dealings and he also
established an affiliation with Colonel Broman's company. Conflict of Interest:
Denials of Wrongdoing The two men denied any wrongdoing, although Colonel Mott
acknowledged that he had set up a defense consulting firm before he retired. He
denied that it was involved with Iran.

Colonel Mott's Iran connection was less clear than Colonel Broman's. Army
investigators found evidence of Colonel Broman's connection and reason to
suspect Colonel Mott's. The Times's inquiry repeatedly turned up evidence of a
business association between the two men, who met in Vietnam, in addition to
their individual companies. Sources told The Times that Colonel Mott was
involved with them in Iran dealings.

It is unclear to what extent the efforts of Colonels Broman and Mott were known
or sanctioned by superiors, although Colonel Mott maintained that he had
operated with the approval of senior officials at the United States Embassy in
London.

The investigation highlighted growing official concern that high-ranking
military officers - retired, or nearing retirement - have sought to turn their
knowledge of arms and intelligence into profit.

''From lieutenant colonel on up, all over Washington, retired senior officers
have been getting involved in arms deals,'' said one well-placed Government
source. ''That's what they can fall back on. It can be done legitimately, but a
lot of times it is not.''

Until he retired on July 31, 1984, Colonel Broman was the Paris chief of the
Office of Defense Cooperation, a Pentagon unit operating through the United
States Embassy that monitors defense preparedness and weapons movements in host
countries. But before his retirement, Colonel Broman had begun an association
with a company called European Defense Associates, a private venture that
concluded agreements to supply hundreds of millions of dollars of arms to Iran.

Colonel Mott served a similar official function as assistant defense attache for
security assistance in London; he retired on June 13, 1986. While on active duty
in 1985, Colonel Mott was one of the founders of a private company in Britain,
Spearhead Atlantic, that sought to act as a consultant to defense firms seeking
to do business with American defense manufacturers.

In a recent interview in his Paris apartment, Colonel Broman, who is 55 years
old, would make only the following comment on the record: ''I flatly deny that
any impropriety or illegality occurred to the best of my knowledge during my
service at the American Embassy. Charges that I violated the law or misused my
office are absolutely false.''

The Times, however, has obtained a copy of a four-page lease signed by Colonel
Broman for European Defense Associates on March 15, 1984, more than four months
before he retired. He is listed on the lease as gerant, or manager, of the arms
firm at 9 rue Leon Vaudoyer in Paris.

In addition, two French arms dealers told The Times that they met with Colonel
Broman in his office at the United States Embassy in February 1984, five months
before he retired, and discussed the sale of arms to Iran.

''There is witness testimony putting him in control of illegal arms deals to
Iran,'' said one Government source.

Colonel Mott, 47, said four senior officials at the United States Embassy in
London - the defense attache, army attache, counselor and deputy chief of
mission - allowed him to help start Spearhead Atlantic a year before he retired.
In an interview, he said it was an ''agreement that was reached between
ourselves'' and there was ''no objection'' by his superiors.

There was no indication, however, that the superiors knew of any dealings
concerning Iran.

American officials in London said senior embassy officers did acquiesce in
Colonel Mott's private venture. But one London official added that at least one
senior embassy officer was uncomfortable with Colonel Mott's arrangement and
that ''we should not have done it - as an ethical matter, it was questionable.''
The officials said embassy officers did not know the full details of Colonel
Mott's plans and associations and were ''astonished'' at Colonel Mott's
implication that he had acted with the full knowledge and approval of senior
embassy officers.

Associates said Colonel Broman joined efforts to sell arms to Iran in December
1983, through Paul S. Cutter, a former American diplomatic official who had
worked for the United States Information Agency in Moscow and served for 11
years as a researcher and translator for the Central Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Cutter is serving a five-year prison sentence in Arizona after being
convicted in Orlando, Fla., in December 1985 of trying to smuggle TOW antitank
missiles to Iran. He was arrested in the summer of 1985 in an F.B.I. ''sting''
operation. Colonel Broman's role in efforts to sell arms to Iran was known to
Federal prosecutors and emerged at the trial, but he was not charged.

Mr. Cutter and Colonel Broman decided in late 1983 to set up the private
arms-brokerage firm, European Defense Associates, with offices in Paris,
California and Washington, arms dealers and business colleagues said.

Associates said that despite the fact that Colonel Broman was still on active
duty, Mr. Cutter made him editor of two defense science magazines, one called
Countermeasures and the other Military Science & Technology. The associates said
the magazines were to be used in conjunction with arms sales: Some information
collected from defense officials and executives by the magazines was then used
to further the venture's arm sales efforts. An Insider's Account: The Story
Checks Out The Times's inquiry into the activities of Colonel Broman was aided
by Kenneth R. Timmerman, a Paris-based journalist whose book on Iran-Iraq arms
sales, ''Fanning the Flames,'' has been purchased by The New York Times
Syndicate. Mr. Timmerman once worked with Colonel Broman at magazines owned by
EDA Publishing, a part of European Defense Associates, and said he had
information on the company's arms dealing. He was hired by The Times for three
weeks in December to assist in researching the background of Iranian arms deals.

After his contract expired, The Times independently obtained a 1984 telex
message, signed by him, that appeared to be part of an effort to purchase
military aircraft for Iran. Asked about this, Mr. Timmerman said he had
performed solely as a journalist for The Times and from February to October 1984
for the magazines. He said he had never engaged in arms deals and that the
message reflected only an administrative function. He said he was unaware at the
time that the telex actually involved efforts to ship arms to Iran, which was
not named in the telex.

Nevertheless, The Times then reinterviewed sources that Mr. Timmerman had
previously contacted and found the information that he had provided to be
accurate.

Mr. Cutter, who also uses his Yugoslav name of Paul Sjeklocha, claimed in an
interview, ''We all worked under the umbrella of Defense Department approval.''
He asserted that the Customs Service and the United States Attorneys, who have
arrested many people around the country on charges of arms smuggling, often did
not know about covert operations sanctioned by the Administration.

Through another former State Department official, John Mowinckel, Colonel Broman
met two French arms dealers, Claude Lang and Bernard Veillot, associates said.
Mr. Veillot was indicted in New York City in April 1986 on charges of attempting
to sell arms to Iran, but he is still at large.

Mr. Lang said he visited Colonel Broman twice at his embassy office in February
1984 to discuss arms sales. One aspect involved the sale of F-4 fighter planes
held by Egypt. The ostensible destination for the planes was to be Paraguay, but
the real destination was Iran and Colonel Broman knew it, Mr. Lang said. He said
Iran was specifically discussed as the buyer and that Mr. Cutter had told
Colonel Broman separately about it.

''Colonel Broman told me straight out that he could help me find the planes,
that he understood what I wanted,'' Mr. Lang said. ''He was sitting in an
official office at the U.S. Embassy, with an American flag, a French flag and
with an enormous bronze eagle on his desk. I had no reason not to believe him.
It all looked very official, very above-the-board.'' Accountability Question:
Who Else Knew?

Several associates recalled that Colonel Broman said he had ''higher
instructions'' and otherwise indicated that his actions were approved by his
superiors. There was ''a lot of winking and nodding,'' Mr. Lang said. He added
that it was implicit that Colonel Broman would receive commissions from the sale
of weapons.

Col. Allan J. Fritz, who succeeded Colonel Broman in Paris, denied in an
interview last month that Colonel Broman had mixed his official duties and
illegal arms sales. But in another interview Friday, Colonel Fritz said Colonel
Broman had recently acknowledged some doubts about the propriety of his
dealings.

Embassy sources in Paris, however, said Colonel Fritz told other officials there
that possible improprieties by Colonel Broman had been discovered and that the
information had been reported up through channels.

In early August 1984, a week after Colonel Broman retired, he was formally made
chairman and a 50 percent owner of European Defense Associates, according to
company documents and associates.

In prior months, Colonel Broman introduced himself to people in the arms
industry as ''Mr. Cutter's partner,'' and Mr. Cutter introduced himself as
''Colonel Broman's partner,'' associates said. Colonel Broman was listed on the
masthead in May as the editor of the EDA magazines. Associates said he was sent
his European Defense Associates business cards at the embassy in the spring of
1984.

Mr. Cutter said Colonel Broman helped arrange the sale to Iran of spare aircraft
parts and 120,000 uniforms that resist chemical warfare agents. Colonel Broman
is also mentioned in a telex on July 25, 1984, discussing the sale of small arms
that Mr. Cutter said were for Lebanon.

Mr. Cutter also said that Colonel Broman had taken part in the sale of 80 tanks
to Iran in 1984, which earned Mr. Cutter commissions of $175,000 a tank, he
said.

He said the tanks came from Western Europe and had been refurbished in Israel. A
telex of European Defense Associates shows that one of those who arranged to
view the tanks was Manucher Ghoribanifar, an Iranian arms dealer and
acknowledged associate of Adnan M. Khashoggi, the Saudi Arabian arms dealer, in
the White House's arms-to-Iran venture.

In October 1984 Colonel Broman closed the Paris office of European Defense
Associates, ostensibly for lack of funds. Associates said Colonel Broman
destroyed some of the firm's records.

European Defense Associates was also in contact with Colonel Mott's Spearhead
Atlantic, documents show.

On May 23, 1985, Colonel Mott, still assigned to the embassy in London, wrote
Mr. Cutter to urge closer collaboration between their two companies and voiced
hopes that Spearhead would ''evolve deliberately into a viable profitable
enterprise.''

Mr. Cutter said that in April 1985, as he was about to leave London on a flight
to Iran to discuss arms sales, he called Colonel Mott at the United States
Embassy and that Colonel Mott ''gave me the flag, the go-ahead.''

Colonel Mott, asked about the account, asserted that he did not know Mr. Cutter
had ever gone to Iran and that he did not have the authority to approve such a
mission. But when pressed on whether Mr. Cutter had called him, Colonel Mott
said: ''If he says he did, he probably did.''

Mr. Cutter and a former associate also recalled that in 1985 Colonel Mott had
approached European Defense Associates for help in locating two submarines that
could be sold to Iran.

Colonel Mott said that as a defense consultant he did not break the law because
he himself did not make any money from the company before retiring, although he
intended to. Army officials said money is not a factor in determining if the law
is broken. The Profit Motive: Accusation and Denial Colonel Mott, who lives near
Boston, said that his company did not deal in firearms and that he had never
trafficked in any weapons systems. But that assertion was contradicted by
military investigators, who said he was involved in arms sales. The colonel
contended that he did not sell arms to Iran, although ''if we'd found some way
to make money we could have.''

Both Mr. Cutter and his employees said there was a signed agreement between the
two firms. Other associates said he and Colonel Mott discussed arms shipments to
Iran.

Military sources said the two men had also violated codes that make it illegal
for a military officer, within two years after retiring, to advise a foreign
defense compnay doing business with an American counterpart - as was apparently
the case with each officer.

On the lease he signed for his compnay, Colonel Broman said it would advise
French defense companies on tapping the American defense market.

In his May 23 letter, Colonel Broman wrote that he hoped to represent British
clients ''whose target market is some sector of the U.S. defense market.''

The United States Embassy in London referred questions about Colonel Mott to
Washington, where a Pentagon spokesman said that Colonel Mott retired due to
medical problems but that privacy laws precluded further disclosures. Tom
Switzer, a State Department spokesman, called questions about Colonel Mott an
''Irangate'' inquiry and referred The Times to the White House.

After it was suggested that Colonel Mott's function as an embassy official made
his activities a State Department concern too, Mr. Switzer shouted: ''Don't try
to muck up the water. We have no information for you, sir.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Col. Ralph Mark Broman; Photo of beginning and end of lease
signed by Ralph Mark Broman and ''read and approved'' is written ab bottom in
French

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
'PLATOON' FINDS NEW LIFE IN THE OLD WAR MOVIE

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1554 words


''I kept thinking about all the kids who got wiped out by 17 years of war movies
before coming to Vietnam to get wiped out for good,'' Michael Herr remembers in
''Dispatches,'' his book of Vietnam memoirs published in 1977.

''Most combat troops,'' he goes on, ''stopped thinking of the war as an
adventure after their first few firefights, but there were always the ones who
couldn't let that go. . . A lot of correspondents weren't much better. We'd all
seen too many movies, stayed too long in Television City, years of media glut
had made certain connections difficult.

''. . . even after you knew better you couldn't avoid the ways in which things
got mixed, the war itself with those parts of the war that were just like the
movies, just like 'The Quiet American' or 'Catch-22'. . . just like all that
combat footage from television. . .''

In ''Living Room War,'' his 1969 collection of essays, Michael J. Arlen takes
exception to those who were saying at that time that television was making ''the
hazards of [the Vietnam] war. . . 'real' to the civilian audience.'' Those
hazards, he suggests, are ''also made less 'real' -diminished, in part, by the
physical size of the television screen, which, for all the industry's advances,
still shows one a picture of men three inches tall shooting at other men three
inches tall. . .''

Whether the images are 30 feet tall or three inches, movies and television work
on us in similar ways. The images are drugs whose side effects aren't
immediately recognized. They do inform us, but with whatever ''truth'' they hold
to be self-evident, which may be Rambo's or Walter Cronkite's.

Movies and television can make the wildest fiction look like fact, and lethal
facts look as harmless as fiction. Even at their most reasonable, movies and
television must distort their subjects to the extent that they find esthetic
order in chaos, conferring on events a romantic vision or, at least, a
comprehensible overview. They put at a safe distance those unmentionable,
unrecognized things that otherwise are allowed to enter our minds only as
nightmares.

Now, nearly 12 years after the fall of Saigon and nearly 20 years after the
particular time it recalls, comes Oliver Stone's ''Platoon,'' the best fiction
film yet made about the fighting in Vietnam. Here's an exceptionally good,
serious, foot-soldier's view of the war that, in spite of its sense of
desolation, could well inspire the fantasies of some future generation of
American soldiers.

It's something of a circle. As the film maker's imagination shapes his movies,
those movies shape our imaginations. Thus, as Mr. Herr writes, the war itself
gets mixed with those parts of the war that are just like the movies.

Though ''Platoon'' is a far cry from John Wayne's gung-ho ''Green Berets,'' it's
still a work of fiction. It comes out of a long tradition of ''war'' movies -
everything from ''Battleground'' to (don't laugh) ''The Green Berets.'' It also
uses a number of war-movie conventions, but so effectively that it's as if
they'd been reinvented.

''Platoon'' finds in the experiences of the members of a single platoon of
soldiers some equivalent to just about every horror story we've ever read about
Vietnam, including the My Lai massacre. This is the license that can be granted
to a film that - until its final few minutes - so rigorously keeps its eye at
ground level.

It shares with its soldiers the pervasive physical discomforts of heat, damp,
insects and exhaustion that, somehow, are made bearable by (because they seem
less important than) their fear. Never before, I think, have I seen in a war
movie such a harrowing evocation of fear, which functions like adrenaline but
feels like a headache, the kind that rises and falls but never quite disappears.
As much as anything that actually happens in combat, it's day-to-day fear - the
will to survive, attached to the awareness that there's no earthly reason one
has to -that alters the psyche.

Mr. Stone's achievement is not in the creation of a new kind of war movie but in
the degree to which he rediscovers new life in the old, which he virtually
redefines by cleaning away the debris that has accumulated over the years.

''Platoon'' is a lean film, beginning with its dusty, hazily golden opening
shots on a Vietnam airstrip, where new arrivals from the States are being
deposited from a giant transport plane that looks like a World War II LST,
though one that magically flies. Very little is specifically stated. Mr. Stone
doesn't have to announce his meaning (though he eventually does, in the film's
only major lapse of judgment). The film's talk is mostly to the point of what's
happening, or might happen, or can't happen, which is what most vividly
describes the soldiers' boredom.

Its three principal characters are Chris Taylor (Charlie Sheen), the young
college dropout, who's the film's hesitant mouthpiece, and the two sergeants who
have effectively split the platoon between them. They are Barnes (Tom Berenger),
a seriously out-of-control, life-sized, clay-footed version of the ''fighting
machine'' Sylvester Stallone glorifies in ''Rambo,'' and Elias (Willem Dafoe), a
man no less tough than Barnes, but whose tours of duty have transformed him into
a soft-spoken, almost embarrassed prophet of doom.

The other members of the platoon don't wear labels that immediately characterize
them. They take some time to get to know and, even then, they tend to merge, not
as stereotypes but as the same sorts of men. ''Two years of high school, mostly
poor and unwanted. . . They're the bottom of the barrel, and they know it,'' is
the way Chris Taylor describes them. The differences that finally do distinguish
them are all the more prized and moving for being so finely graded.

Mr. Stone appreciates the singularity of the grunts without italicizing them.
It's part of the film's revivifying mystery that when the members of this
particular platoon find themselves on the verge of wiping out an entire village,
the identities of the men who cave in to the hysteria (and of those who hang
back) haven't been predictable.

''Platoon'' is about war as seen by men for whom the only goal is daily
survival. There are no great issues here, no debates about good and evil. It's
about fighting for anonymous pieces of jungle, to hold positions that may well
include the enemy, in a landscape of code names and numbers, where there are no
points on the compass. It's to the film's credit that it manages to bring moral
order to this confusion without celebrating it.

Whether or not this is what the public wants to see, I've no idea. At Loew's
Astor Plaza the other weekday afternoon, there was a small but noisy claque that
kept trying to respond to the film's reluctant heroes, and to its grim battle
footage, as if ''Platoon'' were really another ''Rambo.'' It wasn't easy. The My
Lai-like sequence began promisingly, but the resolution clearly left some of the
claque unsatisfied.

Does ''Platoon'' romanticize its grunts? I suppose it does, at least to the
extent that all movies somehow lend larger-than-life importance to whomever they
acknowledge. There are also occasional moments when Mr. Stone allows a
self-conscious image to repeat an idea that requires no amplification - as in
the Christ-like image of a betrayed American soldier being crucified, not on a
cross but by bullets.

Not having been in Vietnam, I've no idea how accurate ''Platoon'' is in some of
its details. Is the ratio of black ''grunts'' to white grunts correct, and does
Mr. Stone soften the bitterness of racial antagonisms? Someone else can answer
those questions. Anyone who fought in Vietnam will bring to the film a set of
expections far different from those of someone for whom Vietnam was, first, the
living room war, then the war of written recollections and, most recently, the
war as refought in the case of Westmoreland v. CBS.

It must say something about the American public's feelings toward the entire
Vietnam experience that it's taken this long for the producers of a commercial
film to attempt to make such a movie. As fine as they were, both ''Apocalypse
Now'' and ''The Deer Hunter'' more or less floated above the concerns of the
American foot soldiers and saw the war in terms of mythology. ''Rambo'' and
Chuck Norris's two ''Missing in Action'' films jumped the gun, giving us
revisionist views of a war whose sad end had scarcely been admitted by movies -
with the exception of ''The Deer Hunter'' - in the first place.

Clint Eastwood's new film, the hugely popular war-comedy, ''Heartbreak Ridge,''
acknowledges the Vietnam defeat, but then goes on to buck us up with a
reenactment of our military triumph in Grenada. If I interpret ''Heartbreak
Ridge'' correctly - and I'm not sure it makes complete sense - it seems to
suggest that the only wars we can win from now on must be of the scale of the
invasion of Grenada.

I've no way of knowing, but I suspect that in any future, nuclear-free
engagements, the men who fight it will, in their fantasies, be seeing themselves
not as any member of ''Platoon's'' Bravo company but as good old Clint. Mr.
Eastwood still exemplifies the glamour that, in most of our war movies to date,
disguises the true consequences of mortality. There's very little glamour in
''Platoon.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from Oliver Stone's 'Platoon' (Ricky Francisco)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS FORUM: ADVICE FOR MRS. AQUINO;
Get Business on the Government's Side

BYLINE: By BENJAMIN WEINER; Benjamin Weiner is president of Probe International
Inc., a Stamford, Conn., research firm that provides political and economic
information to multinational corporations.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1145 words


NEARLY a year after the defeat of Ferdinand Marcos, the Philippine economy
remains capital-starved and in trouble - per capita economic growth fell for the
second straight year in 1986. Frightened by political instability, both American
and Philippine executives continue to withhold new investment. Unfortunately,
with the future of the Aquino Government hanging on the performance of the
economy, this reluctance has itself become a major source of instability.

Why the inaction? After all, segments of the Philippine business community
proved their daring by taking an early and outspoken stand against the Marcos
regime. And American executives murmured in enthusiastic response when President
Corazon Aquino called for renewed investment during her triumphant tour of the
United States a few months ago.

Moreover, this is a country wealthy in agricultural lands and natural resources.
Its currency has stabilized and the rate of inflation is below that of the
United States. Capital flight has slowed. Labor is abundant, competent and
inexpensive. Finally, the United States Government, in word and deed, has
emphasized its continuing support of the Aquino Administration in its struggle
to shape a viable, moderate political mandate.

Despite these promising aspects, many business leaders apparently fear that the
process of political rejuvenation is still incomplete; that, like the storming
of the Bastille on July 14, 1789, the Peoples Power drama of last February
signaled the beginning and not the end of the revolution. This reasoning is
clearly evident in the actions of the ''Filipino-Chinese'' community.

In the Philippines, as in other Southeast Asian countries, Chinese immigrants
and their descendants play a signal role in the economy. The Filipino-Chinese
business community is highly sensitive to potential tremors, which accounts for
the anomaly of capital flight out of the Philippines peaking in the months
before, and not after, the murder of Benigno Aquino in 1983. Regrettably, their
fears have yet to fade. Respected members of the Filipino-Chinese community told
me recently that funds were not yet returning for direct investments.

The general concern over instability translates into the specific worry that
President Aquino is ill-equipped to deal with the serious and violent threats
from both ends of the political spectrum. Perhaps this is a valid anxiety.
However, in November Mrs. Aquino clearly demonstrated that she was more the
dragon-lady than the housewife when she dealt with the challenge of former
Defense Minister Juan Enrile. And it now appears that she would not succumb to
accommodations with the Communists, which could lead to their infiltrating and
eventually dominating the country's political institutions.

However, the investment drought may have less to do with politics than with the
failure of the Aquino Administration to demonstrate a unified commitment to the
private sector and to foreign investment. Mrs. Aquino may sincerely believe in
the contributions foreign investors can make to the Philippines. And her
competent Ministers of Finance and Trade, Jamie Ongpin and Jose Concepcion, may
firmly support a dynamic private sector. But the words and actions of others in
the Government make a different impression. For example, the number of strikes
in 1986 may exceed by 50 percent those in 1985. A majority of these were
instigated by the Communist-controlled Kilusang Mayo Uno, the largest union in
the Philippines. But many observers also point a finger at the Minister of
Labor, Augusto Sanchez, for his statements attributing economic problems to the
private sector and for his criticisms of foreign investors. With an unemployment
rate surpassing 30 percent and with underemployment even higher, a Minister of
Labor should be more interested in urging businesses to create new jobs than in
engaging in irresponsible confrontations. A FURTHER example is provided by the
Presidential Commission for Good Government. Established to recover the wealth
stolen by President Marcos, his friends and relatives, the commission sometimes
appears vengeful and arbitrary, interested more in ''getting even'' than getting
money. Assets of targeted companies have been sequestered, apparently to force
them into quick cash settlements and to avoid a drawn-out legal process during
which the sequestered assets would diminish in value. These actions are
destructive of the business climate, not to speak of the companies in question
and their thousands of employees.

While the alleged billions of dollars stolen by Mr. Marcos would go far in
reviving the crippled economy, the Government cannot look upon the money as a
quick fix. Legal and administrative roadblocks in the Philippines, the United
States, Switzerland and other foreign countries make recovery a frustrating,
long-term task.

As bleak as the economic situation may seem, there are several immediate steps
the Aquino administration can take to regain the initiative.

First, her administration should speak in a single voice in defining the moral
and operational terms in which foreign investors can function in the
Philippines. Business can live with constraints and risks, as long as they are
clearly stated. It is Mrs. Aquino's prerogative to have Cabinet ministers openly
hostile to the private sector or to foreign investors certainly, but such voices
are a costly luxury at a time of great unemployment and economic stagnation.

Second, realizing that the Marcos wealth will not be recovered quickly, the
commission should concentrate its recovery efforts overseas. Its activities in
the Philippines should be limited strictly to instances where there is clear and
promptly confirmable evidence that the Marcos family and cronies were hidden
owners.

Lastly, the Government should open talks about the United States military bases.
The rental price for the facilities at Clark Field and Subic Bay Naval Station
should be determined on the basis of ''market value.'' Just what are the
Russians paying for Camranh Bay in Vietnam and for secret airfields in Cambodia?
If their rental is $1 billion a year, then the United States should be asked to
pay $1 billion a year for its bases in the Philippines (we are now paying $900
million over five years). These funds could be applied in part to the retirement
of the $26 billion Philippine foreign debt. Moreover, management of the
non-military aspects of the bases should be transferred to a civilian
corporation, which would be a joint venture of American and Philippine
companies.

Foreign investment in concert with a confident domestic private sector has been
a winning combination in many Asian countries and could work in the Philippines.
However, President Aquino must demonstrate a commitment to this approach.
Meanwhile, American and Filipino businessmen will watch and wait.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BUSINESS CYCLE ROLLS OVER AND PLAYS DEAD

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN

SECTION: Section 3; Page 6, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1475 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


NOT so long ago, an awesome force known as the business cycle drove the economy
along much as the moon drives the tides and the sun the seasons. It was almost
always there, a perpetual motion machine that propelled the nation through booms
and busts. Yet for more than a couple of years now, the cycle has been dormant,
with the economy moving listlessly month after month.

''It ain't there,'' says Albert T. Sommers of the Conference Board, a
cycle-wizened veteran in economic forecasting. ''There's no glimmer of cyclical
behavior out there.''

Two decades ago, when the cycle had calmed, economists speculated that it had
died, only to be chastened by a lulu of a recession in 1969. Now, economists
predict the cycle's eventual revival. ''I don't see it happening now,'' says
Geoffrey H. Moore of Columbia University, who at age 72, is the nation's
best-known student of the cycle. But he guarantees it will reappear, perhaps
within in a year or two. The economy's performance is said to be cyclical
because it gropes along like a giant engine, producing jobs, profits and
prosperity as it goes up and layoffs, bankruptcies and poverty going down. The
timing and magnitudes of the ups and downs vary, but the process seems on the
surface like a self-perpetuating chain reaction.

In fact, the cycles are caused by people and governments, often unknowingly
acting in concert. And these conjunctions can cause the cycle to fade for
protracted periods, as it seems to have done recently. Since an exuberant
year-and-a-half boom that ended in September 1984, the economy has grown at an
average rate of 2.5 percent, with unemployment locked at about 7 percent.

The cycle's current behavior is disheartening. If the cycle is going to freeze
during an expansion, both economists and politicians would prefer it to do so at
a growth rate fast enough to push unemployment down - say, to 4 percent. Few
economists would want growth of much more than that for fear of triggering
another bout of inflation and another recession.

Some economists - such as Lyle E. Gramley, a former governor of the Federal
Reserve and now chief economist at the Mortgage Bankers Association - take a
different view, however. They prefer cycles of mild booms and busts that result
in an average growth rate of 4 percent over many years, which the economy
witnessed through much of the era following World War II. Such cycles mean work
for everyone who wants a job, at least during the boom periods, and the
recurring busts enforce economic discipline, shaking out waste and inefficiency.

But protracted 2.5 percent growth pleases no one very much. The sluggishness
means the economy is operating well below its potential. A sizable part of the
population never finds work in such circumstances. Many industries do not earn
enough to expand and develop new products. ''Two and a half percent is too weak
for comfort,'' Mr. Gramley said. In the vernacular of cycle theory, a cycle
begins with an economy's climb from the ''trough'' or pit of a recession. The
ascent, called an ''expansion,'' starts because businesses find everything
irresistibly cheap -wages, rent, credit, materials. They borrow, buy, hire labor
and invest in factories to increase production. The money they pour into the
economy to get production rolling gets spread around. That speeds more
businesses along, so spending, investing and profits soar. This exuberant phase
of the expansion, called a ''recovery,'' is invariably fast. It usually ends
when the economy reaches the size, or ''peak,'' it reached during the previous
cycle. Then, in moving to a new peak, the rate of expansion normally slows. It
is in this slow-growth phase that the economy has been mired during the
mid-80's.

According to the theory at least, eventually growth must stop. The economy then
enters the ''contraction'' or recession phase, that ends in a trough and the
start of a new cycle. Lots of things can bring on recession - inflation, a
collapse of the dollar, a rise in interest rates or even just a surge of
pessimism.

During the current four-year expansion, the cycle has shown far less volatility
than in earlier long expansions: 1961 to 1969 and 1975 to 1980. Interest rates
have been going down throughout this expansion, not up and down as before. Wages
this time have been stable-to-slipping in ''real,'' inflation-adjusted terms.
Prices of most materials have plunged. Production has been flat for more than a
year. So the seam-bursting pressures that a stronger expansion engenders just
haven't shown up. THERE have been signs aplenty that the economy would pick up
speed - such as the decline of the dollar and of interest rates - but the
''acceleration just hasn't appeared,'' said M. Kathryn Eickhoff, chief economist
at the President's budget office. Ms. Eickhoff finds much of this hard to
explain, and so do many other economists. ''This is an interesting question -
why it goes on for so long and why nobody sees the end of it,'' says Herbert
Stein of the American Enterprise Institute and formerly President Richard M.
Nixon's chief economist, referring to the current cycle.

The explanation that Mr. Gramley offers for the apparent death of the cycle is
''an accidental counterbalancing of developments in different sectors.'' The
continuing hard times in farming, mining and some manufacturing, he says, offset
the good times in many of the service industries and sectors that are immune to
foreign competition.

Many economists say that the sluggish growth problem has arisen because of the
curious character of the current economy - its mix of uncommonly large budget
deficits and trade deficits and the ways that both play through the national
economy and the international economy.

The budget deficit might normally make interest rates soar and push the economy
into a recession as the Treasury keeps borrowing to finance it. But foreigners
have been buying the Treasury's securities in such volume that they have helped
keep interest rates at only half the level they were at the start of the last
recession. The deficit, furthermore, could help sustain the expansion:
Government spending can propel the economy much as business spending does.

Some economists, including Jason Benderly of Goldman, Sachs, single out the
trade deficit as the most important cause of the quieter cycle. Slow-moving
domestic industries, hit hard by imports, keep unemployment high but also ease
the pressures of inflation. Economists say the trade deficit's disappearance,
which no one expects for many years, would restore the cycle to its historical
vigor.

If economists claim to understand the pattern of the cycle, few say they can
predict its timing. The economy can go from one trough to another in less than a
year, or it can take almost a decade to do so. Expansions, in any case, have
been running longer throughout this century. The longest, from 1961 to 1969,
cheered economists much more than the current one does because the economy was
so much stronger. It aroused hope that policy makers had tamed the cycle, or
even arrested it. Walter W. Heller, who was chief economist to both President
John F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson, says the Government was
confident it had learned to ''fine tune'' the economy to produce a docile cycle
for a livelier expansion than we now enjoy.

Mr. Heller said that by manipulating the Government's power over spending,
taxation and interest rates, policy makers figured they could steer the economy
forever along a course of 4 percent growth and 4 percent unemployment. They
called this an optimal ''full employment'' economy because they assumed that
many of those who remained unemployed were unemployable. ''We were pretty feisty
about what we could do with policy,'' Mr. Heller says. ''We felt we could very
substantially subdue recessions.''

Mr. Heller's confidence crumbled when the cycle came roaring back with the
recession that started in 1969. In retrospect, he attributes the blame to a
Government that thought it could cut taxes at the same time it was borrowing to
finance the war in Vietnam. That got inflation going. Politicians and economists
overlooked its threat to the cycle because there had been so little inflation
for so long that not much was made of its slow acceleration.

However weak growth is now, certain economists see some good in the current
economic state. Growth cannot be perpetual and the business cycle, they say, may
have delivered something akin to a recession, but gentler. ''It looks like we
may have achieved the soft landing that we have hoped for,'' Mr. Stein said.
''We may have a new prescription for keeping the economy alive,'' even if it has
not been maintained in perfect health. From such soft landings, economists hope,
the country can enjoy the benefits of the cycle and less of the pain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of U.S. economic growth, 1976-1986 (Source: Commerce Department);
photo of Geoffrey H. Moore (NYT/Keith Meyers)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ'S WAY

BYLINE: Ronald Steel; Ronald Steel, a professor of international relations at
the University of Southern California, is the author of ''Walter Lippmann and
the American Century,'' among other books.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 17, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4484 words


GEORGE PRATT SHULTZ RAISED HIS HAND in the hushed committee room, took an oath
not to lie, and then upbraided the assembled members of Congress. ''This is the
first time in my 10 years of service as a Cabinet officer that I have been asked
to take an oath of office before Congress,'' he told them. ''If a public servant
is not prepared to tell the truth, he has no business being a public servant,
oath or no oath.'' The lesson given, he then proceeded to answer questions about
the Government's secret arms sales to Iran and the skim to the Nicaraguan
contras.

Only Shultz could have gotten away with such a lecture. In fact, probably only
he would have tried it.

''Mr. Secretary, you come before us as a man of very great integrity,'' said one
Congressman, after Shultz insisted he knew little ''in detail'' about the arms
shipments to Iran and ''zero'' about the contra bypass.

It is not often that a Secretary of State is congratulated when foreign policy
initiatives go amok. Those who wield power are usually held accountable for what
takes place in their bailiwick. Shultz has managed not only to avoid blame for
action taken on his watch, but even to be considered the aggrieved party. He has
washed his hands of actions taken by his chief, Ronald Reagan, and in the
process enhanced his own standing. He now is hailed as a paragon of common sense
in a gaggle of crazed ideologues and Indiana Jones-style buccaneers. In the
sleazy labyrinth of the Iran-contra affair, Shultz has been dubbed Mr.
Integrity.

When looked at closely, however, his efforts to detach himself from the Iran
arms deal seem more a bureaucratic gambit than an expression of principle. He
told Congress that he had heard of two proposed arms shipments in 1985, but got
the ''impression'' they were not consummated. However, last January he could
''fairly conclude'' that future transfers probably would be authorized, and
during the year he picked up ''bits and pieces of evidence'' to indicate they
were in fact going ahead.

If he was outraged by the arms shipments in November, when they first became
public knowledge, why wasn't he outraged by them months earlier, when he
realized his opposition to them ''didn't seem to be prevailing''? Why didn't he
threaten to resign then unless the operation were halted? ''I'm not here to
claim that my actions in all of this were all that they should be,'' he replied.
''You'll have to judge that for yourself.'' It is curious how few have done so,
or at least in any way that casts doubt on Shultz's reputation for probity. Yet
the question remains: Did Shultz know little ''in detail'' about the 1986 arms
sale to Teheran because he was deceived, or because he chose not to know?

Some critics have contrasted Shultz's behavior with that of Cyrus R. Vance,
Secretary of State during Jimmy Carter's ill-fated hostage-rescue mission to
Iran in 1980. Vance argued against the operation and, after he had lost, turned
in his resignation. ''When core values are at issue, then a Secretary of State
must speak his piece frankly and strongly to the President,'' Vance commented
recently. ''If the President overrules that, then I think he should resign.''

Shultz, on the other hand, chose to distance himself from the scandal, and, by
implicitly threatening to resign, forced a pledge from Reagan to return control
over Iran policy to the State Department. Once he had won, Shultz fell
conspicuously into line. ''President Reagan is a freedom fighter, and the world
knows it,'' he proclaimed. ''And I stand with Ronald Reagan.''

This judicious gamesmanship has significantly enhanced his power. Yet his
victory over his bureaucratic rivals so far is a hollow one. Like an improbably
stolid Siegfried, Shultz has drawn the sword from the tree where it awaited him.
But it dangles from his hand, untarnished and unused. Shultz's strength is also
his weakness. He is a fixer, an arranger, a negotiator, not an initiator. He
earned his doctorate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1949 in
labor relations, and has been practicing collective bargaining, in one way or
another, ever since. Those who have sat with him at the bargaining table attest
to his scrupulous fairness. But the qualities that make him a good negotiator -
an ability to understand both sides of an issue and bring contending parties
together - get in the way when he is expected to be a contending party himself.

He is not a grand conceptualizer, like Henry A. Kissinger, whose geopolitical
abstractions were daring, though they sometimes blinded him to mundane
realities. Nor is he a frenetic doer, like Alexander M. Haig Jr., for whom no
event was too minor to be considered a crisis. Rather he is a patient
consensus-builder. ''I've been involved in lots of negotiations over a period of
time,'' he explained early on in his tenure as Secretary of State. ''I just sort
of get into them and try to see what seems reasonable and talk to people.'' This
makes him a middleman in an Administration divided between right-wing ideologues
and cautious pragmatists. A moderate, Eastern internationalist Republican at
heart, Shultz has held his right-wing critics at bay by affirming his loyalty to
Reagan and by moving to support such litmus-test causes as aid to the contras
and its theoretical justification, the Reagan Doctrine.

As Reagan's man in Foggy Bottom, nipping a bit here and tucking a bit there,
Shultz has made no real mark of his own on foreign policy and, judging by the
record, is unlikely to leave a lasting legacy. The reason lies both in the
internal politics of the Reagan Administration, and in the very qualities that
have made George Shultz a survivor. SHULTZ IS A SOLID, IMMOVABLE BLOCK OF A MAN,
WITH a placid face that reveals little emotion, and a slow, deliberate way of
moving. His clothes are a bit rumpled and not well-cut -in contrast to those of
his predecessor, the nervous and nattily-dressed Haig - and at the first
opportunity he doffs his suit coat. When I first went to see him at his imposing
office in the State Department, he was bent over a fireplace poking some logs,
dressed in a blue-and-white cardigan. It is easy to imagine him cooking
hamburgers, as he has done, for the press corps in the backyard of his home near
Stanford University, joined by his wife, Obie, an Army nurse he met in Hawaii
during World War II, their five children and assorted grandchildren.

An interview with him is rather like sitting down with one's faculty adviser.
''Have you ever worked in the White House?'' he asked me when when I posed a
question about the National Security Council overstepping its bounds. ''It's an
idiosyncratic place, more like a court - and I'm not speaking of the Reagan
Presidency, but any Presidency. It's organized around and for the President,
whoever that President is.''

Shultz has known how to operate at that court with striking success. A
university economist unknown to Richard Nixon when he was brought in as
Secretary of Labor in 1969, he soon became one of that President's closest and
most trusted advisers. His steady doggedness, his mastery of detail and, most
important of all at the court of the Presidency, his loyalty - first to Nixon
then to Reagan - has allowed him to survive attack both from inside the
bureaucracy and from without.

Only in one area has he seriously drawn the line - on issues that he thinks
compromise his principles. When he was Secretary of the Treasury, he tangled
twice with Nixon: first when the President complained that he should not have
his income tax return audited, and second when Nixon pressured Shultz to use the
Internal Revenue Service to punish those on the President's enemies list. Shultz
stood firm, and Nixon fumed to his aide, John Dean: ''What does that candyass
think I sent him over there for?''

Throughout his career, Shultz has zealously guarded his reputation for
integrity. That is why he lectured the Congressmen when they required him, along
with all the other witnesses, to take an oath before testifying. It is why he
made such an issue last year of refusing to go along with a White House edict
that Federal employees take lie detector tests to prevent news leaks. When asked
by a reporter whether he would take the test, he declared he would resign ''the
minute in this Government I am told that I'm not trusted.'' The next day, Reagan
retreated.

This is all very honorable. But nobody asked Shultz to take the test and almost
certainly no one ever would. Perhaps principle was involved. But when the
Administration, in its public relations ''war on drugs,'' asked Federal
employees to submit urine samples for testing, Shultz posed no objections.

Shultz has a firmly held code of honor, but it is a particular one. When he was
dean of the business school at the University of Chicago in the late 1960's, he
turned in his resignation when the president of the university overruled
Shultz's ban on the use of loudspeakers by anti-Vietnam War student protesters.
The president's decision seemed to question his judgment, and Shultz had to be
persuaded to withdraw his resignation.

What this suggests is a man of integrity but also of considerable vanity. In
those areas in which his personal honor is questioned, he is quick to take
offense and demand amends. He wants, and insists on, respect, particularly where
his bureaucratic turf is concerned. But when it comes to actions that many might
regard as immoral or at least illegal - such as bombing Libya or soliciting
private support for a civil war in Nicaragua - his sense of honor is apparently
not engaged.

He has won the respect of the career Foreign Service officers and staff by his
unpretentious ways and his reliance on them instead of on political appointees
drawn from the far right. Reagan fundamentalists resent him deeply for what they
consider his closet liberalism and for blocking their capture of key State
Department jobs. A cluster of right-wing groups, led by three former Reagan
ambassadors, a year ago demanded the ouster of Shultz for ''undermining
President Reagan's foreign policy.''

These rightist critics keep demanding that Shultz and others around the
President ''let Reagan be Reagan.'' They fail to recognize that Reagan is
Reagan, in his caution as well as in his rhetorical excesses.

In foreign affairs, the Reagan Presidency, for all its bluster, has so far been
essentially reactive. It has bombed an annoying desert autocracy, invaded a
speck of a Caribbean island and financed an assortment of ragtag guerrilla
movements to harass various Marxist regimes. But it has tread lightly where any
direct contact with Soviet power was concerned, and it even sheepishly pulled
out of Lebanon at the first sign of trouble. For all Reagan's roar, he has been
remarkably prudent. In this respect, Shultz is not the antithesis of Reagan the
ideologue; rather, he is the pragmatic side of Reagan.

Shultz's major victory, perhaps his only unqualified one, came in 1982, when he
talked Reagan out of his vendetta against the West Europeans for helping the
Russians build a gas pipeline to provide Europe with cheap fuel. Reagan, who
didn't mind selling the Russians grain subsidized by American taxpayers, thought
it outrageous that the NATO allies buy Russian gas, and imposed economic
sanctions against European companies involved. Shultz used his labor-negotiator
skills to work out a compromise that gave the Europeans their gas and Reagan
satisfaction for talking tough.

Aside from this guidance counseling among allies, the Reagan Administration has
not been able to pull off a single diplomatic achievement to match the Panama
Canal treaty or the negotiated, if unratified, SALT II treaty of the Carter
Administration - not to mention the Camp David accords. Shultz, after burning
his hands in Lebanon in 1983, seems virtually to have given up on the Middle
East. Although an economist by training, he has made no discernible effort to
work out an American response to the crushing problems of third-world debt and
protectionism. His policy of ''constructive engagement'' in South Africa has
degenerated into an instrument of Pretoria in its efforts to dominate the region
under the label of anti-Communism.

In Central America, the Sandinista revolution remains an obsession Washington
can neither exorcize nor come to terms with. The Administration's one supposed
innovation, the Reagan Doctrine, is merely a warmed-over version of 1950's
globalism that labels every third-world Communist regime a mortal threat; its
main effect has been to link the United States to guerrilla movements no more
democratic than the governments they are trying to overthrow. And following the
breathtaking poker game at Reykjavik, for which Shultz arrived unprepared and at
which Reagan fumbled, chances for a breakthrough arms accord with the Russians
seem slim.

A LTHOUGH PART OF the reason Shultz has failed to make more of an impact on
events lies in the problems themselves, part also lies in his own method. Shultz
is a reactive rather than innovative Secretary of State. His skill lies in
putting blocks together rather than drawing up blueprints. His range is narrow.
To ask him to see a problem before it fully emerges, to anticipate rather than
to negotiate, to think conceptually rather than sequentially is to push him onto
paths on which he feels uncomfortable.

On the plane returning from the NATO foreign ministers' conference in Brussels
last month, I asked Shultz, over the roar of jet engines and the buzz of roaming
stewards and aides on Air Force One, whether he thought the United States -with
its uncontrolled budget and trade deficits, its mountain of debt and its rich
but clinging allies - could still afford a foreign policy put together during
the 1950's, when it was undisputed king of the mountain. He seemed to find the
question vaguely irrelevant.

''We have the wealth to pay for whatever defense we need to guarantee our
security,'' he said.

''Yes,'' I persisted, ''but doesn't the definition of security depend on how
rich a country is and how much it chooses to extend itself abroad?''

The question did not engage him, and so I passed on to more specific issues of
today's and yesterday's headlines. Maybe I was being too abstract. Yet I could
not help but feel that the ability to see beyond current jousting was what gave
foreign policy substance and intellectual weight. These seemed the real issues.
Not whether the Sandinistas have made Managua like Moscow, but whether an
obsessive preoccupation with them was a distraction from the real problems
facing the United States.

For George Shultz, all that was theory, and he had to get past tomorrow without
the world blowing up in his face. That is no easy task. Shultz is a negotiator,
not an architect. Diplomacy needs both, but there are areas in which negotiation
is not enough.

Take, for example, that graveyard of American hopes, the Middle East. Shultz
came into office expressing sympathy for the ''legitimate needs and problems''
of the Palestinians. He inherited yet another American peace plan that had been
shattered by Israel's invasion of Lebanon. He tried to get everybody out: the
Syrians, the Israelis and the Palestine Liberation Organization. A novice to a
region in which many a reputation has sunk, he thought he could engineer a deal
between Beirut and Jerusalem that would lock out the Syrians.

He was warned by Middle East experts within the American Government that it
would not work, that no lasting edifice could be built in Lebanon without the
Syrians, but he plunged ahead - eager perhaps to pull off a Kissinger-style coup
de theatre. The result was that most of the Israelis left, Beirut collapsed into
further chaos and the Syrians stayed to run the show.

After the bombing of the Marine barracks in October 1983, where 241 servicemen
lost their lives, the Americans also pulled out. Shultz wanted to stay on and
fight, but Reagan decided to cut his losses before he started slipping in the
polls.

The whole episode left Shultz angered. He had lost important battles within the
Government: The Pentagon refused to support his call for a show of force; the
decision to withdraw the Marines was made in the White House when he was out of
town; his first effort at big-time negotiating had collapsed. He soured on the
Arabs and turned toward the Israelis. For the last three years, the United
States has not been a serious actor in the region. Shultz's attention has turned
elsewhere.

It has turned to arms control, which he has pursued despite serious opposition
from the civilians in the Defense Department, and to terrorism, which appears to
obsess him.

It was Shultz who pushed for the bombing attack against two Libyan cities last
spring, and who argued that the United States ''cannot wait for absolute
certainty and clarity'' before hitting suspected terrorist targets, even when
innocent civilians might be killed.

This single-minded preoccupation with terrorism in general and Libyan leader
Muammar el-Qaddafi in particular has led Shultz into rhetorical as well as other
kinds of overkill. Last spring, when the industrial nations meeting at Tokyo
produced a weak and relatively innocuous document criticizing terrorism, Shultz
exultantly informed the absent Qaddafi: ''The message is: 'You've had it, pal.
You are isolated. You are recognized as a terrorist.' '' In fact, the message
was that nobody cared about the issue as much as Shultz, and the communique was
designed as much to humor him as to punish Qaddafi.

Shultz's obsession can be traced back to the bombing of the Marine barracks. The
death of the young Marines, partly as a result of his Government's negligence,
made a searing impact on Shultz, a former Marine. His determination to punish
the killers and his anger when Reagan pulled the American contingent out of
Beirut provided both intellectual and emotional justification for his ''war on
terrorism.'' Shultz is so personally involved in the issue that at a foreign
ministers' meeting in Belgrade he became red-faced and started pounding the
table when his colleagues suggested he might be overdramatizing the terrorist
threat.

On the issues of arms control and relations with the Soviet Union, Shultz has
won some bureaucratic bouts. He got Reagan to back down on the ''Evil Empire''
litany, and retained until this month the moderate Arthur A. Hartman as
Ambassador in Moscow. He worked behind the scenes to reverse an Administration
effort to adopt a new interpretation of the 1972 antiballistic-missile treaty
that would have jeopardized the treaty in order to permit Star Wars testing. And
he persuaded Reagan to postpone his decision to exceed the SALT II limitations
on strategic missiles, although Reagan finally succumbed last November to
Pentagon pressure to repudiate the treaty.

Since he came to office, Shultz and the Defense Department have been at
loggerheads over arms control. Almost totally uninformed at the outset about an
issue of infinite complexity, he has relied heavily on the veteran arms
negotiator Paul H. Nitze. In 1982, Nitze, during a ''walk in the woods'' with
his Soviet counterpart, reached an arms accord that the civilians in the
Pentagon opposed. The tentative agreement was disavowed by both Washington and
Moscow. The conflict between State and Defense has continued, and Caspar W.
Weinberger lost a significant round last October when he was not invited to
attend the Reykjavik summit.

Reykjavik was either a triumph, a disaster, or a near-miss, depending on one's
point of view. For Shultz, it was clearly an immense disappointment. He went to
the meeting expecting to nail down the Russians to a full-scale summit a few
months later, and quickly was drawn into sweeping negotiations covering every
aspect of nuclear weaponry. The Russians, to the amazement of the American team,
accepted Reagan's proposal for the elimination of intermediate-range nuclear
missiles from Europe and for deep cuts in long-range ballistic missiles. But
when the talks collapsed over Reagan's refusal to limit Star Wars testing, the
distress was written on Shultz's face. ''For a few hours, a truly historic
outcome seemed within our grasp,'' he said, on the verge of tears and
exhaustion, as he came out of the mammoth bargaining session.

Shultz obviously believed deeply that he had glimpsed the future, although the
NATO allies were horrified at the notion that the United States might actually
pull all its intermediate-range nuclear weapons out of Europe, and most
strategists felt that Shultz had not come fully to terms with the implications
of a nonnuclear defense in the face of the Soviet Union's huge conventional
army.

Shultz, for his part, rejects these complaints. The NATO allies, he points out,
years ago endorsed an American plan for a joint withdrawal of American and
Soviet missiles from the Continent, the so-called zero option.

''The fact is,'' Shultz told me in his office, ''when it all of a sudden seemed
a reality to get rid of those weapons, the allies got attached to things whose
withdrawal they had been advocating. They all said, 'Wait a minute, now. Do we
really want to do that? Do we really want to get rid of those missiles?' But
those were all allied positions, and I think basically good positions.''

Shultz recognizes that Reykjavik implied serious changes in strategy; that fewer
nuclear weapons means spending more money on conventional European defense.
''Here I have to speak as an individual human being,'' he told me. ''I think
we're better off if we have a somewhat less nuclear world. We'd be a lot more
comfortable, but it may be that we have to pay a price.'' Reflecting on the
larger meaning of the agreement that wasn't, he expressed his belief that Reagan
''will turn out to have been the most radical President since Roosevelt in the
sense of changing the agenda. The agenda in arms control now is major reductions
on warheads, whereas the agenda before had always been limiting their increase.
. . . I think that's a very constructive change, and Reykjavik captured it.''

Even if the agenda has been changed - and that is far from certain - the fact
remains that, at Reykjavik, Shultz was unable to persuade Reagan to give up his
dream of a ''leak-proof'' missile defense (his Strategic Defense Initiative) in
return for the reality of deep cuts in Soviet missile forces. Having given way
on what he considers small battles - for example, by embracing the Reagan
Doctrine - so that he could position himself to win the big ones, Shultz could
not negotiate the immovable object of Ronald Reagan.

W ITH ARMS CON-trol now on hold, and the war against terrorism mostly in
stalemate, Shultz's major foreign policy initiative these days is that battle
call of the ideological right: the Reagan Doctrine. He did not come into office
dedicated to a crusade against Marxist governments in the third world.
Initially, he opposed covert aid to rebel leader Jonas Savimbi in Angola, and in
Nicaragua favored a negotiated settlement that would send Cuban and Russian
advisers home, along with a pledge by Managua to cease aid to the
anti-Government rebels in El Salvador. This was the position argued by the chief
of his Latin American division, Langhorne A. Motley. But Shultz, under strong
pressure from the far right, compromised, shifting to the hard-line position
that the Sandinistas must negotiate directly with the contras to change their
form of government. Motley left the State Department and was replaced by Elliott
Abrams, an ardent advocate of the Reagan Doctrine.

Shultz's conversion may be sincere, or it may be simple opportunism. But his
embrace of the Reagan Doctrine has failed to help him with right-wing
fundamentalists, who suspect his motives, and it has exacerbated the deeper
problems in Central America and southern Africa. In the latter, the
inconsistency of American policy is particularly glaring: in Mozambique, the
United States is supporting a Marxist Government, while in Angola the Reagan
Doctrine is proudly unfurled. In Angola, as in Nicaragua, the theme sounded from
the State Department these days is weapons, not negotiations.

It is hard to see what this policy is likely to accomplish, other than mounting
frustration on the far right and continued stalemate. After the revelation that
Iran's Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and the contras are joined in unholy wedlock,
Congressional support has evaporated for the rebel band on the Honduran border
trying to ride piggyback on American shoulders into Managua.

The contra issue is a loser for any President at this point, as is the
intellectual scaffolding constructed around it, the Reagan Doctrine. This is
part of the paraphernalia that Shultz took on with the job, and which he has
done little either to make coherent or to jettison.

T HE UNDERMINING of the Reagan Presidency may make any creative diplomacy
impossible during the next two years, and Shultz himself could well be pushed
out of office when Reagan insiders feel the scandal has subsided enough for them
to do so. Nonetheless, Shultz may have a rare opportunity. To seize it, he would
have to break out of the mold of cautious temporizing - punctuated by fits of
belligerence in the cases of terrorism and the Reagan Doctrine - and seriously
address the critical issues that Reagan has ignored, exacerbated or smothered in
rhetoric during the past six years.

He would have to go back and put together an arms control package from the
remnants of Reykjavik and sell it to Reagan; seriously address the global
economic crisis and the burden of debt that is impoverishing and destabilizing
the third world, and, at a time when the United States is increasingly in debt
to its rich allies, re-examine the premises of a security system fashioned 40
years ago under vastly different conditions. To focus on these essentials, he
would have to free himself from his own fixation on terrorism and return the
Reagan Doctrine to its rightful place as a liturgical incantation for the
radical right.

If he were to seize this opportunity, Shultz could make himself remembered as
more than one who left things no worse than he found them, or who kept Ronald
Reagan's fantasies within bounds. He could break out of the pattern that has led
him to compromise on what he considered the minor issues, but in the end did not
help him make much impact on major ones.

When George Shultz leaves for the comforts of a cushioned chair at Stanford,
will it be said that it made much difference that he was Secretary of State
rather than another? So far, the record suggests not.

At this moment, when he alone in the Reagan Administration retains the public
trust, George Shultz has the chance to be remembered as more than a survivor.
But the moment is slipping, and it is not within every man to leap beyond
himself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Sec. of State George Shultz relaxing in his State Dept. office
(Michael O'Neill) (pages 14-15); photo of Shultz testifying before House Foreign
Affairs Committee on Iran arms deal (Greg E. Mathieson/Mathieson & Associates)
(pages 16-17); photo of Shultz with Soviet Foreign Min. Eduard A. Shevardnadze
and at Iceland summit briefing (Alain Nogues/Sygma; Pete Souza/The White House)
(pag

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KREMLIN FEELS STRAIN OF AFGHAN WAR

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 858 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


THE withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan is not far off, the Soviet
Foreign Minister, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, announced last week. ''This event,''
he predicted, ''is not behind the mountains.''

Whether Mr. Shevardnadze proves to be a better prophet than the American
officials who used to speak of the light at the end of the Vietnamese tunnel
remains to be seen. But it was clear last week that while Moscow is increasingly
eager to reduce its involvement in Afghanistan, the route to a withdrawal is not
as smooth as Mr. Shevardnadze suggested.

The Foreign Minister and Anatoly F. Dobrynin, the party secretary in charge of
foreign policy, returned from a trip to Kabul, the Afghan capital, amid
indications that the Soviet Union had a carefully designed plan to achieve both
the reality and the appearance of progress toward a settlement.

The plan, announced with considerable fanfare by Moscow and Kabul, included a
call for a cease-fire with guerrilla forces that would have started Thursday and
a national reconciliation effort sponsored by Najib, the Afghan leader. The
Soviet Union also agreed to set a timetable for withdrawal of its estimated
120,000 troops as part of a settlement negotiated by a United Nations mediator.

Although the guerrillas quickly rejected the terms for the reconciliation and
cease-fire, the Shevardnadze-Dobrynin delegation, the highest-ranking Kremlin
group to visit Kabul since Soviet troops moved into Afghanistan in 1979,
suggested that other moves might be under consideration. Western diplomats
speculated that these might include a unilateral reduction of Soviet forces to
coincide with the Feb. 11 resumption of United Nations-sponsored negotiations in
Geneva between the Afghan and Pakistani Governments. The withdrawal last year of
six Soviet regiments, some 8,000 men, was considered a token gesture in the
West, and United States officials have reported that the troops were replaced by
new forces within days.

Moscow has plenty of reason to want to bring its troops home. The Soviet press
has indicated that draft evasion is not infrequent and has written
sympathetically of the plight of disabled and troubled veterans. Graveyards
across the country have monuments to the men killed in Afghanistan. There is
concern that the sharp rise in drug use among Soviet young people since 1981,
reported in Pravda last week, is partly the result of the involvement in
Afghanistan, where narcotics are easily obtained.

'A Symbol of Shame'

Moreover, Moscow's role in Afghanistan has hurt its standing among Moslem
nations, hampering Mikhail S. Gorbachev's efforts to increase Soviet influence
in Asia and the Middle East.

''Afghanistan is to Soviet foreign policy what Sakharov was to human rights, a
symbol of shame,'' one Western diplomat said, referring to Andrei D. Sakharov,
the dissident physicist who was allowed to return to Moscow last month after
nearly seven years in exile in the city of Gorky.

Sensitivity to the domestic and foreign costs of the war has been evident in
Soviet press reports that increasingly depict the fighting as an
''internationalist duty'' by a ''limited contingent'' in an ''undeclared war.''

Despite the drawbacks, however, it is unlikely that the Soviet Union will
untangle itself from Afghanistan any time soon. Mr. Najib, a former head of the
Afghan secret police who was installed with Soviet help last May, has so far
failed to draw his opponents into the Government, and the guerrillas have
spurned his terms for national reconciliation. The rebels also rejected Mr.
Najib's plan for a cease-fire, insisting on direct negotiations with Moscow.

Western analysts doubt that the Soviet Union will remove its forces until the
internal situation stabilizes. ''If the Soviets withdraw under present
conditions, their friends will be slaughtered,'' a Western diplomat said last
week.

In addition, Moscow has made any deal contingent on the cessation of Western aid
to the rebels. But the United States is unlikely to halt the flow of money and
arms unless Moscow withdraws a substantial number of troops. Although some
progress was reported in the United Nations talks, the timing of a Soviet
withdrawal remains an obstacle. Pakistan, with backing from the United States,
has insisted that all Soviet troops be withdrawn within months, perhaps a year.
Moscow has talked about three years and hinted that it might accept a two-year
deadline.

Ultimately, the Russians may have to decide what sort of Government they can
live with in Afghanistan. If they could accept a neutral Afghanistan, similar to
the one that existed before the Soviet presence, a settlement would be easy.

But so far Moscow has given no indication that it would accept anything less
than a pro-Soviet government, a condition the rebels find unacceptable.

One Western diplomat suggested that if Moscow is determined to cut its losses in
Afghanistan, it might have to follow the advice that the late Senator George D.
Aiken of Vermont once offered on the Vietnam War. What the United States should
do, Mr. Aiken recommended then, was simply declare a victory and go home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of guerrillas preparing to attack an army oupost in Afghanistan
(Gamma-Liasion/Pierre Issot-sergent)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
A POLICY THAT'S FAILED

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 809 words


When Adm. John Poindexter was asked why he had condoned an apparently illegal
diversion of funds from the Iranian arms sale to the ''contras'' trying to
overthrow the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua, President Reagan's former national
security adviser is reported to have replied: ''I felt sorry for the contras.''

That's hardly sufficient reason for making important foreign policy decisions,
let alone breaking the law - and in this case, it's not the real reason anyway.
The actual motives behind the Reagan Administration's dogged, die-hard,
occasionally illegal determination to support the contras, despite that policy's
failure, have been disclosed again in its own public statements.

* Elliott Abrams, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs,
to a group of European correspondents: ''If you believe in negotiations, if you
want the Contadora process to proceed, and succeed, we believe that the only way
to do it is through the military pressure that the contras can put on the
Sandinista regime . . . If this current U.S. policy is maintained, it seems to
me the Sandinistas will not survive.''

* William G. Walker, Mr. Abrams's deputy, in a letter to The New York Times
(Jan. 9): ''. . . [The] threat to Costa Rica's unarmed democracy lies across its
northern border, in Nicaragua,'' from which emanate ''the very real military
pressures that the democracies of Central America -new and old - are facing.''

These statements, like others before them - some by President Reagan himself -
leave no doubt that the Administration's objective in organizing, arming and
training the contras has been and still is the overthrow of the Sandinista
Government. Not only do Mr. Reagan and his men want the ''democratization'' of
Nicaragua that Mr. Abrams demanded; they either believe, or put forward as a
plausible rationale, that Nicaragua also constitutes a clear and present danger
to its peaceful neighbors.

There are numerous flaws in this Administration position, aside from the fact
that the Sandinistas obviously see Honduras - with its big U.S. military
presence and backing, its shelter for the contras and its superior air force
(now being bolstered by the U.S.) - as anything but a peaceful neighbor.

It's grotesque, therefore, for example, for the U.S. now to insist piously on
the ''democratization'' of Nicaragua, after this country's long history of
support for (and sometimes, as in Guatemala in the 50's, creation of) brutal and
dictatorial Latin governments, not least the U.S. puppet regime of the Somozas,
under which Nicaragua suffered for so long, and the continuing Pinochet
dictatorship in Chile. Even ignoring this shabby history, where is it written in
law or the Constitution that the U.S. is supposed to force democracy on other
countries? And only on some countries at that?

As for Nicaragua's threat to its neighbors, even stipulating that it exists -
which the Reagan Administration has not been able conclusively to show - the
U.S. has never needed to counter it by organizing, supplying and training an
army tainted with Somocistas, the C.I.A. and human rights abuses, to overthrow a
Government even Washington recognizes.

Instead, with overwhelming support in the hemisphere and among U.S. allies -
which the Reagan policy of military overthrow does not have - Washington could
state plainly that it will not tolerate any Soviet military base in Nicaragua,
or any overt or covert attempt by Nicaragua to attack its neighbors. That policy
could be verified and enforced at far less cost than the good money Mr. Reagan
and Mr. Abrams want to throw after the bad already spent on the contras.

Mr. Abrams insists that the Sandinistas will negotiate a Central American peace
structure only if the U.S. keeps them under the military pressures of the
contras. But it's far more likely that the Reagan Administration's obvious
determination to overthrow them is what keeps the Sandinistas fighting -
especially since what Washington wants is a negotiation that would result in
''democratization'' and the inclusion of contra leaders in a new government, in
effect the removal of the Sandinista regime.

For nearly 10 years the U.S. tried unsuccessfully to use military pressures to
force North Vietnam into negotiating away its own position. That war should have
taught this Administration that small nations do not always succumb to the power
of large ones, and that it cannot win at the negotiating table what its
surrogate army has been unable to wrest from a determined adversary on the
battlefield.

The contras have shown no ability at any time to win popular support or to take
and hold territory in Nicaragua. Nothing suggests that more U.S. dollars and
more C.I.A. training - or even Admiral Poindexter's crocodile tears - can
improve that dismal record, this Administration's record.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
WHEN WILL IT END?

BYLINE: By GOERGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 5; Page 1, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 922 words


IN the tormented inner world of Giant fans, it is still the long, hot summer of
1969 and they are still singing ''Goodbye Allie.'' These poor souls still fall
into a tortured sleep at night watching Mike Battle of the despised Jets
hurdling the crouched, frozen bodies of Giant tacklers.

Not all the crisp Phil Simms passes or the mighty Lawrence Taylor sacks have
exorcised the fumbles and the bumbles that haunt this franchise. The Giants must
reach the Super Bowl for the first time to end the spell.

If the Giants fall on their faces on the wintry steppes of East Rutherford this
afternoon, their fans will still be living in that time warp since the last
championship in 1956, since the last conference title in 1963.

For some fans, the bad old days were Herman Edwards's run with Joe Pisarcik's
famous Fumble-With-a-Capital-F in 1978; for others the bad old days were the
trade of Sam Huff and the tumble to a 2-10-2 record in 1964. For this outsider,
the summer of 1969 was when time stood still for the Giants.

Does 1969 seem that vivid to other old-timers? The Vietnam War was still
grinding on, Martin Luther King and Robert Kennedy were gone, and a motley army
was heading toward a music festival at Yasgur's farm.

In some weirdly allegorical way, the Giants were as befuddled as any other
American institution in the summer of 1969. Their fans saw them as a noble
tradition, the red-white-and-blue clad warriors of Tuffy Leemans and Charley
Conerly, but up close this was as ramshackle as any sports franchise could be -
The Emperor's Clothes, personified.

They trained on an empty campus in suburban Connecticut, preparing for an
exhibition with the Super Bowl champions, the upstarts from Long Island, the
Jets. Allie Sherman was so edgy on the subject of the Jets that he could not
bring himself to speak their name. They became ''our opponent.''

Never have I seen such paranoia in grown men. Players did everything but duck
behind bushes if they spotted a reporter on the sunbaked campus. Players came
and went in the middle of the night, and very few of them could play football
very well.

All their worst fears came to pass in that exhibition in New Haven, while
Woodstock was happening a few hours away. The Jets pasted them, 37-14. A few
weeks later, in a chilly, partly empty baseball park in Montreal, fans performed
a few French variations on the ''Goodbye Allie'' routine as the Giants lost
their fifth straight exhibition, their ninth straight game going back to 1968.
The next morning was bright and sunny in New York, and Wellington Mara put Allie
Sherman out of his misery.

Time cures some things. Today, Allie Sherman is a lucid commentator on ESPN who
makes football so understandable that grandmothers can discuss the game with
their grandsons. He is 63 years old, gracious and prosperous. He seems younger
than his age in 1969, and he has long since lost that glazed look he carried
that summer.

''I never root,'' Allie Sherman says. ''I still watch the game like a coach. I
loved my Giants, but the only Giant I really know now is Well Mara. I think
Young and Parcells have done a great job with that team. I love those
linebackers. They make the whole team go. They even intimidate the other team's
defense, the way they get the other offense off the field so fast.''

Sherman talks about the bad old days reluctantly. He defends his trades that
sent away some of the mainstays of the conference champions of 1961-62-63, his
first three seasons. He says: ''We'd win 12 games a year but we didn't dominate.
We did one thing late in the game and we'd win, but we were getting old.

''Then the other candy store opened down the block, you know, the American
Football League, and there weren't as many players. The Cowboys and the Rams
were just getting started with year-round programs.

''I always believed in research, but I remember the first time I heard about
them hiring high-school coaches to grade films in the off-season, I didn't think
it was necessary, and there wasn't a lot of television money, so you couldn't do
certain things.''

He declines to talk about all the changes the Giants made since his dismissal,
including the league finding George Young to run the club for the feuding
Wellington Mara and his nephew, Tim Mara.

There is a straight line running from the decline of the Giants after 1963 (The
Curse of Sam Huff?) to the feuds and the fumbles. The chartered airplane that
flew over Giants Stadium in 1978 trailing a banner that said ''15 Years of Lousy
Football . . . We've Had Enough'' was only an airborne version of the guerrillas
who howled at Sherman, once even when the coach took his wife to dinner in
Manhattan.

Now the fans call themselves loyal and patient and long-suffering, but when they
howl at Phil Simms the first time he misses on third down, it is really
self-directed rage.

One suspects some Giant fans do not really believe. Intellectually, the fans
know Young and Parcells have put together an excellent team, skill and courage
everywhere. The Giants should win today, and let the Super Bowl take care of
itself.

But until that happens, Giant fans and even bemused observers will always think
to themselves: Something could go wrong. And they are right. Let's go back to a
nippy night in October, the Boston Red Sox on the brink of exorcising the Curse
of Babe Ruth that had haunted the franchise since 1918.

May a witness to the bad old days offer Giant fans just two words of caution on
this day of hope: ''Bill.'' And ''Buckner.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Sam Huff (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By DULCIE LEIMBACH

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 279 words


THE LAY OF THE LAND. By Dean Crawford. (Viking, $16.95.) Jeremy and Leslie are
wayward, late 1960's spirits, free from their spouses, eager to start anew,
anxious yet happy to be living near one another - only there's something
peculiar about their titillatingly close friendship. They are brother and
sister. This first novel is narrated in a compelling voice by Jeremy, who
recalls traversing the country in his van in 1974, when he was 24, following his
30-year-old sister in her Volkswagen bus. They drive from the East Coast to
northern California, where they partly grew up and where they are resettling in
the lush hills. Through flashbacks, Jeremy recounts their youth in California,
Hawaii and eventually Connecticut; and he finely evokes the tumultous days of
Richard Nixon, Vietnam, marijuana and women's liberation. Dean Crawford's
writing can be abstract and careless, but an impassioned lyricism emerges when
he's describing the California countryside: ''You know it's winter when the
hills start turning green, spring when they look like Ireland, summer when they
lighten to a shade of split pea on their way to becoming an inflammable blond
again.'' The eerie beauty of California only abets the siblings' curse, their
mutual attraction slowly engulfing them; the promise that something erotic and
dangerous will happen keeps the pages turning. Mr. Crawford travels through vast
emotional territory, but unfortunately is wary of journeying deeply into the
incestuous miasma; too much is implied through innuendoes. However, the final
chapters are rich with power and tension. The reader will feel chilled and
unsettled - as if an Arctic wind blasted in.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE AIR WAR IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Richard Witkin; Richard Witkin reports on aviation for The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 804 words


OVER THE BEACH By Zalin Grant. 311 pp. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. $18.95.

THE Vietnam war has generated more than its share of first-rate books, a fact
that might limit the audience for another account, however compelling. Yet it
would be unfortunate if ''Over the Beach,'' the story of the air war, were
overlooked because of a surfeit of earlier works.

The author, Zalin Grant, who spent five years in the war, first as an Army
officer and then as a correspondent for Time magazine and later for The New
Republic, approaches the subject on several levels, a tactic that, in less
capable hands, could have produced a muddle. At the most basic level, he writes
about combat, the missions primarily of a Navy fighter squadron aboard the
carrier Oriskany. And while the jet-jockey competitiveness, the undercurrent of
fear, the victories and foul-ups of jet sweeps have been described many times,
few such chronicles have done it so grippingly and with such a ring of accuracy.
At another level, Mr. Grant explores the emotions felt not only by the men in
battle but by the wives and others left behind, and the questions the war raised
in their minds. Finally, to put in larger context the war's impact on individual
participants, the author periodically reviews the high-level struggles over how
to fight the air war.

What is most impressive is to find an analysis so clearly stated, so seemingly
on track in locating the weak spots in the policies of various political and
military officials.

Mr. Grant makes no claim to having the answers to what should have been done. He
gathers facts, shows how they do or do not agree with the positions of people in
high places, and hopes the nation will learn from its mistakes. The policy
struggle primarily matched the Secretary of Defense, Robert S. McNamara, against
the military high command, with Adm. Ulysses S. Grant Sharp Jr., commander of
all American forces in the Pacific, leading the case against the
Administration's limits on bombing. Mr. Grant leaves no doubt that of the two he
prefers the admiral, though he emphasizes that neither man proved to be
completely right. The admiral is treated with marked respect, while the portrait
of Mr. McNamara, painted in good part with the admiral's brush, is not one the
former defense chief would hang in his study. ''To Sharp,'' Mr. Grant says,
''McNamara was the king of ambivalence, a man of stern visage and imperious
manner, yet essentially a muddlehead who wanted it both ways.''

But the hard-line bombing advocated by the Joint Chiefs of Staff is also viewed
as having been considerably discredited when it was tried. This was especially
true, the author says, when strikes on North Vietnam's oil storage capacity in
1965 failed to bear out Admiral Sharp's thesis that the bombing would either
bring peace talks or cause the insurgency in the South to wither. The struggle
over bombing limits continued through the Christmas bombing of 1972.
''Ultimately, then,'' Mr. Grant writes, ''air power had failed the test every
time it was used to achieve limited political aims.'' On the other hand, ''air
power had proved its worth on numerous occasions when used in the traditional
military sense.''

As the policy split deepened, human beings kept flying missions and occasionally
getting shot down or handing in their Navy wings for a mixture of reasons,
ranging from disenchantment with the war to loss of nerve. And families at home
sweated it out. The trials of these individuals are treated with unusual insight
and sensitivity. And the alternating portions of the book -at least half of the
whole - that are devoted to this cast of bit players is especially moving when
seen against the high-level byplay that set their fate. FRANK ELKINS, for
example, was a talented pilot who balked at some of the horseplay of his peers,
wondered about the rightness of the war, and was shot down and presumed killed
over North Vietnam in the summer of 1966. His wife, Marilyn, battled to have the
Government take more forthright steps to find out about prisoners and those
missing in action. Dick Wyman was a hot pilot who survived the war, had a heart
attack at 41 and settled down in Maine, where his interests turned to protecting
the environment. Dick Bellinger, from the rough-and-tough school of pilots, was
shot down, rescued, downed a MIG himself, was passed over for a wing commander's
job. He later died in a veterans' hospital. If they remind us of people we have
met in other books on other conflicts, they deeply affect us nonetheless; they
are not stereotypes; they help give vital dimension to the strategy struggle in
high places.

''Over the Beach'' makes no attempt to be the definitive study of the war. But,
written in a straight-forward yet stylish prose, it carries tremendous
conviction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By PATRICIA T. O'CONNER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 991 words


MIDAIR, by Frank Conroy. (Penguin, $5.95.) This collection of stories by Frank
Conroy is as spare as his autobiographical novel, ''Stop-Time,'' was expansive,
William H. Pritchard said in these pages in 1985. Some of the tales, he said,
are ''dreamlike happenings reminiscent of Franz Kafka or Nathanael West, with
perhaps a twist of Philip Roth,'' while others are ''admirable precisely for
their realistic textures, the way they provide us with confirmation of common
experiences.'' THE MAN WHO MISTOOK HIS WIFE FOR A HAT: And Other Clinical Tales,
by Oliver Sacks. (Perennial/ Harper & Row, $7.95.) One man who could not
recognize common objects at a glance, another who suddenly de-veloped an acute
sense of smell and retarded brothers who could juggle huge prime numbers are
among the subjects of these essays by the neurologist Oliver Sacks. The author
''sees the human condition like a philosopher-poet,''

John C. Marshall said in The

Book Review last year. He recounts the case histories ''with the lucidity and
power of a gifted short-story writer.'' The same publisher has reissued A LEG TO
STAND ON ($7.95), Dr. Sacks' personal memoir of a leg injury he suffered in 1974
while running from a bull in the mountains of Norway and his eventual recovery.
In 1984 our reviewer, Daniel X. Freedman, called the book ''an adventure in
self-discovery, vividly detailed.'' IN CONSTANT FLIGHT, by Elizabeth Tallent.
(Owl/ Holt, $6.95.) The tales collected in ''In Constant Flight'' are
technically ''close to perfect,'' Edith Milton said here in 1983, ''not merely
well written but constructed with a subtle authority that develops the themes of
each story with . . . precision and economy.'' Yet the stories, all ''to one
degree or another studies in modern alienation . . . seem like little more than
11 variations on a single theme.'' ROBERT CAPA: A Biography, by Richard Whelan.
(Ballantine, $5.95.) The Hungarian-born Robert Capa (1913-54), perhaps the
greatest of all war photographers, influenced a generation of photojournalists.
This is a ''fact-packed, fast-paced'' biography, Howard Simons said in The Book
Review in 1985. ''Names rush across [Capa's] life and Mr. Whelan's pages like a
Perseid shower'' - Hemingway, Irwin Shaw, Cartier-Bresson, Picasso, Gene Kelly,
Ingrid Bergman, Malraux, Steinbeck, Martha Gellhorn and others. BY THE WATERS OF
MANHATTAN, by Charles Reznikoff. (Wiener/Schocken, $9.95.) The poet, playwright
and novelist Charles Reznikoff (1894-1976) unfolds the story of the Volskys, a
family of Russian Jewish emigrants, and the American-born son who opens a small
bookshop in Greenwich Village. In 1930 our reviewer found the novel's style
bleak, but called it ''a sincere and dignified piece of work. . . . Mr.
Reznikoff gives one an exact and vivid picture of Jewish life in old Russia.''
FAMOUS PEOPLE I HAVE KNOWN, by Ed McClanahan. (Penguin, $5.95.) Not everybody is
famous in Ed McClanahan's memoir of hip California in the pre-Vietnam era. ''But
Mr. McClanahan makes us laugh with his recollections of the innocent beginnings
of the 1960's, before the times began a-changing,'' Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
said in The Times in 1985. HAD I A HUNDRED MOUTHS: New & Selected Stories
1947-1983, by William Goyen. (Persea, $9.95.) The 19 tales collected here
include some of the last writing William Goyen did before his death in 1983, and
they add up to a ''retrospective that shows the range of his artistic
achievement in the short story,'' Vance Bourjaily said here in 1985. He ranked
the title piece and ''In the Icebound Hothouse'' ''among the great short stories
of the century.'' The same publisher has reissued Goyen's first novel, THE HOUSE
OF BREATH ($9.95), written about his boyhood in a small town in Texas. It ''is
not a well-made novel,'' Katherine Anne Porter said in these pages in 1950. But
''there are long passages of the best writing, the fullest and richest and most
expressive, that I have read in a very long time.'' EARLY AMERICAN GARDENS:
''For Meate or Medicine,'' by Ann Leighton. (University of Massachusetts,
$14.95.) From adder's-tongue to yarrow, Ann Leighton describes the plants and
the gardens of 17th-century New England. ''With each entry the sense of
identification with the past grows in the mind,'' Helen Bevington said here in
1970. The author ''not only makes the gardens grow again . . . but brings to
vivid life the gardeners as well.'' Miss Leighton's companion volume from 1976,
AMERICAN GARDENS IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY: ''For Use or for Delight'' ($14.95),
has also been reissued by the same publisher. THE PROBLEM OF THE GREEN CAPSULE:
Being the Psychologist's Murder Case, by John Dickson Carr. (International
Polygonics, $4.95.) John Dickson Carr, a master of the ''locked door'' mystery,
offers a puzzle in which murder is committed in front of three witnesses, none
of whom agree on what happened. In 1939 our reviewer, Isaac Anderson, said ''the
plot is so unbelievably ingenious that most writers would have been unable to
make it convincing. But Mr. Carr has done the trick and scored another
triumph.'' Carroll & Graf has reissued a later Carr mystery, IN SPITE OF THUNDER
($3.50), in which the sleuth Dr. Gideon Fell deals with a death in 1939 Germany
and its repercussions in Geneva nearly 20 years later. In 1960 Anthony Boucher
said here it is an ''admirable'' yarn and probably, for newcomers to Carr's
tales, ''a sensational one.'' PLAYING GOD IN THE NURSERY, by Jeff Lyon. (Norton,
$9.95.) Biomedical advances have made possible new choices about life and death
for severely handicapped newborns, and Jeff Lyon surveys these infants' problems
from scientific, social, ethical, legal, economic and public-policy positions.
Combining abstract discussion ''with human particulars, with cases and
interviews,'' Paul Starr said here in 1985, the author provides ''a
well-balanced book about a subject that does not lend itself to balance.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Oliver Sacks

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: January 11, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1206 words


Fiction
1         1    18 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.)
                  Childhood horrors haunt six men and a woman who
                  grew up in a small Maine town.
2         3    24 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.)
                  Without using nuclear weapons, the West staves off
                  the Russians in World War III.
3         2    10 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                  Iran during the month following the Shah's
                  departure.
4         5    13 HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon &
                  Schuster, $18.95.) A top New York model encounters
                  three of Los Angeles's most dynamic men.
5         4    11 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $18.95.)
                  Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal
                  double murder.
6         6    15 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton
                  Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family relationships in
                  South Carolina's low country and New York City.
7         7    11 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                  Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                  Vietnam.
8         8    26 WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) A rich orphan comes of age while she
                  travels the world.
9        10    13 FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
                  $16.95.) The hero of the ''Foundation'' series
                  searches for the lost planet Earth.
10       11    26 LAST OF THE BREED, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam,
                  $17.95.) The adventures of a United States Air
                  Force major in Siberia.
11       12    14 THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte,
                  $17.95.) Continuing the saga of a
                  turn-of-the-century New York family begun in
                  ''Evergreen.''
12       13    19 THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random
                  House, $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and
                  greed mark a young woman's life in 18th-century
                  England and France.
13       14    10 PERFUME, by Patrick Suskind. (Knopf, $16.95.)
                  An olfactory vampire kills people to steal their
                  scents.
14             14 ROGER'S VERSION, by John Updike. (Knopf, $17.95.)
                  A fiftyish professor wrestles with God, sex,
                  science, technology, mathematics and computers.
15        9     7 THE POLAR EXPRESS, written and illustrated by Chris
                  Van Allsburg. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) A small
                  boy's Christmas Eve train ride to the North Pole
                  and the magical events that follow.

                  Nonfiction
1         1    36 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday,
                  $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from the
                  television star and father of five.
2         2    14 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.)
                  From Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized
                  biography of Frank Sinatra.
3         5     8 WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Putnam,
                  $16.95.) A new collection of columns by the
                  journalist and television personality.
4         3    16 McMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi.
                  (Warner, $16.95.) The autobiography of the
                  quarterback for the Chicago Bears.
5         4    10 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                  Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                  recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.
6         6    34 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot.
                  (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire
                  veterinarian about his favorite animal.
7         7    15 ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden
                  with Dave Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations
                  on football by the television commentator and
                  former Oakland Raiders coach.
8         9    44 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random
                  House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic
                  in pictures and rhyme; the first Dr. Seuss book for
                  adults.
9        11    11 ONE MORE TIME, by Carol Burnett. (Random House,
                  $18.95.) The comedian's autobiography, beginning
                  with her impoverished childhood in Hollywood.
10        8     6 THE CHRISTMAS DAY KITTEN, by James Herriot.
                  (St. Martin's, $9.95.) An illustrated true story.
11       13     2 A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
                  (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season
                  spent with the coach Bob Knight and his Indiana
                  University basketball team.
12       12     7 PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon
                  Eisenhower. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A biography
                  of the wife of the 37th President written by her
                  daughter.
13       10     2 ACROSS CHINA, by Peter Jenkins. (Morrow, $18.95.)
                  The author leaves his Tennessee farm to find
                  adventure on the other side of the world.
14             12 THE STORY OF ENGLISH, by Robert McCrum, William
                  Cran and Robert MacNeil. (Sifton/Viking, $24.95.)
                  Companion volume to the PBS series about the
                  world's most widely used language.
15*      15    14 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow,
                  $19.95.) The crisis in the American automobile
                  industry and Japan's role in it.

                  Advice, How-to and
                  Miscellaneous
1         1    11 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff
                  Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at
                  moderate cost.
2         2    48 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow,
                  $14.95.) A television chef's inexpensive dishes.
3         3     3 BETTER HOMES AND GARDENS NEW COOK BOOK. (Meredith,
                  $16.95.) The ninth edition; ring-bound.
4         5     4 BETTY CROCKER'S COOKBOOK. (Golden
                  Press/Western Publishing, $19.95.) New, revised
                  ring-bound edition.
5         4    11 BE HAPPY YOU ARE LOVED, by Robert H. Schuller.
                  (Nelson, $15.95.) Inspiration from a California
                  clergyman.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above. And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE COUNTERLIFE, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) Mr. Roth's
latest novel about Nathan Zuckerman (who resembles the author in some things,
sometimes) turns the form inside out in a brilliant whir of self-contradictory
narrative concerning Jewishness, life, truth and other inescapable issues.

THE COLLECTED POEMS OF WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS: Volume One, 1909-1939, edited by
A. Walton Litz and Christopher MacGowan. (New Directions, $35.) The products of
the first half of the great American modernist's career, in chronological order.


BANDITS, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $17.95.) New Orleans is the locus of
Mr. Leonard's latest assembly of creepy people and byzantine action; his lead
characters are an ex-con and an ex-nun.

TONGUES OF FLAME, by Tim Parks. (Grove, $14.95.) A clever, original novel about
adolescence in a vicarage where people speak in tongues and think the hero's
brother is inhabited by Satan.

RAPE, edited by Sylvana Tomaselli and Roy Porter. (Basil Blackwell, $24.95.) In
this provocative collection of essays, scholars from disciplines as various as
psychoanalysis, classics, sociobiology and popular culture turn their lights on
the subject.

THE LOCKED ROOM: The New York Trilogy, Volume Three, by Paul Auster. (Sun &
Moon, $13.95.) A beguiling entertainment in which a biographer/detective
researches a vanished friend, an author of secret writings, plainly another
aspect of himself.

ROCK OF AGES: The Rolling Stone History of Rock & Roll, by Ed Ward, Geoffrey
Stokes and Ken Tucker. (Rolling Stone/Summit, Cloth, $24.95. Paper, $14.95.) In
separate sections, three journalists who share a deep affection and affinity for
their subject cover rock from birth in the 50's to almost yesterday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

After the Contras Are Gone

BYLINE: By Aryeh Neier: Aryeh Neier is vice chairman of Americas Watch, a human
rights organization.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 694 words


By all accounts, the contras and their sponsors in the State Department are
trying desperately to make some headway in their war before the question of
United States support for the insurgency comes up again in Congress.
Nevertheless, it is not too soon to look ahead to the post-contra era that now
seems in sight.

Despite continuing United States military activity in Honduras, revelations
about the ways that the White House and the State Department raised funds for
the contras have diminished the likelihood of a United States invasion of
Nicaragua. Whatever public support an invasion might have had within the United
States is now evaporating. Indeed, some proponents of the insurgency fear that
the contras themselves may be doomed by the recent exposes and those that lie
ahead. Congress may cut off funding out of a combination of revulsion against
the methods of the Administration, conviction that the contras cannot topple the
Sandinistas without direct United States intervention and abhorrence of the
rebels' continued attacks on civilians.

Aside from raising obvious questions about how genuine an insurgency could be if
its fate hinges on such external political developments, the prospect that the
contra war might wind down should focus attention on how Nicaragua would develop
if it were at peace. Will it become a hard totalitarian state, another Cuba? Or
will it evolve politically along the lines of Mexico, dominated by one party but
not practicing severe repression? Or will it follow some other model, or create
its own?

No doubt internal forces will be most significant in determining what kind of
society emerges in a Nicaragua at peace. And the impact of whatever policies the
United States may follow after the fighting is over will probably be reduced by
the fact that we organized and sponsored the war. Yet the United States looms so
large that even the diminished role that can be envisioned for us in a
post-contra era will still be significant. We need to determine how we will use
our clout.

If proponents of support for the contras are sincere in professing concern that
Nicaragua is becoming a closed society, they should oppose efforts to restrict
travel and intellectual commerce between Nicaragua and the United States, as it
has long been restricted between Cuba and the United States. If they are sincere
in professing concern about the sufferings of Nicaragua's Indians, they should
support financial assistance through private humanitarian agencies to help the
Miskito and Sumo Indians rebuild their destroyed communities and define an
acceptable relationship to the central Government. If they are sincere in
professing concern about Nicaraguan refugees in Honduras, Costa Rica and the
United States, they should also support assistance through private groups to
those who wish to repatriate.

Opponents of the contras also have an important part to play. Following the war
in Vietnam, many critics of American military intervention were loath to
criticize Hanoi on human rights grounds because they believed that the United
States' actions in Vietnam disqualified all Americans as critics. That did a
great disservice to the tens of thousands of Vietnamese who were incarcerated in
re-education camps and to the hundreds of thousands who fled as ''boat people.''
That the United States' role in the war inflicted suffering on the Vietnamese
did not justify turning a blind eye to the plight of those who suffered at the
hands of the victors in the war. If the postwar Nicaraguan government behaves
oppressively, it should be those who were most outspoken in denouncing our
Government's sponsorship of the contras who should speak loudest in criticizing
Sandinista repression.

Unfortunately, things may not work out this way. Many proponents of the contras
may try to isolate and starve Nicaragua to prove that a postwar Sandinista
regime is as repressive as they predicted; and many opponents of the war may
hesitate to criticize repression out of reluctance to appear to justify the war
retroactively. In the process, both sides would harm the Nicaraguan people,
whose interests they claim to have at heart.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. REPORT LINKS DRUGS, ARMS TRAFFIC AND TERROR

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 803 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Jan. 12


Illegal drug production and trafficking are closely linked to the illegal arms
trade and international terrorism, according to a United Nations report made
public today.

The report also says drug abuse in some countries is so serious that it
threatens national security.

''These illicit activities are financed and masterminded by criminal
organizations with international links and with accomplices in financial
circles,'' it says. ''In certain regions, drug trafficking is closely
interconnected with other major criminal activites,'' including ''trafficking in
weapons, and are associated with subversion and international terrorism.''

The report, issued by the Vienna-based International Narcotics Control Board,
also concludes that the vast sums of money generated by illegal drug sales are
concealed ''by being 'laundered' through legitimate enterprises,'' although it
avoids naming specific countries.

'Violence and Corruption'

It adds, ''The whole process undermines the economic and social order, spreads
violence and corruption and imperils the very political stability and security
of some countries.''

The 35-page report, which examines developments in drug production, trafficking
and use according to region, is regarded by some drug experts as the most
comprehensive global overview of the drug problem.

Drug abuse ''now affects virtually all countries and menaces all segments of
society, including young persons and even children,'' the report says.

The report singles out Bolivia and Peru, the two major world producers of
cocaine, as countries where coca bush is cultivated in enormous areas, despite
attempts last year to eradicate illegal drug cultivation. The problem is
becoming more serious, the report says, as drug cultivation begins in other
countries in the region because of the huge profits involved.

The report says the legitimate medical need for cocaine is quite small, and it
calls on Bolivia and Peru to license and effectively control the limited areas
required to cultivate coca for such use.

The report indicates that ''wherever illicit cultivation, production and
trafficking occur, abuse by the local population almost inevitably ensues.'' In
Africa, for example, heroin was virtually unknown until recently, but it is now
abused in Mauritius and Nigeria, which serve as transit points for heroin
originating in Asia and destined for Western Europe and North America. Another
''ominous development,'' the report says, is the appearance of cocaine in the
Ivory Coast, Ghana and Nigeria.

Major urban areas in India, particularly Bombay and New Delhi, which are
transshipment points for heroin trafficking, suffer from a steep rise in heroin
abuse, the report says. In Pakistan, the high level of demand for opium within
the country has reversed a trend toward decreasing production. Opium production,
which had reached a record low of 45 tons during the 1984-1985 reporting period,
nearly tripled to 120 tons during 1985-1986, according to the report.

Heroin seizures increased tenfold since 1984 in Afghanistan, it says, and drug
abuse ''remains serious'' in Iran, Burma and Thailand.

The ''favorite choices of traffickers'' for bases of operations are Caribbean
islands, the report says, because of their strategic location between areas of
production and consumption and ''the existence of banking arrangements which
facilitate the laundering of money from drug transactions.''

In Western Europe, heroin remains widely available and there was a ''new
upsurge'' of cocaine abuse last year, particularly in West Germany, France and
Britain.

In the Soviet Union, authorities are ''increasingly concerned'' by the still
limited but growing abuse of some narcotic drugs, the report says. Drugs are
obtained from wild marijuana and poppy fields, and thefts of drugs from medical
and related institutions are on the increase.

Situation in East Europe

In Poland, it says, there is ''great concern'' about the abuse of a locally made
concoction made from clandestinely harvested poppy capsules. And in
Czechoslovakia, sporadic cases of the abuse of certain psychotropic substances,
often in combination with alcohol, have been reported, as well as limited abuse
of methamphetamine, a locally produced illegal drug.

Heroin use in the United States, meanwhile, appears to have stabilized, although
the report calls drug abuse ''a major public health problem.'' Cocaine, with an
estimated four to five million regular users, causes the ''greatest concern,''
it says.

The report, compiled by 13 nongovernmental experts, is based on data from
governments, the United Nations, Interpol and other international organizations.
Of the world's 185 countries and territories, only Bolivia, Cambodia, North
Korea, Liberia and Vietnam declined to provide drug data.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION;
CULTURAL ISOLATION

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words


Momentum appears to be gathering for an attack on what many educators regard as
Americans' ignorance about the world beyond their shores. Foreign failures and
difficulties that have developed in recent years, from Vietnam to Iran, have led
to calls for a general bolstering Americans' knowledge of unfamiliar languages
and cultures.

''Some day, we may have a President who has been a Fulbright,'' said former
Senator William J. Fulbright, drawing laughter from the audience at a recent
dinner held in his honor by the Institute of International Education.

Senator Fulbright, who 40 years ago initiated the Fulbright Scholarships to
allow Americans students to study abroad, may not have been entirely serious in
his prediction about future Presidents; but he was serious about the urgent need
for more Americans - politicians, policy-makers and voters - to know more about
the world over which their country exercises great power.

He said the scholarships, which have long since become the model for student
exchanges, were ''primarily designed to aid Americans - to educate us about the
rest of the world. We need to understand what other people think.'' While we
don't have to agree with them, he went on, we need to understand their right to
be different. He called it ''the alternative to nuclear war.''

In recent weeks, there have been signs that the Federal Government is waking up
to the need to understand what other people say and think. A recent State
Department study warned of a shortage of foreign service officers who speak
languages of countries and regions vital to foreign policy. These languages
include Japanese, Russian, Arabic and Chinese, but a great many others could be
added.

Recognition that foreign languages are essential to successful diplomacy comes
late to the State Department. The fall of the Shah of Iran and the country's
takeover by a fundamentalist Islamic Government is a case in point.

These events occured when I was serving on President Carter's Commission on
Foreign Language and International Studies., The commission viewed them as an
opportunity to convince American policy-makers of the importance of a greater
knowledge of the language and background of crucial areas. In a meeting with a
high-ranking State Department official, arranged by James A. Perkins, the
commission's chairman, the official conceded that Iran was ''an intelligence
failure.''

But in the commission's view, the events in Iran were not caused by a lack of
able intelligence agents but rather by the inability of the large American
community, and especially its diplomatic and military representatives, to
understand what was in the minds of a population whose language and politics
they had made no effort to understand.

Edwin O. Reischauer, a leading expert on Japan, who was also a commission
member, confirmed the lack of interest in high places in the language and the
ways of the countries to which Americans are posted. As ambassador to Japan from
1961 to 1968, he surprised his superiors by searching the records of foreign
service officers around the world to locate Japanese-speakers for service in
Tokyo.

The response by some representatives of multinational corporations was not much
more encouraging. Their tendency, too, was to rely on native employees to bridge
the language gap between the firm and its customers.

When the number of college graduates with language skills decreased in recent
decades, the State Department also dropped its language requirements for Foreign
Service candidates. Once accepted, the new recuits do get some language
instruction, generally at a simple conversational level. Language skills,
moreover, are not usually rewarded in terms of promotions and assignments.
Against that background, the new State Department study could be an encouraging
beginning.

An additional sign of change is the plan to establish a National Foreign
Language Center at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies.
The center is to be privately financed with grants from such foundations as the
Pew Memorial Trust, the Ford Foundtion, and the Exxon Education Foundation,
which is trying to make its mark despite some initial opposition. The center's
aim is to develop a ''coherent national strategy for improving the quality of
foreign language teaching both in an out of the formal education system.'' It is
the forerunner of a privately-funded national foundation for foreign language
and international studies.

The Chronicle of Higher Education reports that the idea of the center has been
criticized by some foreign language teachers who charge that they have not been
sufficiently involved in its planning. They also objected that the center would
stress the teaching of adults over the need to deal with with students in
schools and colleges. They also expressed concern that the center would be
limited to serving corporate and military needs.

Others, including key members of the Modern Language Association, which has
developed language curriculums for high schools and colleges, pointed to recent
progress in giving foreign languages a more prominent role in schools and
colleges. In the past few years, they said, at least 90 major colleges and
universities have instituted or reinstituted language requirements.

Still, a spokesman for the Modern Language Association, softening the criticism,
called the new Johns Hopkins center ''very promising.''

Observers of the past ups and downs of foreign language and international
studies at all levels of education will ignore such conflicts over who should do
the teaching. The job is urgent and big, and there is work for all qualified
hands. American diplomats who are illiterate in the language of the country in
which they serve are at a grievous disadvantage in negotiations, as are business
representatives who are the linguistic and cultural prisoners of lower-level
native employees. The limitations imposed on the United States by what Senator
Paul Simon, the , called ''The Tongue-Tied Americans,'' in his book by the same
name, are a serious flaw in the American arsenal.

This is what Senator Fulbright was talking about. ''It's important to the way we
look to other countries,'' he said-- ''that we are not completely devoted to
military power,'' that we understand how other people talk and think.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 14, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A Historical 'Memory' for Presidents

BYLINE: By Stuart E. Eizenstat; Stuart E. Eizenstat, a Washington lawyer, was
President Jimmy Carter's chief domestic policy adviser.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President Reagan has charged the commission headed by John Tower with answering
this question: How can the White House be organized so that controversies like
the one over the arms sale to Iran and its contra sideshow can be prevented? The
commission can suggest reforms necessary to prevent repetition of foreign policy
failures only by recognizing that the underlying problem that led Mr. Reagan
astray has afflicted other Presidents. It is the absence of any historical
memory in the White House.

The panel will be tempted to concentrate on the obvious misuse of the National
Security Council and merely propose to bar it from engaging in covert
operations. But the more basic, if less obvious, problem this crisis underscores
is that Presidents often make major decisions in ignorance of an issue's
historical background.

Both Mr. Reagan and his N.S.C. staff failed to appreciate the lessons of the
Carter Administration's mishaps with Iran: misunderstanding the nature of its
revolutionary forces, the likelihood that secret negotiations would be leaked,
the Iranian Government's inability to deliver on its promises, the absence of
real moderates with whom America could deal. In short, after six years the
Reagan Administration knew no more about Iran than its predecessor.

Ignoring the lessons of another President's decisions (in domestic as well as
foreign policy) is an endemic problem of our Presidency.

Jimmy Carter's ill-fated 1977 decision to seek deep cuts in nuclear arms rather
than consummate the agreement Gerald R. Ford had almost finished, thereby
delaying SALT II for two years to a less accommodating political climate,
resulted from a failure to appreciate the negotiating formula the Ford
Administration worked out in 1974 with Moscow.

The Carter Administration's costly overreaction to the ''discovery'' of a Soviet
brigade in Cuba in 1979 resulted from a blind spot in memory: John F. Kennedy
sanctioned the presence of limited Soviet forces to help resolve the Cuban
missile crisis.

Mr. Ford's 1975 suspension of grain sales to the Soviet Union was made without
recognizing the failure of Richard M. Nixon's soybean embargo, just as Mr.
Carter's embargo on shipping grain to the Soviet Union in retaliation for the
invasion of Afghanistan did not consider Mr. Ford's failed effort. All
demonstrated that embargoes of fungible products cannot be sustained.

Lyndon B. Johnson's decision in 1965 to Americanize the Vietnam War was made
with little historical analysis of France's experience in Indochina and Dwight
D. Eisenhower's unwillingness to commit American manpower there.

Presidents are just as likely to make major domestic policy decisions in
ignorance of past experience. This was demonstrated by the Carter
Administration's welfare reform proposal, which failed to take into account the
reasons President Nixon's family assistance plan died a few years earlier.

Executive branch departments do have permanent bureaucracies that can provide a
President with precedents that can lead to informed decisions. But their data
often fails to reach a President in the isolated splendor of the White House.
Moreover, Presidents increasingly rely on White House staffs on major decisions,
rather than Cabinet Secretaries, whom they see as predictable advocates of
departmental views.

Most major democracies, among them Britain and Canada, have permanent,
top-caliber staffs in their prime ministers' offices to provide policy
continuity and historical memory. These staffs stay on regardless of a prime
minister's political party.

In our system, with the exception of the Office of Management and Budget's
permanent bureaucracy, the entire policy arm of the White House -foreign,
domestic and economic -consists of political appointees who resign with the
outgoing President. New Presidents bring in new staffs. There has been almost no
overlap between the N.S.C. staffs and domestic policy staffs of any two modern
Presidents.

Presidents need trusted aides who share their ideologies and world views and can
impart direction to Cabinet departments notoriously driven by the interests they
serve. But there is a parallel need for non-political careerists in the White
House to consider historical precedents.

While Presidents in crisis should seek counsel of outsiders who have gone
through similar experiences, such ad hoc use of historical memory is no
substitute for an institutionalized memory in the White House involved in day-
to-day policy making.

The Tower commission should recommend, and Congress should create, a White House
secretariat in the executive office of the President. It should be composed of
career Government employees of the highest ability. The secretariat would be
charged with providing the political appointees on the National Security Council
and domestic policy staffs with historical analogues, thereby helping keep
Presidents out of trouble.

A secretariat would not assure that every Presidential decision is wise. But it
would reduce the likelihood that past mistakes would be repeated. This is the
best way to prevent Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini from adding a third Presidential
scalp to his collection several years from now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 14, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

COLLEGES ENCOURAGE STUDENT VOLUNTEERS

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words


WHEN the Campus Compact, an organization of university presidents and
chancellors, was established in November 1985 to stimulate student participation
in voluntary community service, some of its founders wondered how much
enthusiasm there would be for its message.

One of the founders, Frank Newman, said recently, ''We were a group of college
presidents saying that it was important for our students to become involved in
public service, but that was still an idea trying to get out of the wilderness,
and it was not clear that anyone would listen in the political or academic
worlds or in the public.''

Fourteen months later, it has become clear that educators and lawmakers in a
variety of institutions were listening. ''We set the goal for at 100 campuses,
and with no recruiting efforts at all we now have 121 presidents representing
259 campuses,'' said Dr. Newman, who was joined in founding the coalition by
three university presidents: Howard R. Swearer, president of Brown University;
Donald Kennedy, president of Stanford University, and the Rev. Timothy S. Healy,
president of Georgetown University. Dr. Newman is president of the Education
Commission of the States and a former president of the University of Rhode
Island.

Other barometers of the interest in enlisting students in social causes include
these:

* When the presidents of the ''Seven Sisters'' colleges - Barnard, Smith,
Wellesley, Vassar, Bryn Mawr, Mount Holyoke and Radcliffe - held their annual
meeting at Barnard in November, the sole topic on the agenda was ''Public
Service: A New Look at an Old Tradition.''

* In Washington Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, has announced
his intention to introduce a bill to provide tuition assistance to college
students in return for community or military service.

* In California, the State Legislature adopted a resolution in August calling on
the University of California and the California State University to submit plans
to require community service by all students who attend four-year public
colleges or who receive state financial aid at private institutions. Some 1.2
million students would be affected, according to the author of the resolution,
Assemblyman John Vasconcellos, a Democrat who is chairman of the Ways and Means
Committee. Mr. Vasconcellos said: ''There are enormous unmet needs that we
cannot get to because of insufficient tax resources. Students are given a
substantial subsidy and it is appropriate that they learn early to give as well
as take.''

* The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, in its assessment of
higher education last year, included recommendations that every student complete
a service project and that colleges offer deferred admission to students who
devote a year to volunteer work.

Asked what had made this issue timely now, Ernest L. Boyer, president of the
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, said, ''It is not
overstating the case to say that among many young people we found a climate that
focused inwardly, that seemed unrelated to larger social and ethical concerns.''
Researchers for the foundation who visited 29 colleges in late 1984 found, he
said, ''that a preoccupation with personal intersts seemed to dominate, and that
there was a narrowness of vision and lack of concern for and commitment to
social issues.''

''That mood,'' Dr. Boyer added, ''was so pervasive that one had to ask about the
purpose of education.''

But the researchers also found another trend, he said: ''We saw a stirring of
interest through voluntary activities among the students, suggesting that there
is still altruism and the desire to be engaged. It is unfair to say that this
generation is unduly selfish, but the way we organize colleges tends to isolate
students, not to remind them of larger opportunities.''

Dr. Swearer of Brown described the formation of the Campus Compact: ''What
brought us together were two contradictory impressions of student attitudes,
both of which we felt needed to be addressed. Some students were idealistic and
active, and we wanted to give them support. Others typified the 'me'
generation.'' Dr. Kennedy of Stanford said he had been troubled for several
years by the lack of coordinated efforts on the campus. ''It seemed to me,'' he
said, ''that the various signals to which the young listen had not been
encouraging the development of interest in public service, either as a volunteer
or as a professional.'' In 1983 he recruited Catherine Milton to assess the
efforts that were being made to encourage student involvement.

Ms. Milton said: ''We found that while there was enthusiasm on the part of
students, there was not a strong institutional support network. Students need
that, they need staff to help them develop projects, and they need ways to tie
those projects in with academic work.''

As a result, the university opened the Public Service Center with Ms. Milton as
director. Under its umbrella, students assist refugees from El Salvador, tutor
neighborhood children, work in retirement homes, conduct the East Palo Alto
Summer Academy for underprivileged teen-agers, or serve internships in
Washington.

Other campuses also encourage social activism. At Brown, for example, where the
Brown Student Outreach is the largest campus organization, some student
volunteers operate a big brother-big sister program for children with cancer.
Some Barnard students work in a soup kitchen. At Harvard, Derek Bok, the
president, set aside $1 mllion four years ago to increase the opportunity for
community service, and now students in one program serve as advocates for the
homeless.

At Michigan State University, students dressed as clowns visit children, the
handicapped and the elderly - the costumes, a university official explained,
help break down barriers. And at Hunter College, students work in offices of
state assemblymen, neighborhood associations and other agencies as part of an
academic program designed to attract them to careers in public service.

There are no statistics on how many college students nationwide are engaged in
community service, although a survey of the Campus Compact schools is now being
completed at Stanford. Dr. Newman believes that only a minority of students are
involved. ''There is a good deal out there in terms of community service on
campus,'' he said, ''but in fact, it affects only a part of the student body.''

Educators see the college years as an ideal time to develop interest in
community service. Ellen Futter, president of Barnard, explaining the meeting of
the Seven Sisters presidents, said: ''We talked about helping students to
understand that you do things at different times of your life, but that college
is the time when you have the opportunity to make a statement and develop the
habit of involvement. We need to cultivate habits of the heart.''

Jean Kayser, a 22-year-old Stanford senior from Far Hills, N.J., seems to have
developed those habits. She is co-chairman of ''You Can Make a Difference,'' a
campus conference that will bring students and faculty together Jan. 31 to
discuss homelessness, divorce, poverty, day care and other family issues. She
has also worked in nursing homes and on a Vietnam veterans project in
Washington, and is the philanthropy chairman for her sorority.

''It is so easy to get caught up in the nonreal-world environment of school
where you are surrounded by the same kind of people, of the same age, doing the
same kind of things,'' Ms. Kayser said. ''It's important to me to get out in the
real world, to help others who are less fortunate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of student volunteers, Ellen Shaw and Maryanne Matyas (Steve
Bamberg) (pages C1 & C8)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 15, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

King's 'Dream' Is Kept at a Distance

BYLINE: By Edward Olshaker: Edward Olshaker is an editor of training guides for
the United States Army at the Redstone Arsenal.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: HUNTSVILLE, Ala.


During the national holiday Monday honoring the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.,
we will no doubt hear a number of high-toned official pronouncements that his
legacy lives on. But the tributes to Dr. King, whose chief goal at the time of
his death was to end poverty, are painfully ironic when viewed alongside the
harsh facts about the growing numbers of poor and powerless in this country.

If there's one commodity in which we are rich it is symbolism. The holiday
honoring Dr. King - however noble the intentions of its originators -
effectively masks the failures of social programs with a display of well-chosen
words. We refrain from dealing responsibly and immediately with the still-urgent
issues that Dr. King tried to address. Rather, we prefer to put on a good show
that centers on praising his ''dream,'' a vision we are comfortable praising
because we can hold it perpetually distant -either frozen in that 1963 speech or
deferred to a vague, ever-receding future.

In Dr. King's ''Letter from Birmingham Jail'' (his reply to clergymen who placed
a newspaper ad urging him to call off a demonstration), he made clear his
impatience with community leaders who merely ''mouth pious irrelevancies and
sanctimonious trivialities.'' Yet come Monday, there will be no stopping the
tributes, which will probably include a speech from President Reagan.

Last year, following President Reagan's moving speech memorializing Dr. King
before a group of black schoolchildren, Mr. Reagan proceeded to show contempt
for Dr. King's ideals on a number of fronts.

He attempted to appoint to a Federal judgeship Jefferson B. Sessions 3d - a
young prosecutor who called the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People ''un-American'' and a white civil rights lawyer ''a disgrace to
his race''; he restrained the Civil Rights Commission from fulfilling its
anti-discrimination mission; and he proclaimed, after cutting $12 billion in
nutrition assistance, that Americans are hungry only because of a ''lack of
knowledge'' of food programs - having also abolished the program that provided
such information.

There will probably also be eloquent remarks by the Rev. Jesse Jackson,
considered by many supporters to be Dr. King's successor, a view he seems to
share. After his impressive showing in the 1984 New York Democratic Presidential
primary, Mr. Jackson announced, ''What was a crucifixion in '68 became a
resurrection in '84.''

Our political leaders are now free to define and use Dr. King any way that suits
their purposes. Today, Dr. King is manageable; his discomforting challenge to
the nation to live up to its Judeo-Christian ideals and democratic principles is
long gone. Now we have him where we want him: on a pedestal, carved in stone,
ideal and conveniently unthreatening.

Dr. King was not so popular when he was alive. In a biography of Dr. King, ''Let
the Trumpet Sound,'' the author Stephen B. Oates notes that in the final months
of Dr. King's life he was under attack not only from his usual enemies but also
from ''young black militants for his stubborn adherence to nonviolence, moderate
and conservative blacks, labor leaders, liberal white politicians, the White
House and the F.B.I. for his stand on Vietnam.''

Yet Dr. King proceeded to attract even harsher criticism by announcing plans for
a protracted, nonviolent poor people's campaign in Washington. He declared that
the slow, silent violence of poverty was so brutal that it justified a march
designed to cause ''major, massive dislocations'' in the capital.

Each year that we continue to celebrate Dr. King's birthday in our sentimental
way, we further obscure and forget the true nature of his work. At the time of
his murder, on April 4, 1968, he was still young, radical, and, more than at any
other time in his career, a thorn in the side of the establishment. His fiery
oratory emphasized urgency and immediacy. But this national day of symbolism
-paid for with revenue that Dr. King surely would have preferred to use to feed
the hungry - represents the opposite of a sense of urgency. It carries an
underlying self-congratulatory message that, with Dr. King's birthday on our
calendar, we have finally assimilated him into our culture.

More unfortunate, the holiday conveniently serves as a cosmetic to hide the true
face of policies that continue to constitute an assault on the interests of the
powerless Americans for whom Dr. King fought and died.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 15, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'REMEMBRANCE' HONORS MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 517 words


IT is no disrespect to the memory of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. to
report that tonight's birthday tribute, ''In Remembrance of Martin,'' on Channel
49 at 8 o'clock and on Channel 13 at 9 o'clock, is for most of its hour as
exciting as you would expect excerpts from memorial services and commemorative
meetings to be. The civil-rights leader's co-workers, relatives and admirers,
including Coretta Scott King, Julian Bond, John Lewis and Archbishop Desmond
Tutu, say all the expected things about how he fought for peace, justice,
equality and good will.

Interviews, mostly with the same people, echo those reverential sentiments. Bill
Cosby, wearing an expression of deep reflection, declares: ''Dr. King was a
mover. Dr. King was a doer.'' One of the few startling moments comes when Andrew
Young, now Mayor of Atlanta, says that had it not been for Dr. King, his city
today would look like Beirut. Several folk and gospel numbers are interspersed
among the encomiums and, for some reason, there is a mini-tribute by Mr. Cosby
to Dick Gregory.

Relief from the eulogistic boilerplate, for better and for worse, is provided by
the Rev. Jesse Jackson. We see him taking the occasion of a speech in Dr. King's
honor for a bit of political opportunism, as he tells his audience that Dr. King
was assassinated ''for acting and challenging the Government; Dr. King's life
threatened the political establishment.'' The implication that Dr. King was a
victim of some sort of officially-sponsored conspiracy is not further
substantiated. But it is Mr. Jackson, too, who offers one of the few interesting
reminiscences - of the discord among civil-rights leaders over Dr. King's public
opposition to the war in Vietnam, a dispute over tactics that remains alive in
different forms.

Considerably more evocative than the interviews is newsreel footage of some of
the dramatic moments of Dr. King's career and of American history of the 1950's
and 1960's - from Montgomery, Birmingham, Selma, Washington, Chicago. You've
seen before most of the scenes of civil-rights marchers encountering brutal
clubbings in the South and ugly signs and shouts in the North, but they retain
their force. One brief segment new to me is of Dr. King talking about his
feelings soon after escaping from a threatening mob in Philadelphia. (For a full
review of the civil-rights struggle, see ''Eyes on the Prize,'' the fine
documentary series that begins Jan. 22 on Channel 13.) The highs in this
program, which was produced by Kell and Lori Kearns, come from the clips of Dr.
King delivering some of his famous addresses in that wonderfully resonant voice
and those compelling cadences, climaxing with the prophetic words a day before
his assassination in 1968, when he mused on his possible death: ''And He's
allowed me to go up to the mountain, and I've looked over and I have seen the
promised land.'' Forgive me if this sounds like one of the tributes that clog
''In Remembrance of Martin,'' but you can't see and hear the man without being
awed anew by how stirring a preacher he was and how courageous a leader.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. (UPI)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Power Makes Political Power

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 421 words


To the Editor:

''Reagan's Doctrine and the Iran Issue'' by Daniel Patrick Moynihan (Op-Ed, Dec.
21), on Marxism's demise, Leninism's attractions for the third world and what we
should do about it, was simply superb. Why is it that highly thoughtful,
creative and action-oriented people like Senator Moynihan are seldom mentioned
as Presidential timber?

There is one additional point the Senator might have made to strengthen further
his plea that ''Political economy is the name of the next task, not
geopolitics.''

History has shown that almost every major foreign-policy mistake made by the
United States has resulted from the inability of our decision makers to
distinguish between political Communism and economic Communism. The mistake in
Vietnam was a classic example.

Despite many years of Communist and socialist rhetoric, the free-enterprise
system has economic Communism on the run. Some of the most important recent
political changes in both Communist and socialist countries were importantly
influenced by the failings of their own ''planned'' economic systems. Such
countries as the Soviet Union, China, India and even Albania have sought trade
and joint ventures with the West.

It is no accident that the one country that is most respected in the political
arena today, and is even called upon at times to be an honest broker between
such warring nations as Iran and Iraq, is Japan. The Japanese don't even have a
nuclear deterrent or a large standing army. All the Japanese have is a belief in
and a commitment to an economic-growth imperative.

Senator Moynihan is absolutely right when he implies that if America were to
rediscover its traditional economic-growth imperative, it would accomplish a lot
more in the political arena. Unfortunately, the article doesn't mention why and
how American business leaders have lost their commitment to quality growth since
1973. Without the understanding of why and how this came about, it will be
almost impossible for the United States to settle for anything less than
institutionalized mediocrity in the next decade.

Meanwhile, the repressive Communist states will try to strengthen their hold on
their inhabitants politically, while economically they will borrow from our
free-enterprise system. If the Communist states can grow economically, they will
gain more political territory through economics than they could ever hope to
gain through brute force.

They will make the Senator's case prophetic.

MURRAY HILLMAN
  New York, Dec. 28, 1986

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CONBOY TO BE RECOMMENDED FOR JUDGESHIP, D'AMATO SAYS

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 423 words


The New York City Investigations Commissioner, Kenneth Conboy, who has played a
major role in the inquiries into city scandals in the last year, will be
recommended for a Federal judgeship, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said yesterday.

''I'm personally very high on Ken Conboy,'' said the Senator, a New York
Republican. He added that he and his office had worked extensively with the
48-year-old career law-enforcement official when he was the city's Criminal
Justice Coordinator. The Senator said that Mr. Conboy's ''strong law-enforcement
background'' was consistent with the Senator's philosophy.

Mr. Conboy, a Republican who is not active in party affairs, was a candidate for
a Federal judgeship a year ago when he took over the investigations post at a
time when the Investigation Department itself drew criticism for failing to
uncover corruption.

The department has been expanded greatly in the 11 months in which Mr. Conboy
has been Commissioner, with its budget doubling and personnel scheduled to rise
to 273 by June 30, the end of the fiscal year. In addition, at least 230 new
jobs are to be added with the consolidation under the Investigations Department
of inspectors general and their staffs in every city department.

Name to Be Submitted

Mr. D'Amato said he had talked with Mayor Koch about the Conboy appointment, to
fill a vacancy in the Southern District of New York based in Manhattan, and that
the Mayor was pleased. Mr. Koch, however, must find a new investigations chief
at a time when investigations and indictments, mostly by Federal prosecutors,
are continuing.

The Senator said he would submit Mr. Conboy's name to his judicial screening
panel within the next 10 days and expected that Mr. Conboy would be found highly
qualified. His name would then be submitted to the Justice Department with the
formal appointment made by the President subject to Senate confirmation.

Two earlier D'Amato recommendations for Federal judgeships - Rena Raggi, the
former United States Attorney in the Eastern District, based in Brooklyn, and
Justice Richard Daronco of State Supreme Court in Westchester County - are
awaiting formal appointment.

A graduate of Fordham College and the University of Virginia Law School, Mr.
Conboy served in the Army in Vietnam, becoming a captain. He was an assistant
district attorney in Manhattan for 11 years, a deputy police commissioner for
legal affairs and counsel to the city Police Department before his appointment
by the Mayor as Criminal Justice Coordinator in 1983.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Kenneth Conboy (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Nina Darnton

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1548 words


IT'S a little less than three months until Academy Award time, but already
behind-the-scenes dramas are being enacted that are of interest to film makers
and film lovers.

The academy's Board of Governors voted this week on an issue that might have had
serious implications for the documentary film -whether or not to remove the full
announcement and presentation of the Oscars for best documentary feature and
short film from the awards telecast, exiling it to a dinner ceremony the week
before where technical contributions are honored.

The suggested change, recommended by the academy's policy committee on rules,
was aimed at saving time and streamlining the show. The documentary awards would
have been announced at the dinner; on Oscar night, the nominees would not have
been recognized and only the winners would step quickly out from offstage to
pick up their prize.

According to industry sources, the vote was practically unanimous in favor of
retaining the traditional televised presentation - envelopes and all - of the
documentary awards, which have been part of the Oscar ceremony for 40 years. But
the fact that it came to a vote at all highlights a problem that has surfaced
frequently in past years - the struggle between the producers of the Oscar show
who search for ways to make it more lively and entertaining and those in the
motion-picture business who want to maintain what they view as the academy's
tradition of serious awards for excellence.

''I'm not going to argue that this was not being shoved from the center ring to
the side ring,'' said Bruce Davis, the executive administrator of the academy.
''But I'm not sure that it would have hurt their publicity as much as some
people feared.''

Documentary film makers and distributors, however, say they would have been hurt
by being given short shrift. ''Government grants are drying up,'' said Seymour
Wishman, president of First Run Features, which distributes documentaries.
''Foundation grants are drying up because of the new tax law. There is little
money for advertising. Without this push from the academy, the documentary would
be in real trouble.''

The vote against the recommendation of the rules committee - which was made up
of several members of the Board of Governors - seemed to be the result of a
campaign by the International Documentary Association, which included press
coverage in Los Angeles and letters and telegrams from such figures in the
industry as Gregory Peck and David Wolper.

''I think the issue is probably finally laid to rest,'' said Robert Guenette,
the president of the Documentary Association. ''It's always been discussed by
the producers of the show. This time they got to the Board of Governors. I think
the vote forced them to realize that they have more responsibility to film
makers and the traditions of the academy itself than to the producers.'' Steve
Guttenberg As Romantic Lead In ''The Bedroom Window,'' a suspense thriller that
opens today, Steve Guttenberg has been deliberately cast against the audience's
expectations. The comic actor who made his reputation in films like ''Police
Academy'' plays a romantic lead - the love interest of the likes of Isabelle
Huppert and Elizabeth McGovern - whose character progresses from self-interest
to Hollywood-style heroism. ''Dino De Laurentiis wanted someone for this role
that the audience would be surprised to see in this situation,'' Mr. Guttenberg
said. ''There are a lot of fine dramatic actors, but I guess he wanted someone
the audience could identify with, someone the people would kind of understand
and like. At the beginning, my character is self-centered with just a thread of
humanity. By the end, the humanity is central.''

In the film, Mr. Guttenberg's character, Terry, is having a love affair with
Sylvia, his boss's wife, played by Isabelle Huppert. Sylvia witnesses an
attempted murder from her lover's bedroom window. When another young woman is
murdered later in the same neighborhood, the couple wonder if they should come
forward to describe the suspect. To protect their adulterous affair, Terry
pretends he saw the assault. When his story seems shaky, the police begin to
suspect him.

In a film with a perversely clever psychopathic villain and two strong female
characters, Mr. Guttenberg said he felt his challenge was to avoid being bland.
''That's always the problem with a protagonist,'' he said. ''The first Romeo
must have gone to Shakespeare and said, 'Hey, what is this, Lucretia's got all
the good lines.' It's a challenge to make the protagonist interesting.'' Change
of Pace For Tom Berenger Tom Berenger is another actor whose screen personality
keeps changing. He has played everything from psychopathic killers to Hollywood
television stars.

After the English director Ridley Scott saw an early screening of ''Platoon,''
he offered Mr. Berenger, who played the psychotic Sergeant Barnes, the lead in
his next movie, ''Someone to Watch Over Me.'' But the choice was hardly
typecasting: Mr. Berenger's new character bears absolutely no resemblance to the
chilling Vietnam sergeant whose humanity the war has destroyed. Instead, Mr.
Berenger plays a romantic lead in a thriller - a detective whose happy marriage
is threatened when he falls in love with a socialite who has witnessed a murder.
The film is being shot at locations in New York and is to move to Los Angeles
soon for interior studio shots.

Why did Mr. Berenger's work in ''Platoon'' lead to this part? ''I don't really
know,'' the actor said. ''Ridley Scott saw the screening and then took David
Puttnam - the new head of Columbia - to see it, and they wanted me for the role.
The English are like that. They're used to casting differently. They expect
their actors to do everything.''

Although his critically acclaimed performance as Sergeant Barnes is strong
enough to bring on a host of similar offers, Mr. Berenger isn't worried. ''I've
never been typecast,'' he said. ''My first part was as a psychopath in 'Looking
for Mr. Goodbar,' but I've done soft characters, too - in 'Eddie and the
Cruisers' and 'The Big Chill.' Barnes isn't really the same kind of psychopath
as the guy in 'Goodbar.' He's beginning to lose his morality, by the end he does
lose it, but I had compassion for him. He's a victim, not just of his background
but of what the war's done to him.''

The actor's new part is more straightforward, he said: ''He's a cop. He's a
sweet Queens sort of guy. He likes being a cop, and he gets caught into this
thing and can't stop himself.'' Independent Films Finding New Markets ''The
independent film has finally come of age,'' said Amir Malin, president and chief
executive officer of Cinecom Entertainment Group, which distributed ''A Room
With a View.'' He was referring to the fact that the last five years have marked
the growth of several independent distribution and production companies that are
showing it is possible to turn a healthy profit by handling quality films aimed
at sophisticated tastes.

The viability of companies like Island Films, Circle Films, Cinecom, the Samuel
Goldwyn Company, Orion Classics and smaller operations such as M and R Films
from Chicago bears testimony to the increased appetite for independent films.
The recent National Society of Film Critics Awards honored three independent
films with top prizes - ''Mona Lisa'' (best actor, Bob Hoskins), ''Sid and
Nancy'' (best actress, Chloe Webb) and ''My Beautiful Laundrette'' (best
screenplay, Hanif Kureishi). Why are independent films doing so well?

''It's not really an increase in audience,'' said Ben Barenholtz, vice president
of Circle Films, which recently released the critically acclaimed ''Therese.''
''There have always been a few small companies throughout the years that have
done well catering to this audience. The big difference is video. It's now
viable to do a low-budget film in English that doesn't have to do tremendous
business in theaters to make money.''

Tom Brueggemann is vice president for acquisition and marketing for M and R
Films, which is opening the Japanese film ''Comic Magazine'' today (review on
page C14). The film is an offbeat comedy that lampoons sensationalist journalism
and the Japanese fascination with scandal and celebrity. Mr. Brueggemann says
things are a little tougher for the non-English-language film. ''Foreign films
are an acquired taste,'' Mr. Brueggemann said. ''If you don't keep nurturing it,
if you don't give a steady flow of product, then the audience falls off. We want
to find the good innovative young directors -the Spike Lees of other countries
-that are being true to themselves, not making foreign films with American
audiences in mind.''

''The big studios are increasingly producing films on a homogeneous level geared
strictly for mass consumption,'' said Mr. Malin. ''A lot of directors and
performers are leaving, looking for more creative freedom.''

Mr. Malin pointed out that the filmgoing audience is maturing. ''It used to be
that most moviegoers were between 16 to 20 years old,'' he said. ''Lately, their
percentage has declined drastically and people between 25 to 40 have picked up
the slack. There's a lot of competition for kids' attention - MTV, video, pay
TV. The older audiences want better films.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Steve Guttenberg

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 16, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CRITICS' CHOICES FOR A WINTRY WEEKEND;
Film

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words


Eight New York Times critics offer their choices for the city's best in
entertainment this weekend. It is a good idea to telephone ahead just to make
sure everything is on schedule.

''Platoon'' (at Loews Astor Plaza and other theaters) is simply the best film
yet made about the experience of the American infantryman in Vietnam, in a war
that couldn't be won or even understood. Oliver Stone, the writer-director,
keeps a tight rein on his impulses toward the hysteria and overstatement that
have marked his earlier movies. ''Platoon'' is lean. It sees the war at ground
level, in the harrowing and boring day-to-day experiences of a small group of
American ''grunts,'' who are isolated as much by their stateside backgrounds (as
representatives of ''the poor and unwanted'') as by the surreal circumstances of
jungle combat. Charlie Sheen, Tom Berenger and Willem Dafoe head the remarkably
fine cast.

''Marlene'' (at Cinema 3) is Maximilian Schell's fine, haunted documentary about
the life and career of Marlene Dietrich. By refusing to cooperate with Mr.
Schell in certain key ways, Miss Dietrich helped to turn what might have been a
conventional valentine into a movie whose form defines the star's strengths,
weaknesses and obsessions. The now-reclusive Miss Dietrich allowed Mr. Schell to
interview her on audio tape but denied the use of any cameras. The result is a
moving, nightmarish evocation of Miss Dietrich ''then'' (as seen in clips from
her old films and from television and theatrical appearances) and ''now,'' as
heard on the soundtrack quarreling with Mr. Schell, ridiculing a lot of his
reasonable questions, rewriting verifiable history and, toward the end,
displaying the ''kitsch'' sensibility she so deplores in others. Here's a
one-of-a-kind film about a one-of-a-kind woman.

''Menage'' (at the Cinema Studio 2) is, possibly, the year's funniest,
raunchiest farce, and by far the most successful of the series of offbeat,
sometimes off-putting French comedies made by Bertrand Blier (''Going Places'').
The film can be analyzed for the way in which Mr. Blier plays with ordinary
notions of sexual identity and role-playing - but try not to. That's to miss the
riotous spectacle of the bull-like Gerard Depardieu, playing an ex-con with
unstoppable passions, as he befriends a sleazy married couple (Miou-Miou and
Michel Blanc) in order to seduce not her but him. The film goes a little wrong
in the second half but recoups, ending on the same high note on which it begins.
Be warned: much of the language, even as translated by English subtitles, is of
an explicit kind they don't even write on subway walls.

''Sunset Boulevard'' and ''All About Eve'' (tonight and tomorrow at Theater 80)
are both available on video cassette but, every now and then, they should be
seen again on the big screen. Only there can one fully appreciate the big
performances of the big stars - Bette Davis in Joseph L. Mankiewicz's ''Eve''
and Gloria Swanson in Billy Wilder's ''Boulevard.'' Both women were nominated
for Oscars as the best actress of 1950, but the award went to Judy Holliday for
''Born Yesterday.'' Now that was a very good year.VINCENT CANBY Jane Fonda's
terrific performance as an alcoholic in ''The Morning After'' (at the National
and other theaters) would be reason enough to see Sidney Lumet's new thriller,
but it's a film that also has more to recommend it. Miss Fonda is brittle, canny
and unpredictable as a hard-drinking onetime starlet who wakes up one day in bed
with a corpse and has no recollection of what happened the night before. The
unraveling of this mystery leads to a denouement that's farfetched but also
suspenseful and surprising. Miss Fonda has two quietly superb co-stars: Jeff
Bridges as a gruff, laconic, deep-voiced ex-cop with a peculiar history, and
Raul Julia as a suave, ambitious Beverly Hills hairdresser (there's a
particularly well-played moment in which he and Miss Fonda discuss his marriage
plans). Among the film's other fine points are its frequently clever, crackling
dialogue and the bright, distinctive daylit look Mr. Lumet brings to Los
Angeles. This is the first film the New York-based director has made there.

''Little Shop of Horrors'' (at the Criterion Center and other theaters) is a
musical with a vengeance, thanks to the man-eating houseplant that is its real
star. Singing with the powerhouse voice of Levi Stubbs (lead singer of the Four
Tops), the plant Audrey II steals every scene not stolen by Steve Martin, who
has some great moments as a sadistic biker doubling as a dentist. Nothing else
in the film quite matches these high points, but the whole thing is genial and
bright. Frank Oz's past experience in Muppetry contributes greatly to his
high-spirited direction of Audrey II.

If you haven't seen ''Lady and the Tramp'' (at the Guild 50th Street and other
theaters) since its first release 32 years ago, rest assured that it remains as
delightful as ever. One of Disney's homier and less celebrated classics, it's
still an animated marvel. The dogs are both satisfyingly anthropomorphic and
convincingly canine, and the romance between the film's demure heroine and its
rakish hero is a lot more involving than it has any right to be. The minor
characters are also surprisingly well played. It's nicely plotted and beautiful
animated, and you don't have to be a child to find it a treat.

The most invigorating film in town is ''Something Wild'' (at the 23d Street West
Triplex), Jonathan Demme's jubilant, kaleidescopic road movie about a
straitlaced corporate type and the crazy woman who kidnaps him. It's got the
hippest music, the funniest props and, from Melanie Griffith and Jeff Daniels,
two of the best performances around.

And Bertrand Tavernier's '' 'Round Midnight'' (at the D. W. Griffith and Metro
2) remains an extraordinarily moving tribute to jazz in general and Dexter
Gordon in particular. Mr. Gordon's haunting saxophone dominates the soundtrack,
and his performance is every bit as good as Herbie Hancock's fine score.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from 'Platoon'

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 17, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. EXPECTING TO ESTABLISH TIES WITH MONGOLIA SHORTLY

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 16


The United States was reported today to be close to establishing diplomatic
relations with Mongolia, a Soviet ally on the Soviet-Chinese border.

''We are having discussions with Mongolia about normalizing relations,'' said
Charles E. Redman, the State Department spokesman. ''We're hopeful that these
discussions will end with the establishment of relations between our two
countries in the near future.''

Another official said the negotiations were being conducted in New York by the
respective United Nations missions and were very close to conclusion.

''There are just a few technical points to be cleared up, nothing very
important,'' an official said.

Useful Listening Post

American officials have long considered that a mission in Ulan Bator, the
Mongolian capital, would be a useful listening post along the Soviet-Chinese
border. The Soviet Union, which has been the predominant foreign influence in
Mongolia in recent times, has a large military presence there, as part of its
buildup along the frontier with China.

Mr. Redman said that the Soviet Union had 53 divisions and other military forces
in East Asia, and that ''five of those divisions plus some other units are in
Mongolia.''

On Thursday, Moscow announced that a motorized rifle division and several other
units would return to the Soviet Union from Mongolia between April and June.

Mr. Redman said there was no connection between the Soviet withdrawal
announcement and the negotiations with Mongolia on relations.

The Chinese, in talks with the Soviet Union on improving relations, have made
the withdrawal of Soviet troops on their border one of their conditions for
better ties. The pullout of one division was seen here as a gesture to the
Chinese.

Under the plan for establishing relations, the United States would initially
allow some diplomats in Moscow or Beijing to also be accredited to Mongolia, and
they would make periodic visits to Ulan Bator. Eventually a permanent mission
might be established, a State Department official said.

Only 17 Missions in Capital

He said that about 100 governments have relations with Mongolia, but that only
17 have missions there. These include Britain, Japan, India, China and all the
Soviet bloc nations. The French had a mission but left because of the expense
and difficulty of staffing it.

The United States has tried several times to negotiate the establishment of
relations with Mongolia, but the efforts foundered for different reasons.

A State Department official said that after a period of ''mutual flirtation,''
the United States and Mongolia began negotiations at the United Nations last
fall. Vernon A. Walters, the chief American delegate there, and his deputy,
Herbert S. Okun, met several times with the Mongolian representative, Gendengiin
Nyamdoo.

Mongolia is one of the few nations with which the United States does not have
diplomatic relations. Others include Albania, North Korea, Vietnam, Libya and
Iran.

Mongolia has a population of just under 2 million people, 465,000 of them in
Ulan Bator. The country's economy relies heavily on animal herding, with
cashmere and camel hair its principal exports to the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 17, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Books of The Times;
15 Years of Confidence

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 905 words


AMERICAN HIGH: The Years of Confidence 1945-1960. By William L. O'Neill. 321
pages. Illustrated. Free Press. $19.95. Postwar America was a rich hunting
ground for social critics. Everywhere they turned, there was something to shoot
down. They took particular aim at conformity, peppering such weak sisters as the
Organization Man and the Other-directed Type. They told us that our cars were
too big, our roads too disruptive, our homes an offense against good taste and
our suburbs were dull, dull, dull. President Truman was assailed by the right
for being soft on Communism and by the left for being unkind to the Soviet
Union. Educated people made fun of President Eisenhower's locutions. And, of
course, there was Senator Joseph R. McCarthy.

Much of the criticism was well taken and some of it even bears rereading, but
historical revisionism has been seeping in here as elsewhere. In the aftermath
of Vietnam and Watergate, the late 1940's and the 1950's have assumed a kindly
glow. In ''American High,'' William O'Neill calls the period from 1945 to 1960
''our time of greatest confidence.'' Among its incidental attractions, homicide
and divorce rates dropped and the illegitimacy rate was low.

Although it touches many bases, from religion to rock-and-roll (though not
sports), ''American High'' is highly political. As demonstrated in his other
books, particularly ''A Better World - the Great Schism: Stalinism and the
American Intellectuals,'' Professor O'Neill, who teaches history at Rutgers
University, is a cold-war liberal. In his view, the cold war was inevitable,
guaranteed by ''the Stalinization of Eastern Europe,'' and he admires Truman for
his tough stand against Soviet ambitions. Although he criticizes the way the
Korean War was fought by Gen. Douglas MacArthur, (''imperious, arrogant,
grandiose, theatrical''), he is heartily in favor of American intervention on
the ground that ''Korea was the first instance since the end of World War II
when a Communist state attempted to expand through conquest.''

At home, Professor O'Neill defends the Truman loyalty program as politically
necessary: ''Had Truman failed to act, Congress would surely have created a
worse system,'' but he deplores the way it turned out in practice and has no
liking at all for such Communist-bashing as the ''sordid'' Hollywood blacklist.
At moments, Professor O'Neill gets a little Panglossian. Although an admirer of
Adlai Stevenson, he welcomes the victory of Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1952 as
needed to subdue the right-wing forces that were blaming Washington for losing
China and much else. His own summary of the low quality of the Republican
campaign does not square well with his observation that the conservatism of the
1950's was ''temperamental, nostalgic rather than partisan.''

Very much in the spirit that has raised President Eisenhower in historians'
rankings since 1962 (when he was relegated to 21st place, alongside Chester A.
Arthur), the professor analyzes the ''hidden style of leadership'' that
Eisenhower employed to bring down Senator McCarthy, and he is not too hard on
Ike for failing to speak out more forcefully against abuses of civil liberties.
''Giving directions off-stage was the right method for Eisenhower,'' he
concludes somewhat lamely, ''though not always for the country.''

He grants that the Eisenhower adminstration's activities in Iran and Guatemala,
where the Central Intelligence Agency was instrumental in overthrowing leftist
regimes in 1953 and 1954, was ''totally immoral,'' but adds that ''they were at
least quick, easy and highly advantageous.'' Shades of Grenada. The invidious
standard seems to be America's Vietnam involvement, which began while Eisenhower
still held office.

The one Eisenhower failing that Professor O'Neill does not hasten past is the
general's indifference to the civil rights movement: ''He failed utterly to
comprehend that racism was the greatest moral issue facing America in the
1950's, and did not understand that the mistreatment of blacks was both wrong
and by this late date intolerable.''

In both his credits and his criticisms, Professor O'Neill proves a fairly
mainstream chronicler. What rouses his most spirited writing is the postwar
burst of energy that sent millions of veterans to school and then into new jobs.
He recounts how, making up for lost time, they married fast, bought houses and
cars, raised families and managed, to the despair of those social critics, to
make satisfactory lives for themselves. While noting the darker side of the
decade - ''Sexism was ignored, racism underplayed and poverty obscured by the
general preoccupation with abundance'' - he adds, in typical extenuation, ''This
can be excused to some extent by the fact that no society, however rich, can
attend to everything at once.''

In general, the professor is a more knowing guide to politics than to culture.
He makes too much of the Beats and not enough of the estimable group of
novelists who came up after the war, including Saul Bellow, John Updike, Bernard
Malamud and Philip Roth, and he judges the ''Golden Age of Television'' to have
been real gold.

By its nature, this book, based mainly on the research of others, has a
once-over-lightly feeling. Nonetheless, ''American High'' should set readers of
a certain age to musing fondly over what it was about the postwar decade that
made it the best years of so many American lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William L. O'Neill

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 17, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FEARFUL FOR FAMILIES, CAMBODIANS IN NEW YORK SEEK ASSISTANCE

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1047 words


When artillery fire rains and tanks rumble through refugee camps along the
Thai-Cambodian border, the thud of the shells jolts an ever-present dread among
26,000 people in supposed sanctuary, five miles to the west, at Khao I Dang.

And when, once again, the Government of Thailand announced last month that it
would close Khao I Dang - a sprawling bamboo and thatch encampment inside
Thailand - the shudder of fear was felt as far away as New York City.

The Thai announcement meant, for many among the estimated 6,000 Cambodians
living in New York, that their relatives in Khao I Dang would be forced back to
the border and lose all hope of ever immigrating to a new country. Under Thai
classification, they would no longer be refugees but ''displaced persons'' who
could be returned to their war-torn country when conditions permit.

Roeung Chamroeun, who came to the United States three years ago and now lives in
a Cambodian enclave in the University Heights section of the Bronx, worries
about his mother, a brother and a cousin at Khao I Dang. The Thai announcement,
he said, ''means they will lose their refugee status and go back to Cambodia. It
means we cannot do anything here to help them.''

Fears for Family

Kham Morodak, who came to the United States in 1981 and also lives in the Bronx,
said he is frightened for the lives of his wife and six children. ''If my family
go back to the border, they die like my people what is in Pol Pot,'' said Mr.
Kham - referring to the 15 members of his family already murdered during the
genocidal regime of the Khmer Rouge.

A Vietnam veteran who has written three books about Southeast Asia, Al Santoli,
has been in the border camps when they were being bombarded. ''You have
thousands of women and kids in a shooting gallery,'' he said. ''The Vietnamese
artillery has a range of about 20 miles, and they can just sit back there and
blow up the camps whenever they want to. They do it for terror.''

Arie Bierman, who is coordinator of the Indochinese program of the New York
Association for New Americans, estimates that of the 6,000 Cambodians in New
York City, ''I would think at least 50 percent of them have relatives either in
Khao I Dang or in the border area.''

Mr. Bierman said he had a drawer full of files of people who are ''pleading for
help in trying to get their family to come to join them here in New York.''

''I'm not sure what to do. I feel as helpless as the refugees,'' he said.

''Remember, every Cambodian I know has lost at least 10 family members through
the Pol Pot horrors,'' Mr. Bierman added. ''And they are desperately trying to
save the remnants of their families.''

End of Hopes

When, on Dec. 29, Prasong Soonsiri, the secretary general to the Prime Minister
of Thailand, announced that Khao I Dang - which served as the setting for the
final scenes of the movie ''The Killing Fields'' - would close nine days later,
it signaled the end of Thai hopes that the refugees would emigrate.

''The West could have done more. But so many have promised and have taken no
action,'' Mr. Prasong said, adding that a delay in closing Khao I Dang in 1986
saw no significant increase in the processing of camp residents for immigration.

Robert DeVecchi, the executive director of the International Rescue Committee,
which coordinates the efforts of relief agencies working along the border, said
that although the Thais ''are not going to be moved indiscriminantly overnight
to the encampments on the border or forcibly repatriated into Cambodia against
their will.''

Mr. DeVecchi said he interpreted the announcement ''as an opportunity to the
resettlement countries - such as the United States, Canada, New Zealand,
Australia and France - to renew their efforts to accept as many of the residents
of Khao I Dang as possible.''

Mr. Bierman, at the same time, contends that the United States has been unduly
strict in reviewing the applications of Khao I Dang refugees.

And Mr. Roeung, who worked as a translator in the camp, said: ''They make a big
deal about the answers that the applicant give in the camp. The affidavit will
be matched with the relationship here. If they are making a mistake, they are
rejected.'' In his mother's case, he said, ''they ask when my brother got
married and she can't remember right. They reject her.'' Ambassador at large
Jonathan Moore, the United States coordinator for refugee affairs, said that the
''first-asylum'' immigration allocation for Southeast Asia - meaning the number
of people seeking to come to the United States from a country other than their
native land - has been set at 32,000 for the 1987 fiscal year, a drop from
37,000 in 1986.

''It's possible,'' the Ambassador said, when asked whether applicants were being
rejected on technicalities. ''But it's very unlikely, because decisions are made
on the basis of a whole lot of criteria. Some people are going to feel that
we're being pretty liberal, and other people are going to feel we're pretty
tough.''

Questions of liberality or toughness aside, the issues are a matter of life or
death to Cambodians in New York.

Chou Sovinn, now of the Bronx, said he was very concerned ''about Vietnam
attacks to the border camp.'' His brother, he said, ''maybe killed or injured
because of the fighting.''

Wong Hak, who came to the United States in 1981, said that if his two brothers
are sent back to the border, the Vietnamese ''will force them to join the
Communist army.''

And Ly Saphoth, who walked across Cambodia ''to freedom'' and now lives in
Richmond Hill, Queens, has a special problem. ''My nationality is Vietnam,
Cambodian minority in Vietnam,'' he said. If his brother is forced back to
Cambodia, Mr. Ly said, ''Very, very big trouble. They force him labor all his
life.''

Mr. Santoli thinks the immigration service is being tough. ''These are people
that the world has forgotten,'' he said. ''But Americans, because of our past
relationship with the Cambodians, have at least a little responsibility to make
sure that they are not slaughtered. We were allies. The Americans shouldn't
shoulder all the blame, because the conflict between Cambodia, Thailand and
Vietnam has been going on for hundreds of years. But, at the same time, we
shouldn't leave them stranded.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Arie Bierman and Cambodian refugees Wong Hak, Roeung Kareth,
Roeung Chamroeun, Kham Morodak, Chou Sovinn and Ly Saphoth (NYT/Dith Pran)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IRAN AFFAIR RAISES DEMOCRATS' HOPES AND CAUTION ON '88

BYLINE: By E. J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1432 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 17


The controversy over arms sales to Iran has substantially altered the campaign
for the 1988 Democratic Presidential nomination, politicians say, by increasing
the value of the nomination and thus slowing the race down as potential
candidates and political professionals reassess their hopes and interests.

The Iran factor is one among many influences that have already made the 1988
Democratic campaign - much of which will actually take place in 1987 -vastly
different from the contest of four years ago. The others include a widespread
skepticism about ''front runners'' after Walter F. Mondale's difficulties in
1984, the lack of clearly defined issues that divide Democrats from one another
and a potentially large but still undefined field of candidates.

Playing a Waiting Game

Among the political operatives who bear the burdens of campaign drudgery and the
fund-raisers who pay their salaries, prudence has become a virtue. Many of those
who usually make an early commitment to a candidate are avoiding doing so, in
part because no one wants to make a mistake and be on the wrong side of the
person who ends up up in the White House.

The prospect of that person's being a Democrat was plausible even before the
Iran scandal, and it is now all the more so, which makes choosing a candidate a
very serious business. ''It's like investments,'' said Representative Patricia
Schroeder, a Colorado Democrat who is supporting her home-state favorite, former
Senator Gary Hart. ''You don't do it with your heart.'' A Lesson From 1984 Mr.
Hart's near success as an underdog in 1984 is another important reason so many
Democrats are wary of making early commitments to the front-runner, as a lot of
politicians did four years ago when they supported Mr. Mondale, the former Vice
President.

This is an unfortunate paradox for Mr. Hart, because he is the only Democrat
with any claim to being the front-runner this time and has run ahead in
virtually every poll.

Mr. Hart's problem, said Ann F. Lewis, who directs Americans for Democratic
Action, a liberal group, is that he is being ''haunted by the ghost of Gary
Hart, 1984.''

Instead of coming out and supporting the real Gary Hart, said Ms. Lewis, many
Democrats are looking instead for the man who will be the ''Gary Hart of 1988.''
Mr. Hart shrugged when he was asked about this, saying he would be more than
happy to have all the Democrats competing for the title of the ''new and better
Gary Hart.'' He thinks he can win that contest. And some politicians say the
experience and organization he gained in 1984 will prove a formidable asset.

All Aren't In Yet

Few politicians guessed Mr. Hart's potential last time, any more than they
guessed Jimmy Carter's potential in 1976, a contest compared to this one for its
large field of Democrats who were tempted into the race because a Republican
scandal had enhanced the party's prospects for victory.

For 1988, guessing the outcome is yet more difficult because so many potential
candidates have not even decided if they want to run. How can the game start,
asked Harrison Hickman, a Democratic poll taker, ''when all the players aren't
at the table yet?''

Among the potential players hovering around the edges are Governor Cuomo of New
York, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts and Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia.
Charles S. Robb, the former Governor of Virginia who had been seen as a possible
candidate himself, has been promoting the virtues of a Nunn candidacy for a
year.

Several other Democrats are either contemplating joining the contest or being
pushed by others to do do. Senator Paul Simon of Illinois once thought of
running, but is now promoting Senator Dale Bumpers of Arkansas. Some Democrats
have expressed interest in seeing Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey run, but he
seems unwilling to do so in 1988.

The calculations for 1988 are made yet more complex by the likely candidacy of
the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who is pursuing a vigorous schedule of appearances and
hopes to benefit from the primaries of March 8, 1988 - ''Super Tuesday'' - when
at least 12 Southern and border states will be voting. As one of the best-known
Democrats, Mr. Jackson has been in third place or better in preliminary polls,
but most politicians see no evidence that he can break out of his base of black
voters and a small number of white liberals.

Four Are Working Hard Now

Reflecting the views of many Democrats, E. William Crotty, a Florida attorney
and fund-raiser, listed four candidates who at the moment are ''the ones really
working hard for the nomination.'' They are Mr. Hart, Senator Joseph R. Biden of
Delaware, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri and Bruce Babbitt, the
former Governor of Arizona.

Senator Biden has assembled one of the most powerful teams of consultants and
operatives. He said last week he did not know if he could run for President and
at the same time handle his new role as head of the Senate Judiciary Committee.
But he added that he might solve the problem by resigning his chairmanship, and
many of those close to him believe he will run.

Mr. Babbitt is given credit by many professionals for having organized early and
effectively in the face of minuscule national recognition.

Congressman Gephardt has spent more time in early-voting Iowa than any other
candidate, but has yet to show any strong support in the opinion polls there,
though he does enjoy the backing of many House colleagues.

Represenative Jim Cooper of Tennesssee, who favors Mr. Gephardt, says Democrats
are essentially grappling with the question ''do they want Hart or Cuomo, or do
they want a new face?'' Mr. Gephardt, he added, was quietly winning his share of
the ''new face'' supporters.

Hart Has Staked Out Positions

Mr. Hart is in the curious position of receiving wide praise for how he has
handled himself so far, without winning the deep loyalty of party leaders that
accrued to Mr. Mondale.

The Colorado Democrat was criticized by Mr. Mondale in 1984 for talking more
about new ideas than actually proposing them. ''Where's the beef?'' Mr. Mondale
repeatedly asked, echoing a hamburger commercial.

But among the current candidates, Mr. Hart has issued by far the most detailed
positions on national problems. His foreign policy and defense statements in
particular have drawn praise even from those who disagree with them.

''He's taken a question that was a clear problem for him - 'Where's the beef?' -
and solved it, eliminated it, erased it,'' said Thomas E. Donilon, a politically
active Washington lawyer who supports Senator Biden and was a leader of Mr.
Mondale's 1984 campaign. ''He deserves credit for that.''

Mr. Hart says he hopes that all candidates will be ''judged by the same
standard'' and will be asked to be as specific on issues as he has been already.
But it is not at all clear what issues will dominate the 1988 campaign. ''It's
breathtaking that it's so wide open both politically and substantively,'' said
Mr. Donilon.

Morever, almost all the Democrats are speaking the same cautious political
language that Mr. Cuomo likes to call ''progressive pragmatism,'' an
all-encompassing phrase that captures the widespread desire among Democrats to
push aside any more concrete labels. Clearly absent so far are issues on the
order of the Vietnam War or the nuclear freeze that tend to excite passion.

Many Still 'Shopping Around'

And so, while some of the top professionals have made their choices, many
operatives are still ''shopping around,'' in the words of Audrey Sheppard, the
campaign services director at the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, who
has been involved in Presidential campaigns for 15 years. ''They are sometimes
seeing three or four candidates and are still not deciding,'' she said.

Most of the leading poll takers and media consultants have not decided yet,
either, though some are on the verge of doing so. And many of the campaigns lack
the money to hire them anyway.

A group of leading Democratic fund-raisers, mainly Mondale supporters, united in
an organization called IMPAC '88, an effort to pool their clout behind a single
candidate. But they have been unable to agree on a single candidate, and some
members are drifting away toward their own favorites.

Mr. Crotty, a member of IMPAC '88, said that in this respect, the fund-raisers
are in the exactly same position as most other Democrats: uncertain, mostly
uncommitted and groping for the right choice. But this time, it is the prospect
of winning that is concentrating the Democrats' minds.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: PENTAGON;
Of Military Garbage and Military Glory

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 42, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 17


Gen. Maxwell R. Thurman underscores his place as the No. 2 officer in the Army
by telling friends, ''I'm Avis, not Hertz.'' Adm. James B. Busey 4th stays so
far from the limelight that two middle-ranking Navy staff officers say they
don't know what he does and a third couldn't recall his name right away.

In the Air Force, Gen. John L. Piotrowski is known as a ''loyal deputy who does
not upstage the chief.'' For the Marine Corps, Gen. Thomas R. Morgan follows a
long tradition of maintaining a low profile.

In sum, these are four of Washington's men not in the news. ''Inside the
Beltway,'' an Army officer said, ''those guys stay in the shadows.''

A search of an electronic data base covering several major newspapers, magazines
and news services shows only scant mention of General Thurman as Vice Chief of
Staff of the Army, Admiral Busey as Vice Chief of Naval Operations, General
Piotrowski as Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force and General Morgan as
Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps.

Yet each of these officers is responsible for the day-to-day management of his
service. As an Army officer said of General Thurman: ''He runs the Army.'' Of
Admiral Busey, a naval officer said: ''He's the one who beats up on us all the
time.'' An Air Force officer described General Piotrowski as an ''arbitrator''
who resolves many issues or sends them back to the staff to be refined.

The Color of Dollars

Each No. 2 officer also makes critical long-range decisions in preparing
military budgets, about the development of weapons and on the procurement of
equipment. General Morgan, for instance, is the Marine Corps' main negotiator
with the Navy over getting amphibious ships built since they are paid for, a
retired officer said, ''with blue dollars, not green dollars.''

By law and in practice, the top officer in each service is a member of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and concerns himself heavily with what in Pentagon jargon is
called ''the joint arena.'' The service chief also responds to the civilian
secretary of his department, the Secretary of Defense and occasionally the
President.

Outside the executive branch, the chiefs testify before Congress, lobby on
Capitol Hill and seek grass-roots support with speeches before military and
civic groups. They also carry a large ceremonial burden in both the military and
civilian worlds.

Back at the Pentagon, the vice chiefs watch over the daily flow of reports,
decisions and internal crises, settling many issues themselves and drawing up
recommendations on others for the chief to decide. ''It's a job of drudgery,''
said a naval officer. ''He gets all the garbage the C.N.O. doesn't want and none
of the glory.''

Each of the vice chiefs also travels outside Washington to see for himself what
is going on in the field and to reassure the far-flung forces that they are not
forgotten at headquarters. In addition, when the chief is away, the vice chief
represents him at the thrice-weekly meetings of the Joint Chiefs.

Officers from all services who have watched the workings of the top two officers
say that no two are alike, that how each pair gets along depends on their
personalities, military backgrounds and particular interests.

For the most part, the Army vice chief is already a four-star general before he
is named. Gen. John W. Vessey Jr. was commander of American forces in Korea
before becoming vice chief in 1979; he became Chairman of the Joint Chiefs in
1982 and retired in 1985. Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., the current Chief of Staff,
was also the commander in Korea before succeeding General Vessey as vice chief
in 1982 and moving up to chief in 1983.

The Marine Corps follows somewhat the same practice, with a senior lieutenant
general, who wears three stars, being promoted to Assistant Commandant. The
Marine Corps, the smallest of the services, usually has only two four-star
generals at one time, the Commandant and the Assistant Commandant. Gen. P. X.
Kelley, the present Commandant, led the Rapid Deployment Force as a lieutenant
general before being promoted to general and named Assistant Commandant in 1981.
He became Commandant in 1983.

The Navy and the Air Force have a different philosophy, using the No. 2 position
to season the newest four-star admiral or general before sending him out to a
major operating command. Adm. James D. Watkins set perhaps a classic pattern: as
a vice admiral, he was commander of the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean, then
was promoted to admiral and named Vice Chief of Naval Operations in 1979. After
two years, he became commander of the Pacific Fleet in Hawaii, then returned to
Washington in 1982 to serve four years as Chief of Naval Operations.

Similarly, the incumbent Vice Chief of the Air Force, General Piotrowski, was
commander of the Ninth Air Force, with headquarters at Shaw Air Force Base in
South Carolina, before getting his fourth star and becoming vice chief in 1985.
He has just been named commander of the North American Aerospace Defense
Command, or Norad, in Colorado, and will be replaced as vice chief by Lieut.
Gen. Monroe W. Hatch Jr., who has been vice commander of the Strategic Air
Command in Omaha.

Often, the top officers complement each other. General Wickham is an infantryman
with much command experience; General Thurman is an artilleryman with wide staff
duty. Adm. Carlisle A. H. Trost, the Chief of Naval Operations, is a submariner;
Admiral Busey is an aviator who won the Navy Cross, the second highest combat
decoration, in Vietnam. Gen. Larry D. Welch, the Air Force's Chief of Staff and
onetime vice chief, is a fighter pilot; General Piotrowski is an electronics
specialist while General Hatch is a bomber pilot. General Kelley is an
infantryman; General Morgan is an aviator.

There Can Be Tensions

Even so, there can be tensions between them. An aggressive and effective vice
chief can attract a loyal following within his service and acquire, without
doing so deliberately, a constituency that the chief may see as a threat to his
authority. More than one chief has felt it necessary to remind his vice chief
about who is No. 1 and who is No. 2.

And no matter how much a chief delegates to the vice chief, he does not
relinquish his authority. As an experienced officer put it, ''None of the chiefs
has ever let go of the reins.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Gen. Maxell R. Thurman, Adm. James B. Busey 4th, Gen. John L.
Piotrowski, and Gen. Thomas R. Morgan

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOES MOSCOW MEAN IT THIS TIME?

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2351 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


TEN years ago this month, the Bendix Corporation and the Soviet Union announced
that they had started down the aisle together toward a mixed economic marriage.

Socialist labor, wed to corporate capital and know-how, would give birth to
spark plugs at a factory in the Soviet Union.

But after much talk about a new wave of Soviet-American ventures, the deal
collapsed because of impenetrable Soviet bureaucracy and the Russians'
reluctance to part with any of the profits, recalls William Agee, former Bendix
chief executive.

''They would learn all our technology, and we would not even be profitable
middlemen,'' said Mr. Agee.

The Bendix story is recounted frequently by Western businessmen here as a
cautionary tale, now that the Soviet Union has begun a whirlwind courtship of
Western partners aimed at creating the first genuine joint ventures on Soviet
soil.

Despite the announcement of a new Soviet law allowing foreigners to hold equity
for the first time in Soviet industry, despite high-level promises of managerial
independence and tax breaks, despite the signing of three preliminary joint
venture agreements with American companies, many Westerners remain deeply
skeptical that the Russians will actually throw open their doors to Western
style ventures.

''In order to make it worth your while, you're going to have to be offered the
incredible plum of the Soviet market,'' said one Western commercial officer.
''And that's exactly what the Soviets don't want.''

Without access to the Soviet consumer market of 280 million people -and the
right to take home profits in hard currency - Westerners say the appeal of joint
ventures in the Soviet Union will be limited. Moreover, even corporate
representatives who are now deeply involved in negotiations with Soviet
officials on joint ventures say they have had no satisfying answers to some
crucial questions:

* Will Western partners have authority to fire unproductive Soviet workers and
reward good ones, based on their work habits rather than their party orthodoxy?

* Will joint ventures really be, as the Russians have promised, completely
independent of the rigid, centralized Soviet planning system?

* What will a joint venture have to pay for Soviet fuel, raw materials, and
notoriously unproductive labor?

''We have legal questions, tax questions. What about auditors?'' says Stephene
Mazurek, head of the Moscow office for Monsanto, which has signed a letter of
intent to jointly own and operate a herbicide plant in the Soviet Republic of
Kazakhstan. ''I can give you 10 pages of questions -20 pages if you like.''

A Western trade official with personal experience in such partnerships added,
''I've never been involved in a joint venture that wasn't a nightmare, even when
both partners shared the same business culture. Here, you're talking about a
collision of ideologies.''

On the Soviet side, however, the enthusiasm for joint ventures seems real
enough. According to Westerners, hundreds of American, European and Japanese
companies have been invited to submit proposals. Joint ventures have been touted
in the official press and at international trade meetings as a way of raising
the quality of Soviet products to ''world quality,'' increasing exports and
upgrading outmoded industrial technology.

According to a senior Soviet trade official, Yuri A. Kislenko, the Soviet Union
will offer partners in these ventures ''several'' years of tax-free operations,
''complete'' independence from the centrally planned economy, and freedom to
experiment with such Western management techniques as incentive pay scales.

Mr. Kislenko, who represents the ministry of foreign trade on a high-level
government committee that is working out the terms of joint ventures, concedes
that many details remain to be worked out. But he insists that under party
leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet trade bureaucracy has unprecedented
flexibility to write experimental contracts with Western partners.

Two American companies in addition to Monsanto have signed letters of intent to
enter joint ventures. Occidental Petroleum has agreed to team up with Soviet
partners to extract oil from already tapped oilfields in the Volga region, and
is also discussing a joint fertilizer venture. And SSMC Inc., formerly the
Singer Sewing Machine Company, has signed up to produce home and industrial
sewing machines at a factory in Orsha, in the Republic of Byelorussia. Demand
for the machines is likely to double, officials say, under a forthcoming law
permitting individuals to set up small enterprises like home sewing.

Western and Soviet officials say these three agreements, and perhaps a few more,
will be negotiated in detail over the next six months, and will test the waters
for large-scale creation of joint ventures. Soviet officials say they are
especially interested in chemicals, pulp and paper, food processing, and almost
anything high tech. TO Western skeptics, Soviet officials reply that they have
worked with the West before, successfully. Pepsi-Cola, for example, is bottled
in Soviet plants under a license from the American company, and Coca-Cola is to
follow later this year. Pepsico and McDonald's are negotiating to franchise
fast-food pizza and hamburger outlets.

The Russians have long engaged in joint ventures with Western concerns outside
of Soviet territory, including one Soviet-American venture, U.S.-U.S.S.R.
Marine, in which American fishermen deliver fish and crab to Soviet processing
ships anchored inside the American 200-mile limit. The Russians' biggest auto
plant, in the Volga River town of Togliatti, was designed by Fiat, and some of
the newer Soviet autos were designed with help from Renault and Porsche.

There are also numerous co-production agreements with West European companies,
including one in which Russian cement mixers are shipped to West Germany and
mounted on truck chassis.

''These enterprises also started out with some hesitation and suspicion, but we
passed that stage,'' said Mr. Kislenko. ''Now they operate practically on their
own, and they are even expanding their range of products.'' Ten years ago, when
the Bendix venture folded, ''we were not ready for joint ventures,'' he said.
''We were simply not ready.''

Joint ventures would indeed be a radical departure, challenging the fundamental
assumption of Marxist-Leninist economic thinking, that the ''means of
production'' cannot be privately owned.

Under a new law, which the Soviet news service Tass announced last Tuesday had
quietly taken effect on Jan. 1, foreigners would own a share - up to 49 percent
- of the means of production, would share in management of a predominantly
Soviet work force, and would be entitled to repatriate profits earned by the
sweat of Soviet workers.

The initial driving force behind the Soviet push for joint ventures was a desire
to upgrade outmoded factories with modern equipment, and to improve
productivity. The Russians estimate that less than one-third of their production
is at ''world quality,'' and Western experts say even that grim admission is too
kind.

Until recently, the Russians seemed bent on buying their way into the age of
computers and robotics. Then the price of the country's major export, oil,
plummeted, and with it the reserves of hard currency available for
modernization. ''A couple of years ago, all they could talk about was turnkey
plants,'' said a Western economist. ''They were flush with cash, and the idea
was that they would jump across the technology gap - they would buy a shoe
factory, a polypropylene chemical plant, an auto plant. But as the oil prices
fell, these projects were postponed and policy switched to joint ventures.''
Soviet officials have increasingly tended to talk about joint ventures as a way
of increasing exports to third country markets, in order to generate hard
currency. This gives many Western companies pause. ''What markets can the Soviet
Union deliver that Western companies don't already reach?'' asked a commercial
officer. ''Afghanistan? Vietnam? The real plum is the Soviet market, and it's
not at all clear that will be open.'' ACCORDING to Western business sources who
declined to be named, SSMC was originally told it could sell its Soviet-American
sewing machines in the Soviet Union and take out its profits in hard currency.
More recently, these sources said, Soviet officials have told the American
company that the venture will have to generate its own hard currency by selling
to markets outside the Soviet Union, where Singer is already the market leader.

SSMC's fears appeared to be confirmed last Tuesday when additional details of
the new joint venture rules were published in the Soviet press. One of the rules
provides that the hard currency profits of Western partners cannot exceed the
amount of currency the joint ventures generate by selling outside the Soviet
Union.

''This might restrict somewhat the number of Western firms striving to
participate in the creation of a joint enterprise on the territory of the
U.S.S.R.,'' the news agency Tass conceded. Said one Western diplomat, ''the
people who are pushing this within the Government have sold it as a vehicle to
address the decline in hard currency. To the extent that's what it is based on,
it's going to fail.''

Despite their misgivings, Westerners say some companies may be willing to take a
marginally profitable plunge simply to get a foot in the door of a new and
percolating market.

''This is the biggest country in the world, and it will be one of the biggest
growth areas around if Gorbachev succeeds; you can feel things are changing,''
said Greg Oztemel, chief Moscow representative of the Satra Corporation, a
trading company that does about $100 million a year buying Soviet metals and
selling Soviet autos in Britain.''

Westerners say Soviet industry has some obvious attractions as a place to set up
joint ventures. The country is rich in coal, oil, metals and timber - assets
especially appealing to the Japanese, who are short of natural resources. Soviet
engineers are highly regarded for their competence, especially in such fields as
sheet metal, casting and forging.

And, as one Westerner pointed out, pollution controls that have closed some
older plants and required costly cleanup technology in the United States, are
minimal in the Soviet Union. On the face of it, Soviet labor is cheap. The
average industrial worker earns 195 rubles, about $286 a month.

But Soviet officials have yet to explain how much joint ventures will be
required to contribute to such benefits as housing and medical care, which are
heavily subsidized by the Government. And there is the ''hidden cost'' in the
fact that the average Soviet worker produces less than a worker in, say, Taiwan.

Mr. Kislenko said it was ''premature'' to discuss the possibility of Western
managers firing Soviet workers, but he noted, ''in Western Europe, firing a
worker is also a very complicated process. Many people raise this question, but
in my opinion it is not one of the most important.''

What is a problem, he said, is opposition from the American Government. The
Pentagon's fear that Western computers will end up guiding Soviet missiles, the
punitive export controls imposed after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and
possible trade barriers against Soviet-American products, all loom as potential
spoilers of the joint venture movement, he said.

But Westerners say these concerns are minor compared with the basic problem of
merging two warring economic systems.

''The Soviets have talked to hundreds of Western companies about joint ventures,
so they know what people want to hear,'' said one Western official. ''But when
it comes down to knowing what is involved, I'm afraid they don't. They just
don't understand the difficulty ahead.''

EASING THE BRAKE ON SOVIET-AMERICAN TRADE

WASHINGTON - Representative Don Bonker, Democratic chairman of a House
subcommitee on international economic policy, likens American-Soviet economic
relations to a motorist with one foot on the accelerator and the other on the
brake.

From this perspective, Moscow's new joint venture proposals appear to mean less
drag on the brake, in the view of many analysts, although the Reagan
Administration remains split between Defense Department hardliners who see a
military peril in practically any commercial relations with Moscow, and the
Commerce and State Departments, which are attuned to commercial and diplomatic
interests.

The National Academy of Sciences lined up with Commerce and State last week,
releasing a report that calls for less restrictions on trade with the Soviet
Union and observing pointedly that current controls had cost the American
economy $9.3 billion in 1985, including 188,000 jobs. Figures for 1986 have are
not yet available.

A test of the Administration's response both to the Soviet reforms and to the
demands of American exporters came last Thursday when the Administration decided
to ease restrictions on the export of non-strategic oil and gas equipment and
technology, much of it used for exploration. The restrictions had been in place
since 1978.

The Commerce Department said the action was mainly the result of pressure from
domestic manufacturers, but the action was seen as a indication that the
Administration would allow more trade with the Soviet Union. Currently, United
States-Soviet trade accounts for only $5 billion of the Soviet Union's $50
billion a year in trade with the West.

In addition to export controls, the other main barrier to Soviet-American trade
is the Jackson-Vanik amendment of 1974 denying the Russians most-favored-nation
tariff treatment because of Soviet restrictions on emigration of Russian Jews to
Israel and the United States.

Some legislative leaders, including Senate minority leader Bob Dole, have raised
the possibility of a temporary suspension of Jackson-Vanik as an inducement to
Moscow to permit more emigration. Last year fewer than 1,000 Jews were permitted
to leave the Soviet Union, compared with 34,700 in 1973 and 54,000 in 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARCHIVES OF BUSINESS: THE DOW IN PERSPECTIVE
TRACING THE UPS AND DOWNS OF THE 20th CENTURY THROUGH THE EYES OF WALL STREET;
Where the Dow Was When

SECTION: Section 3; Page 16, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 441 words



1900

The Dow: +6.8% for year to 70.71
Mass production of the automobile begins at the Olds Motor Company's factory
near Lansing, Mich.
Real G.N.P. Growth: +7.4%
Average Unemployment: 5.0%

1916

The Dow: -4.2% to 95.00
Albert Einstein revolutionizes physics by publishing his General Theory of
Relativity as World War I rages across Europe.
Real Growth: +7.6%
Unemployment: 5.1%

1919

The Dow: +30.4% to 107.23
The 18th amendment, Prohibition, is passed, outlawing the manufacture, sale or
transportation of intoxicating beverages. The United States is dry until repeal
in 1933.
Real Growth: -7.3%
Unemployment: 1.4%

1929

The Dow: -17.2% to 248.48
The Crash signals the start of the Great Depression. Real growth will not match
1929's level for a decade; joblessness will soar and stay in double digits until
World War II.
Real Growth: +6.3%
Unemployment: 3.2%

1939

The Dow: -21.5% to 150.24
Social Security is expanded to provide benefits not only to working Americans,
but also to their survivors and dependents; Germany invades Poland touching off
World War II.
Real Growth: +7.9%
Unemployment: 17.2%

#1945

The Dow: +26.6% to 192.91
The United States drops two atomic bombs on Japan forcing a surrender that ends
World War II.
Real Growth: -1.9%
Unemployment: 1.9%

1951

The Dow: +14.1% to 269.23
Remington Rand installs the first commercially available electronic computer,
called Univac.
Real Growth: +10.3%
Unemployment: 3.3%

#1957

The Dow: -12.8% to 435.69
The United States is left stunned at the starting gate when the Soviet Union
starts the space race by launching Sputnik in October.
Real Growth: +1.7%
Unemployment: 4.3%

#1964

The Dow: +14.6% to 874.13
President Johnson pushes the Tonkin Gulf resolution through Congress, beginning
the big United States build-up in Vietnam.
Real Growth: +5.3%
Unemployment: 5.2%

#1969

The Dow: -15.1% to 800.36
Two United States astronauts are the first men to walk on the moon.
Real Growth: +2.4%
Unemployment: 3.5%

#1973

The Dow: -16.6% to 850.86
OPEC's embargo raises oil prices fourfold, and most of the nation watches
televised Congressional hearings on Watergate.
Real Growth: +5.2% tr,fnlUnemployment: 4.9%

#1982

The Dow: +19.6% to 1,046.54
The Bell system is dismantled, and the Government drops its antitrust suit
against I.B.M. Fed chairman Paul Volcker acts to lower interest rates, igniting
the stock market rally that is still under way.
Real Growth: -2.5%
Unemployment: 9.7%

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph traces stock market cycles, 1900-1987

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAN AM'S DISAPPEARING ACT

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. BENNETT

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3221 words


IN his private conference room on the 46th floor of the Pan Am building, C.
Edward Acker, chairman and chief executive of Pan American World Airways, reacts
calmly when asked if his strategy is to declare the troubled airline bankrupt.

''Anything's a possibility,'' responds the tall Texan, who was hired as chairman
in 1981, when Pan Am was nearly broke. ''But I don't think you'd take a valuable
property and put it into Chapter 11.''

But bankruptcy or another drastic solution to the airline's money troubles seems
a distinct possibility. Pan Am has about $212 million in cash right now, says
Mr. Acker.

That is enough to get the airline through the first quarter, and if bookings are
strong for the spring and summer travel season, Pan Am might even turn a small
profit, analysts say. That would keep the 50-year-old airline alive, but far
from healthy. In an increasingly tough business where market share, financial
strength and diversification are the keys to long-term success, Pan Am has lost
its clout.

Mr. Acker's strategy seems to be to put the airline on the auction block, piece
by piece, while holding on to Pan Am's new Northeast shuttle and the profitable
Pam Am World Services, which technical and managerial services. Both are owned
independently by the airline's parent, the Pan Am Corporation.

''I would say the Pan Am Corporation will look the same as it does today,'' he
says, in response to a question about where the company will be some years from
now. And the airline? Will it still exist? Mr. Acker hedges. ''If we don't feel
that the profits are acceptable in terms of our investment and the amount of
risk involved, we feel that substantial change is, if not necessary, certainly
desirable,'' he said.

The airline, after years of heavy losses, has a negative net worth - and that
does not even take into account some $450 million the carrier owes to its
pension plans. But the holding company has about $200 million in equity.

Some think Mr. Acker might decide to let the airline go into bankruptcy rather
than use the holding company's cash to keep it aloft. Mr. Acker says he sees the
airline ''making a total recovery in 1987.'' But he also indicates that the
airline's shareholders would come out ahead if he sells off the carrier, or its
parts, at the highest price possible.

Last year, Mr. Acker sold Pan Am's coveted Pacific routes to United Air Lines
for $750 million. Now, he says, he will strengthen the airline's remaining
divisions, so that if he sells them they will fetch higher prices. Such an
unsentimental approach pits Mr. Acker against many at Pan Am, including vice
chairman Martin R. Shugrue Jr. Meanwhile, other airlines are already taking a
look at what Pan Am has to offer. Last week, American Airlines and another,
unnamed carrier began meeting separately with Pan Am in merger talks. The moves
were taken seriously on Wall Street, where Pan Am stock rose 25 percent, to 5
1/2, following initial reports of the meetings on Thursday.

So even if the loss-plagued airline does not go belly-up - and most analysts say
it probably won't -an independent Pan Am airline, once America's flagship
overseas carrier, may be reaching the end of the runway.

The carrier's problems are legion. Among American airlines, its market share of
domestic and international passenger revenue miles is down to 6 percent, from 12
percent in 1980, says I.P. Sharp Associates, which tracks airline data.

Pan Am has been running in the red for years. Its 1986 losses are expected to
result in an estimated $346 million loss for its parent. Since 1980, in fact,
Pan Am has racked up losses of more than $1 billion.

To make up for those losses, it has been stripping itself of assets. Before Mr.
Acker's arrival, Pan Am sold its Intercontinental Hotel chain for $500 million
and its Manhattan headquarters for $249 million.

In more recent times, besides jettisoning the Pacific routes, Mr. Acker hocked
practically all of Pan Am's fleet. Banks stopped lending to Pan Am years ago.
And the airline has not even been able to sell its latest, $125 million,
junk-bond issue. The high-yield, below-investment-grade securities, secured by
old aircraft, have languished on the shelf at Merrill Lynch.

''Their last operating profit was in 1978-79,'' said Candace E. Browning, an
airline analyst for Wertheim & Company. ''Basically they've been hanging on ever
since.'' Already, Pan Am has been forced to depend on other airlines for its
survival. Last year, it joined the Sabre reservation system, owned by American
Airlines, because few travel agents used Pan Am's own, outdated, system. As part
of the deal, American receives a fee for every reservation made, gets advance
notice anytime Pan Am agrees to sell a substantial portion of its airline
operations, and gets 30 days to decide if it wants to equal any offer made by
another company - which is what spurred last week's talks. WITH virtually no
financial resources, Pan Am is ill prepared for any unforeseen calamity in the
highly volatile airline business. It was financially devastated by the 1986
bombing of a TWA jetliner and the Chernobyl nuclear plant accident in the Soviet
Union. Both events caused a plunge in travel to Europe, where Pan Am does 60
percent of its business. ''Chernobyl went up the day we resurrected our Moscow
service,'' said Mr. Shugrue.

Bad luck, in fact, accounts for a big chunk of the airline's problems. ''If Pan
Am started a funeral parlor,'' said Mr. Shugrue, repeating a joke making the
rounds at the company, ''no one would die.''

Prior to the Chernobyl and TWA tragedies, Mr. Acker had invested much of the
money from the sale of Pan Am's Pacific division into European operations. Then
in September of last year, a Pan Am jumbo jet was hijacked in Karachi.

''If they hadn't had Chernobyl and terrorism, they probably would have lost
under $100 million in 1986, instead of almost $350 million,'' said John V.
Pincavage, an analyst at PaineWebber, which at times acts as a financial adviser
to the airline.

But bad management plays its part, too, analysts say. Though many of Pan Am's
problems are the legacy of Juan Trippe, who founded the airline in 1927 and
ruled it despotically for 40 years, critics say the 57-year-old Mr. Acker has
his own bad habits. They grant that he has kept the wolf from the door by
cutting labor costs, making the airline's fleet more efficient, and raising
enough cash to keep the airline aloft despite the problems he inherited. But
some say he does not always use the cash wisely.

''When Pan Am sold the Pacific division, they got a very good price for it,''
said Ms. Browning of Wertheim. ''It allowed them to pay back debt and they had
nearly $1 billion in cash and had signed fairly reasonable union contracts. But
when trans-Atlantic traffic turned down, Pan Am did not act quickly enough and
frittered away the cash.'' Unlike Trans World Airlines, Pan Am did not shift its
big planes from European to domestic routes last year.

Mr. Acker says that Pan Am's domestic system was too small and its jets too big
to allow for such a flexible use of aircraft. That, he adds, will change as he
replaces some of Pan Am's huge 747's with smaller European Airbus planes.

Other critics, meanwhile, accuse Mr. Acker of making crucial moves without
enough planning. ''He makes decisions on the backs of envelopes without
consulting anyone,'' said a former airline executive.

Mr. Acker does not deny that. In fact, he is proud of it. ''I have a basic
understanding of the economics of how to get from A to B,'' he says. ''I don't
need a staff to figure this out. I do pads of data and when I give it to my
staff, it's in a pretty finished state.''

Still, he likes calling the shots himself - and he sometimes misses, at least
initially. The new Pan Am Shuttle service, bought from New York Air last year,
is a case in point. His critics say Mr. Acker failed to consult with Pan Am's
experts and that he rushed to buy the Boston-New York-Washington shuttle
business from New York Air. ''The staff didn't know about it until it was
basically done,'' said one analyst. ''He decided to buy the shuttle, he picked
out the slots and the things he picked out didn't work - the times of day and so
forth.''

Mr. Acker brushes aside the complaint. ''The whole thing was managed just
right,'' he said.

Perhaps so. For now, anyway, the shuttle's revenues for fourth-quarter 1986 are
in line with company projections. (See box) Mr. Acker says he could sell it
today for at least three times the $70 million it cost to buy.

Now he is working to beef up the value of the airline's domestic and
international divisions.

The strategy worked in the Pacific, Mr. Acker claims. ''We sold the Pacific
routes at the peak of their value,'' he said, adding that five years earlier,
the routes would have brought only 5 percent of the price they fetched last
year. The increased value, he says, was the result of his creating a Tokyo hub
that feeds into a number of other Asian cities.

Now Pan Am's Latin American division has become more appealing, Mr. Acker says,
because its fleet has improved. As part of the UAL-Pacific deal, Mr. Acker
transferred part of the more efficient Pacific fleet to the Latin American
routes. Mr. Pincavage of PaineWebber puts the value of the Latin American
operations at $200 million to $300 million. Mr. Acker says they're worth a lot
more.

As for the Atlantic routes, according to Mr. Pincavage, Pan Am's coveted slots
at London's Heathrow Airport alone are worth $300 million to $400 million.
HOWEVER successful Mr. Acker's sell-off strategy might eventually be, it is one
that puts him at odds with the company's traditional culture. Mr. Acker,
welcomed as a financial wizard when he joined Pan Am, lacks the sentimentality
about airlines that seems to be very much a part of Pan Am. This is the carrier,
after all, that opened the Pacific to commercial aviation in the 1930's with its
famous China Clipper ship, the airline that developed, under Mr. Trippe, a
special and protected role in American aviation.

Even today, Mr. Acker's approach is resented at Pan Am. It pits him against the
45-year-old Mr. Shugrue, who started out as a Pan Am pilot after five years as a
Navy pilot in Vietnam. ''Acker and Shugrue see the world 180 degrees apart,''
says one analyst. The vice-chairman, for example, thinks the airline can remain
independent, though it may work in tandem with other carriers. ''We've been
through wars, hurricanes, pestilences - we've been through it all, we'll
survive,'' Mr. Shugrue said.

And it is Mr. Shugrue, not Mr. Acker, who has the strong support of Pan Am's
five unions. The employees own about 6 percent of the company's stock and have a
seat on the board, a gain the unions claim they won in exchange for wage
concessions in 1981. From time to time, rumors circulate that the union will try
to get control of the company and install Mr. Shugrue as chief.

''The reason people don't like Acker,'' says Mr. Acker, ''is because Acker has
to do things that people don't like.''

Indeed, during Mr. Acker's first four years at Pan Am, the company persuaded the
airline's five unions to take pay cuts and wage freezes that amounted to more
than $300 million. Management also promised big raises starting in January,
1985. But as losses bled the company, it reneged on this promise. The Transport
Workers Union wound up with a 21 percent raise spread over three years instead
of a 14 percent raise for one year. In response, unions called a strike - a
first at Pan Am.

Labor also resents Mr. Acker's 1984 decision to save money by unilaterally
freezing payments to the union's pension fund. Pan Am is now fighting a lawsuit
brought by the Teamsters union charging that Mr. Acker had no right to freeze
those payments. If Pan Am loses, it could cost the company more than $200
million. THE son of a railroad engineer, the 6-foot 4-inch Mr. Acker grew up in
Dallas and attended Southern Methodist University, playing basketball while he
earned a joint degree in economics and psychology. After graduating, he began
working in finance, eventually at the GreatAmerica Corporation, a financial
holding company. Shortly after GreatAmerica bought Braniff Airlines in 1964, Mr.
Acker was installed as an officer of the airline. ''We bought Braniff because we
thought it was poorly managed and that we could turn it around,'' said Mr.
Acker. And under Mr. Acker, Braniff did flourish, although seven years after he
left it, the carrier became the first big airline to fail under deregulation.

Air Florida flourished too, after Mr. Acker began to lead it in 1977. But the
profits were mainly from financial wheeling and dealing, analysts say, not from
the airline's operations, which continually lost money. When Mr. Acker left Air
Florida in 1981 tojoin Pan Am,, it already was running into money troubles. In
1984, after Mr. Acker redirected the huge Pan Am to compete head-on with Air
Florida on its key New York-Miami route, Air Florida went bankrupt.

At Pan Am, meanwhile, the legacy of Juan Trippe had already left Mr. Acker with
plenty of financial problems to solve. Some analysts say the company was
permanently harmed by Mr. Trippe's decision to buy 25 Boeing 747's in 1966 at a
cost of $1 billion. When the jets were delivered in the early 1970's, worldwide
recession had set in: International travel was stagnant, and the airline wound
up with heavy losses, layoffs and a smaller route network.

Mr. Trippe operated in a world far different from today's. In an era of heavy
regulation, he was an expert at currying political favor at the highest levels
of Government. As a result, Pan Am was for years given an almost exclusive
franchise as America's international airline. There was little need for
efficiency - if profits were down, or unions pressed for more money, he merely
asked Washington for an increase in fares.

As a consequence, Pan Am developed a rather high-flying corporate culture. A
former senior executive says he was often embarrassed by the limousines and
entourages meeting him whenever his plane arrived.

Critics say that culture lingers. Pan Am pays for what some describe as an
extravagant apartment for its chief in New York's Westbury Hotel. Mr. Acker,
whose base salary is $500,000, has his permanent home in Bermuda. (''We tried
living in Connecticut, but it takes as much time to get there as it does to
Bermuda and we like the water in Bermuda better,'' he says.) And critics say he
has scheduled a daily, late-afternoon Pan Am flight to Bermuda just to
accommodate his weekend trips there. Mr. Acker claims that the government of
Bermuda asked him to put in that flight and that it has one of the carrier's
highest load factors.

Mr. Acker does not need to depend on Pan Am for the luxury in his life. He made
millions of dollars earlier in his career when he worked as a financier and when
he sold his stock in Air Florida before it went bankrupt.

And if he is successful in his strategy to make Pan Am's stock as valuable as
possible, it will make him even richer. Mr. Acker holds options to buy 900,000
shares of Pan Am stock at $2.75, plus another 35,000 shares at prices ranging
from $2.87 and $3.37. Based on last week's share prices, that would net Mr.
Acker more than $3 million before taxes.

Now what he needs is a bit of luck. Even those who are optimistic about Pan Am
say that a blast of bad luck could blow the whole strategy. Says Mr. Pincavage
of PaineWebber: ''If everything goes wrong - fuel prices rise, terrorism pops up
again in Europe - then they've got a problem.''

THE PAN AM SHUTTLE'S BEER AND BAGEL WARS

Pan Am's new shuttle service faces an uphill struggle for recognition in the
hotly contested Northeast market, according to travel agents and industry
analysts.

''People are creatures of habit,'' said Raymond P. Kane, president of Pisa
Brothers Travel Service in Manhattan. ''Pan Am will have to keep reminding
people that they run a shuttle, too.''

Indeed, Pan Am spent $5 million in print, radio and television advertising in
the fourth quarter of 1986, the start-up period for its shuttle. That was nearly
as much as is budgeted for all of 1987.

''They really haven't made any impact as far as passengers,'' said Paula Musto,
a spokesman for Eastern Air Shuttle, the pre-eminent air service in the
Northeast corridor. Ms. Musto declined - for competitive reasons, she said - to
disclose Eastern's sales figures or passenger loads, other than to claim that
the airline still carries 7 out of every 10 shuttle passengers in the market.

Pan Am said that 90,000 passengers used its shuttle in December. It is
projecting the same for January, the slowest month of the year. Business travel,
which accounts for 80 percent of all shuttle passengers, drops sharply in the
holiday season.

''We expect over 100,000 passengers in February and then more growth in March,''
said Bruce R. Nobles, president of the Pan Am Shuttle, a wholly owned subsidiary
of the Pan Am Corporation. Mr. Nobles said that the shuttle's revenues of
between $15 million and $20 million for the last three months of 1986 were in
line with projections, and he estimated sales of $125 million for 1987. He said
the shuttle hopes to gain 50 percent of the market by its first anniversary.

Passengers flying either shuttle in the past two months, however, have probably
had plenty of extra room. Pan Am, for example, filled only 25 percent of its
seats during December and January, Mr. Nobles said, down from 35 percent in
November and well below the 45 to 50 percent needed to break even. Mr. Nobles
said the shuttle nevertheless expects to turn a $10 million profit in its first
year.

Pan Am is serving bagels and cream cheese for breakfast, and a cheese and
cracker snack for afternoon flights, prompting Eastern to offer snack service
too. Recently, it switched to Beck's beer instead of Heineken. Pan Am serves
Budweiser.

''Someone in dining services thought Beck's was an upgrade,'' said Ms. Musto.
Both airlines have the same fare - $75 one-way between New York and Washington
and $65 between New York and Boston. On weekends, the fare drops to $50.

- ERIC SCHMITT

PAN AM'S TUMBLING MARKET SHARE. . .PUTS IT NEAR THE BOTTOM OF THE HEAP
Total U.S. airlines ranked by share of total revenue passenger miles flown in
1986.
Texas Air          18.8%
UAL                 16.4
American            14.1
Delta               11.7
Northwest           10.1
T.W.A.               8.2
PAN AM               6.0
US Air               4.3
Piedmont             2.8

(Source: The
Airline
Quarterly)

AT A GLANCE:
PAN AM
All dollar
amounts in
thousands,
except per
share data
Three months ended
Sept. 30                           1986           1985
Revenues                       $887,971     $1,022,193
Net income                        5,508         21,096
Earnings per share                $0.04          $0.18

Year ended
Dec. 31                            1985           1984
Revenues                     $3,484,368     $3,684,838
Net income                       51,750      (206,836)
Earnings per share                $0.45             $-
Total assets, Dec. 31, 1985                 $2,448,413
Current assets                               1,347,665
Current liabilities                          1,182,150
Long-term debt                                 657,898
Book value per share, Dec. 31, 1985              $3.36
Stock price, Jan. 15, 1986
N.Y.S.E. consolidated close                      5 1/2
Stock price, 52-week range                     9 1/2-4
Employees, Dec. 31, 1985                        24,537
Headquarters                                  New York

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of C. Edward Acker; graph of Pan Am's net income, 1980-86
(estimate); photo of Martin R. Shugrue Jr. (NYT/chester Higgins Jr.) (page 8);
graph of Pan Am's market share, 1980-86 (Source: I.P. Sharp Associates) (page 8)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CARLUCCI AND THE N.S.C.

BYLINE: By James Bamford; James Bamford, author of ''The Puzzle Palace,'' a
study of the National Security Agency, writes frequently on intelligence
matters.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4749 words


LIKE ANYTHING ELSE,'' SAYS Frank Carlucci, ''it can be abused.'' ''It'' is
covert action, and Carlucci, who took office two weeks ago as President Reagan's
fifth assistant for national security, knows what he is talking about. His
immediate predecessor, Vice Adm.

John M. Poindexter, resigned last

November, after it had been disclosed that one of his staff, Lieut. Col. Oliver
L. North, had diverted to the Nicaraguan contras money from the secret sale of
arms to Iran.

Covert operations directed by National Security Council staff members have
plunged the Reagan Administration into a deepening scandal, and brought the
relatively little-known N.S.C. under unprecedented scrutiny. In the coming
weeks, as Congress and a panel appointed by President Reagan pursue their
separate investigations, that scrutiny is sure to intensify.

In the middle will be Frank C. Carlucci 3d, a savvy 56-year-old Washington
insider with a smile that looks perilously like a frown. He is an informal man,
with a shock of gray hair and a preference for wearing cardigan sweaters when
working in his office. Partly because his resume reads like an organizational
chart of the Federal Government, Carlucci's arrival at the spacious West Wing
office so recently vacated by Poindexter has been greeted with a collective sigh
of relief. A distinguished foreign service career culminating in the
ambassador's post in Portugal; No. 2 man in the Office of Management and Budget
under President Nixon; Deputy Director of Central Intelligence under President
Carter; No. 2 man in the Pentagon during Reagan's first term - it would be hard
to imagine a more fitting candidate for the President's national security
adviser.

But Carlucci's enthusiastic reception also derives from his firm view that his
staff should stay out of the operational end of foreign policy, particularly
covert action. ''Philosophically, I feel that the N.S.C. should exploit its
comparative advantage,'' Carlucci told me just before he took office, ''that it
should not be doing things that other agencies normally can do. . . . Certainly
it shouldn't be doing covert action.''

Not that he objects to such operations per se. ''I believe there is a useful
role for covert action in the conduct of U.S. foreign policy,'' he said, quickly
adding that such operations ''need to be tied very closely to foreign policy
goals, and all the procedures set up by statute, of course, need to be
rigorously adhered to.''

It is these procedures, most of which were formulated during the mid-1970's
after Congress's highly publicized investigations of the ''rogue elephant''
C.I.A. that were ignored or circumvented under Carlucci's predecessors.
Carlucci's challenge will be to return the N.S.C. to the role originally
intended when it was conceived nearly 40 years ago: that of the President's
adviser and coordinator on national security issues, or, as Carlucci puts it, as
''a staff arm to the President in helping him make the necessary decisions in
the foreign policy-national security area.''

Carlucci began by cleaning house; even before he formally took office on Jan. 2,
he had decided to replace 24 of the council's 59 professional staff members. He
has reorganized the staff, following the recommendations of a ''transition
team'' of experts that he simplify the chain of command.

Although he won't comment specifically on the current scandal - ''I don't think
it does any good for me as the new boy on the block to finger-point'' - one of
Carlucci's first acts was to eliminate altogether North's former unit, the
political-military affairs section, in which the disastrous, and apparently
illegal, Iran/contra operation was conceived and implemented. That particular
unit, Carlucci says firmly, ''is not needed for the proper functioning of the
organization.''

In the view of many, Carlucci's housecleaning was long overdue. Since the days
of McGeorge Bundy under President John F. Kennedy and of Henry A. Kissinger
under President Richard M. Nixon, national security decision-making has become
increasingly concentrated in the White House, and the N.S.C. staff has gradually
assumed more and more power. During the Reagan Administration, the N.S.C.'s
transformation from an advisory and coordinating body into an operational one, a
kind of White House ''Mission: Impossible'' force, was completed.

Although the process had been under way for decades, it was hastened by the
particular atmosphere of the Reagan (Continued on Page 26) Administration - its
obsession with secrecy and exaggerated fear of leaks; its fascination with
covert operations and growing frustration with revolutionary Nicaragua, and,
finally, a preoccupation with terrorism and fixation on the American hostages in
Lebanon.

But the Reagan Administration inherited an intelligence apparatus that it
considered hobbled, restricted in its freedom to conduct covert operations by
laws requiring strict Congressional oversight. With the N.S.C. staff exempt from
such scrutiny, a solution must have seemed obvious to the White House.

Unlike the Pentagon and the C.I.A., which employ thousands of highly trained
experts for the purpose, the N.S.C. includes no covert operatives; its staff is
made up mainly of deskbound foreign policy analysts and communications
technicians. North and his colleagues in the political-military affairs division
devised a solution: they subcontracted, enlisting their own team of secret
agents. Most of these recruits were drawn from a shadowy group that maintained
close ties to Edwin P. Wilson, the former C.I.A. agent turned Libyan arms
supplier who is now serving 52 years in a maximum security prison.

This ''privatization'' of secret national security operations, which relegated
the C.I.A. to the role of banker and shipping agent, was to become one of the
most dangerous developments in the history of the N.S.C.

In order to understand how, and why, this came about, one has to understand how
the National Security Council works and what it does. Last month, I was granted
access to the inner workings of the N.S.C. The description that follows is based
on an unprecedented 10 hours of interviews with former and present members of
the N.S.C. staff, as well as a long talk with Carlucci himself.

S HORTLY AFTER 7 IN the morning, the National Security Council staff members
begin passing through the Secret Service checkpoint on the ground floor of the
Old Executive Office Building, next door to the White House. From there,
elevators take them to a suite of ornate, high-ceilinged offices that occupy
much of the third floor.

I visited these offices on the day that Poindexter and two of his former staff
members, North and Howard J. Teicher, former director of the political-military
affairs division, were up on Capitol Hill, testifying, or rather refusing to
testify, before Congress. Down the street at the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, agents pored over N.S.C. documents. A few blocks away, President
Reagan's newly formed Tower commission, headed by former Texas Senator John
Tower, prepared to start an investigation of the N.S.C. staff's procedures.

Apart from occasional anxious glances at the television screen to see whether
their former colleagues would plead the Fifth Amendment, the men and women of
the N.S.C. staff worked quietly, pecking at their computer terminals and reading
policy papers and cables.

Under Carlucci, as under Poindexter, about a third of the 186-member staff is
composed of secretaries and support personnel, and another third of technicians
who man the crisis-management center - a wonderland of sophisticated computers
and advanced communications equipment designed to keep the White House in direct
contact with American forces around the world. The others - 59 people - are the
professionals: mostly upper-level military and C.I.A. officers and State
Department personnel on temporary assignment, along with a few academicians from
outside think tanks and universities.

Waiting for them each morning is a stack of the previous night's cable traffic,
dispatches from the State Department, Pentagon, C.I.A. and other agencies that
provide a picture of what's going on around the world. ''The paperwork flow is
so great,'' a senior Administration official told me, ''because we are the
integrator of what a number of bureaucracies are doing. This means we have to
look at the same intelligence reports and the same memoranda they do, and that
probably takes up three or four hours a day.''

At about 7:20 A.M., the section chiefs - who head the various three- and
four-man divisions, which are set up by region (e.g., European and Soviet
affairs) or by function (e.g., international economic affairs) - and other
senior staff members walk across to the ground-floor entrance of the White House
and pass through the thick wooden door of the Situation Room. Seated around a
long oak table, the 15 or so officials discuss with Carlucci current and future
crises. If necessary, the large, polished oak panels lining the walls can be
opened to reveal a hidden world of electronic maps and video displays.

In these meetings, according to one official, ''We review the state of the world
- what is going on internationally, what's going on within the Government - with
the focus on near-term issues and problems in order to insure that all of us,
but more importantly our boss, is in tune to the significant events that are
going to occur that day, this week, this month.''

Following the half-hour meeting, Carlucci discusses the coming day with his new
deputy, Lieut. Gen. Colin Powell, and with the N.S.C.'s new executive secretary,
Grant Green. Then, at 9:30, just as his predecessor had done, Carlucci walks to
the Oval Office for his half-hour briefing of the President.

Carlucci's staff, meanwhile, continues with its main activities: attending
meetings and writing memos. Meetings, memos and position papers form the spine
of the national security bureaucracy, a hierarchy of decision-making leading up
to the President himself. Most of the meetings - called I.G.'s, for
interdepartmental groups, and S.I.G.'s, for senior interdepartmental groups -
bring together the N.S.C. professionals and their counterparts in the other
departments of the executive branch. Officials at the assistant secretary level
from the State and Defense Departments, the C.I.A. and other national security
agencies meet in these I.G.'s to discuss the broad range of national security
issues, from terrorism to counterintelligence to arms control.

In a discussion on Middle East policy, for example, Robert B. Oakley, Carlucci's
new head of Near East and South Asian affairs, would attend, along with the
assistant secretary of state for the Middle East, and corresponding officials
from the Pentagon, the C.I.A. and other interested agencies.

Once an issue has been debated in the I.G.'s, and recommendations condensed into
a memo or policy paper, it is taken up by the S.I.G.'s, attended by the
Government's No. 2 officials: the national security adviser or his deputy and
undersecretaries or deputy directors from relevant departments. Recommendations
are debated further and narrowed for presentation to the body that constitutes
the pinnacle of the bureaucratic hierarchy: the National Security Council
itself.

Here, at gatherings of the government's highest officials, with the President as
chairman, the critical decisions bearing on the security of the United States
are made. Like a powerful board of directors, the N.S.C. presides over the
United States' burgeoning intelligence and national security community,
consuming information and recommendations and producing policy decisions.

The National Security Council was created by President Harry S. Truman in 1947,
in the same legislation that established the C.I.A. By law, those attending its
meetings include the Vice President, the Secretaries of State and Defense, the
Director of Central Intelligence, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and,
when their business is on the table, the Directors of the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency and the United States Information Agency. President Reagan
has chosen to include Attorney General Edwin L. Meese 3d, Secretary of the
Treasury James A. Baker 3d, Office of Management and Budget Director James C.
Miller 3d and the chief delegate to the United Nations, Vernon A. Walters.

Under Truman, the N.S.C.'s staff amounted to little more than a few
administrative assistants. But as the national security decision-making process
became increasingly concentrated within the White House at the expense of the
State Department and other agencies, the N.S.C. staff grew steadily in size and
importance.

The office of national security adviser first became predominant during the term
of McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy's aide. But the revolution came in the Nixon years
with Henry Kissinger, who conducted secret diplomacy from the White House,
establishing a ''back channel'' to the Soviet Union and making a dramatic trip
to China. Kissinger cut out the State Department and other parts of the
government to such an extent that the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
infiltrated a spy into the N.S.C. staff to find out what it was doing. Under
Jimmy Carter, Zbigniew Brzezinski continued the Kissinger tradition.

On taking office, President Reagan was intent on shifting the initiative back to
the State Department. But by the fall of 1986, the N.S.C. staff had expanded
into an organization approaching the record size of the Kissinger years. It had
also become heavily weighted toward the military: 19 active-duty officers were
serving on the staff, double the number assigned when the Reagan Administration
took office, and a number of senior positions were filled by retired officers.
Finally, in the face of increasing paranoia over leaks, and a growing belief
within the Administration that the public should know only what it is told,
secrecy had become the hallmark. NOWHERE WAS THIS secrecy more important, and
more pervasive, than in the political-military affairs division which, under
President Reagan, became the White House's covert operations arm. This was where
Oliver North worked - and it was the division that Frank Carlucci, in one of his
first acts after his appointment, abolished. It was here, behind the
cipher-locked door to Room 392 in the Old Executive Office Building, that the
Iran arms shipments - and, presumably, cash transfers to the contras - were
planned.

According to Administration sources, the principal mission of this section was
to deal with matters that ''do not fit cleanly into regional areas: foreign
military sales and the whole issue of security assistance.''

The genesis of the Iran arms sales may have been a memorandum written by a
former high-ranking C.I.A. official, Theodore G. Shackley, whose book ''The
Third Option'' arguing that the United States should greatly expand its use of
covert operations, particularly in third-world countries, strikingly anticipated
the Administration's Reagan Doctrine. Shackley was approached in November 1984
by an Iranian arms dealer, Manucher Ghorbanifar, who, during a subsequent series
of meetings, reportedly mentioned the hostages and claimed he could get them
released in exchange for cash. Shackley passed on this information to the Reagan
Administration, and about eight months later Ghorbanifar, through Israeli
connections, was introduced to Michael A. Ledeen, a close friend of Shackley's
and a consultant to Reagan's N.S.C.

Shortly after Ledeen's meeting with Ghorbanifar, Howard Teicher, the 32-year-old
Middle East specialist who was then chief of the political-military affairs
section, was co-author of a memorandum for Robert C. McFarlane, then the
national security adviser, which proposed selling arms to ''moderate'' elements
in Iran. Later that summer, the United States made its first delivery of arms to
Israel to replace arms the Israelis, with President Reagan's tacit approval
(according to McFarlane), had sent to Teheran.

The political-military affairs section was traditionally manned by three or four
military officers who represented the various branches of the Armed Forces. As
the Marine officer in the division, North had bureaucratic jurisdiction over the
guerrilla war between the contras and the Nicaraguan Government. He was also the
logical choice to handle the problem of terrorism, including the hostages
(Continued on Page 76) held in Lebanon. In retrospect, the decision to place the
portfolios for both aid to the contras and antiterrorism on North's desk was one
of the biggest blunders the Reagan Administration ever made. Senator William S.
Cohen of the Intelligence Committee compared North to an engineer conducting two
trains at once:

''One of those railroads is running arms into Iran. . . . The second train . . .
is also raising money for the contras. At some point in time those two lines
that were running parallel merged. The question is, did he think of the merger
himself, take off two hats and put on one?''

A S THE KEY N.S.C. official on both the contras and the hostages, North met
frequently in I.G.'s with his counterparts from the State Department, Pentagon
and the intelligence community. Any discussion culminating in a proposal to
launch a covert action should have gone through a set procedure.

After the recommendations of the relevant I.G.'s, the matter should have been
taken up by an elite S.I.G. known as the planning coordinating group. Once this
group approved an operation, it should have been discussed at a full meeting of
the National Security Council, and the final decision made by the President.

The President would then be required by law to issue a secret ''finding'' that
the operation is necessary; the N.S.C.'s intelligence policy section would then
transmit the finding to the Director of Central Intelligence, who then would
have to convey it to the Congressional intelligence committees. These
requirements, adopted after the Congressional intelligence investigations of the
mid-1970's, was designed to eliminate the practice of maintaining Presidential
''deniability,'' which has traditionally been used to shield the Chief Executive
from responsibility for secret operations.

In the case of the Iran arms shipments, these established procedures were
scrapped because of the Administration's obsession with secrecy. Normally, for
example, the costs and benefits of shipping arms to Iran would have been debated
by the experts in the Middle East I.G. However, even Dennis B. Ross, then the
N.S.C.'s Middle East chief, was kept in the dark, according to one knowledgeable
Administration source. A few doors down the hall from Ross's office, his
colleagues in political-military affairs were busy secretly sending arms to one
of the main countries Ross was supposed to keep the President informed about.
Had more voices been brought in, the Iran operation may have been altered
significantly or even scrapped. Just as the Iran proposal bypassed the I.G.
procedure, so too was it kept from the planning coordinating group. Indeed, so
secret was the operation that at least one member of the full National Security
Council - Joint Chiefs Chairman Adm. William J. Crowe Jr. - was never informed,
even though it was his weapons that were being shipped.

Finally, although a finding was eventually signed by President Reagan in January
1986, reportedly at the insistence of the C.I.A., the N.S.C.'s
intelligence-programs section was not apprised of it. Neither, of course, were
the Senate and House Intelligence Committees. Needless to say, if Congress had
been notified beforehand and had offered any encouragement, much of the heat the
White House is currently taking might have been deflected.

''These kinds of missions,'' one Administration official explained to me, ''get
closer and closer to the Oval Office and the White House because . . . over time
they get restricted to smaller and smaller groups.'' That is because, he said,
of the ''demonstratable inability to keep a secret.''

But there is another reason for keeping the number of informed people small and
confined within the tall black fence surrounding the White House: a deep
distrust of the legislative branch. ''Since the Vietnam War,'' one N.S.C. member
complained to me, ''we have had this growing involvement by the legislative
branch in the details of foreign policy that - you can make a constitutional
argument - are properly left to the President. When you do that, then you drive
him in the direction of using other techniques to achieve objectives.'' High
among these ''other techniques,'' is covert action.

Normally, the task would have fallen to the C.I.A. During the last two decades,
however, the intelligence community has undergone a major revolution. The
technical collection agencies - in particular, the National Se-curity Agency,
which engages in electronic eavesdropping, and the National Reconnaissance
Office, which controls spy satellites - now provide the Government with some 85
percent of its raw intelligence. No longer an important source of espionage, the
C.I.A., to remain a powerful agency, had to concentrate on providing the secret
warriors for fighting the brush wars of the Reagan Doctrine - a role its
activist director, William J. Casey, eagerly welcomed.

But Casey soon discovered that the legal rules for engaging in covert action
were complicated and time-consuming, requiring hours of preparation for and
testimony before Congress. To circumvent these problems, and the troublesome
Boland Amendment, which cut off military assistance to the contras, the contra
financing program and the arms shipments to Iran, were placed beyond
Congressional oversight in the N.S.C.

In order to carry out his covert operations, North turned to a network of arms
merchants and gunrunners that had been closely associated with Edwin P. Wilson,
the former C.I.A. man who in 1983 was convicted of illegally selling 21 tons of
plastic explosive to the Qaddafi regime in Libya. North's top deputy in this
shadow network, was reportedly Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord, a former senior
Pentagon official who spent much of his career dealing with arms sales and who
had known Wilson for almost 15 years. Today, Secord sits at the vortex of the
Iran arms-sale scandal, having been named as a key figure behind the diversion
of profits from the Iran sale to the contras. So far, he has refused to say a
word to the F.B.I. and the Senate Intelligence Committee.

This shift in power, first from the C.I.A. to the N.S.C., and then to General
Secord's shadow warriors - in essence, the privatization of covert action - left
to the C.I.A. simply the role of banker and shipping agent.

The agency worked with the Pentagon to supply the weapons, arranged to have them
shipped through an airline with longtime links to the C.I.A. and facilitated the
transaction by making available its Swiss bank accounts. Indeed, the accounts
could be a key to clearing up the important question of how much the C.I.A. knew
about the program. A former C.I.A. official familiar with its Swiss operations
said the agency had more than a thousand accounts there, many of them used to
pay off informants in foreign countries. Those investigating the Iran-contra
affair, he said, are ''asking the wrong level of people. . . . The first thing I
would do is bring back the [C.I.A.] finance guy from Switzerland. . . . Then
they could find out who authorized'' the payments. Each cable approving the
transfer of funds, he explained, ''has authorizing and releasing authority by
true name and [telephone] extension. It's all there.''

Thus, although William Casey might not have known about the diversion of funds
to the contras at the time it happened, as he has claimed, he certainly could
have discovered the truth quickly after the scheme became public. Either way,
according to some, he should have immediately stepped down. ''If I'd have found
out that there was an intelligence operation run without my knowing it,'' said
former intelligence director Adm. Stansfield Turner, ''I'd have quit the next
day.'' ''MY FOCUS IS THE NEXT two years,'' says Frank Carlucci,'' not the last
six months.'' But with the investigations surrounding the N.S.C., the last six
months will be hard to avoid.

Carlucci has moved quickly to make the N.S.C. his own, appointing a new team,
many of whom have worked for him before. His new deputy, General Powell, one of
his aides at the Pentagon, will serve, he says, as his ''complete alter ego,''
eliminating the fragmented responsibilty that obtained with Admiral Poindexter's
three deputies.

Among the other new faces, in addition to Robert Oakley in Near East and South
Asian affairs, are Jose S. Sorzano, a former deputy to Jeane J. Kirkpatrick at
the United Nations, who will take over the Latin American division; Fritz W.
Ermarth, formerly at the C.I.A., who will head European and Soviet affairs; and
Herman J. Cohen, a Foreign Service officer, who takes over African affairs.
Asian affairs will remain under James A. Kelly.

Peter W. Rodman, formerly Poindexter's deputy for foreign policy, will become
Carlucci's counselor with responsibility for what Carlucci calls ''strategic
planning.'' William A. Cockell, a retired rear admiral who was Poindexter's
deputy for defense issues, will take over a new section concentrating on
defense, an area that, Carlucci says, has become ''important enough in these
last two years to merit the separate attention that only an independent unit can
give.'' Col. Robert E. Linhard, a five-year veteran of the (Continued on Page
92) N.S.C.'s defense and arms-control division, will now run a separate unit
devoted to arms control alone.

To increase his own control, Carlucci has reduced the number of divisions within
the staff. ''I'm trying to reduce the span of control to l4 or l5 units - there
were probably l6 or 17 - because that's the maximum that anyone can manage.''

Perhaps most important, he will divide North's ''two trains.'' Responsibilty for
the contras will now fall under the Latin American division; antiterrorism has
been placed under an expanded intelligence unit, as yet unnamed. ''Terrorism and
intelligence are very closely related,'' says Carlucci. ''The best way to stop a
terrorist act is to know it's going to happen.'' The head of the new section,
replacing Kenneth E. deGraffenreid, will be Barry Kelly, who, according to one
source, had previously served in the C.I.A.'s clandestine service during
Carlucci's tour as deputy director. If there is an area in the Carlucci N.S.C.
that could serve as a breeding ground for future ''rogue elephants,'' it is the
new, more powerful intelligence unit, which will combine many of the
responsibilities of the old political-military section, including narcotics
control, and all of the highly secret intelligence operations, which frequently
concern covert action. Aware of the hazard this poses, Carlucci has decided to
hire a full-time general counsel, with extensive experience in national security
law, to insure that proper procedures are followed.

But in a larger sense, the problems that led to the current crisis go beyond
Oliver North, the political-military section and even the N.S.C. itself. New
personnel and new organization alone cannot guarantee that abuses will not
recur. Carlucci himself seemed implicitly to acknowledge this in his comments on
his work reorganizing the C.I.A. - also after scandals about covert action -
when he was deputy to Stansfield Turner during the late 1970's.

''Perhaps the most unfortunate phrase to ever have emerged from the Church
Commmittee was 'rogue elephant,' '' he told me. ''If you look back at the
history of all the charges and wrongdoings, with only a few exceptions, they
were ordered by the political level of the U.S. Government, and the C.I.A. was
carrying out instructions.''

It is too early to say whether the N.S.C. also was ''carrying out
instructions.'' But it is clear that the actions it took were a product of more
than the adventurous spirit of North and his associates, or of structural
failings in the N.S.C. They were made possible, and even encouraged, by the
Administration's total obsession with secrecy, its passion for covert operations
and its enormous distrust, not only of Congress, but even of its own senior
officials. Overcoming that attitude may be impossible -even for Frank Carlucci.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of N.S.C duty officers' station in the White House (John
Nordell/J.B. Pictures); photo of Lieut. Col. Oliver North (Kenneth
Jarecke/Contact) (page 18-19); photo of Howard Teicher (UPI/Bettmann Newsphotos)
(page 19)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEMORY IS HER WORK

BYLINE: By Barbara Thompson: Barbara Thompson's short stories appear in
Shenandoah magazine.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words


BREAKING BREAD By Joyce Reiser Kornblatt. 206 pp. New York: A William Abrahams
Book/ E. P. Dutton. $16.95.

IN her 1985 novel, ''White Water,'' Joyce Reiser Kornblatt told the story of the
Fry family at a moment of transition, the marriage of a daughter and
granddaughter, through five first-person accounts, each an independent short
story. The form itself was a metaphor for the author's theme: however separate
and alienated these people may be from one another, family connectedness and
domestic love provide the only ''buffer against the world's travails,'' the only
''raft in white water.''

Her new fiction, ''Breaking Bread,'' is a chain of stories. Here are five lives
told by a single narrator for whom their revelations were crucial stages in her
own development, from the immigrant grandfather whose devotion surrounded her
earliest years to Lila Frank, who journeyed with her to the country of
childbirth, ''no map adequate, each of us immigrants, as it were, without
possessions, new arrivals like the infants we took to our transformed,
milk-throbbing breasts.'' It was Lila Frank whose struggles toward autonomy
informed her own, as Lila's death by cancer raised once and forever the fact of
the narrator's own mortality.

The theme of the book, and its title, are from W. H. Auden: ''Through art, we
are able to break bread with the dead, and without communion with the dead a
fully human life is impossible.'' The lives in ''Breaking Bread'' are the
narrator's sacred dead. Whether they are also the author's is a speculation she
invites and evades. The narrative voice is strong, clear, womanly - this is
someone you believe, whether she is relating the simple and circumstantial
events of daily life or the convoluted histories of flight and resettlement she
can only have heard second- or thirdhand or, as she tells us, ''dreamed.'' One
of the many pleasures is the richness of detail, the layering of meanings - and
the suggestive uncertainty whether this is augmented memoir or elegant fiction
sculpted on the slight armature of memory. Sometimes Ms. Kornblatt flags her
inventions as dreams, research, probability, but the ambiguity persists. The
Russia of Alexander II and the Cleveland of the mid-1960's are as much creative
inventions as the Continued on next page inner lives of people she barely, or
never, knew.

The narrator's consciousness begins in the 1940's in a small Boston flat dense
with the history of her grandparents' European past. She remembers little of
those years with certainty - her grandfather died when she was ''barely tall
enough to see out a window to the street below'' - but the household survives in
her adult consciousness as a hive of memories, conflicting and incomplete,
demanding to be ordered and understood. In these stories she can ''remember'' or
devise solutions to all the riddles. She will dream the details of her
grandfather's migration from the place of his birth near St. Petersburg through
a magical apprenticeship - as in a fairy tale, the plucky small boy outwits the
giant and is rewarded with his freedom, setting out on his great quest, as in
the tales, with the added impedimenta of a fearful younger sister.

In the second story, the young girl who grew into the narrator comes to know a
woman called Fela Skolnik Teplitsky, who was renamed Flo by some functionary
during the course of her dangerous transit from the Nazis. ''Memory was her
work,'' we are told, as we are told of her husband, an obsessively overworked
salesman of storm doors and windows, that ''when he's working, he forgets.''
Remembering and forgetting are the themes of immigrant life. Flo remembers, and
tells, as a way of taming the past. The child learns that everything can be
borne when it is ordered; that in shaping the story she transforms it.

Daniel Rock was a contemporary, the privileged, graceful boy who was her
protector and idol from her early school days. He was the first American she
knew who seemed afflicted with ''History,'' inculpated in affairs beyond his own
life. Until then she had believed that ''History . . . belonged to Europeans -
all that terror and turbulence. . . . In America . . . I believed that one of
the guarantees of citizenship . . . was a life apart from History.'' But Daniel
Rock's grandfather was summoned by the House Un-American Activities Committee,
and his father was said to be connected to the mob. History, the wider political
reality, is here and now. The day after their high school graduation, Daniel
Rock committed suicide.

Susan Perry, an antiwar activist with a husband fighting in Vietnam, shared the
narrator's tiny office, turning out brochures on drugs and rat control for
Cleveland's first black mayor. Susan does not understand her own life, but she
displays it, revealing without intent the ''ghostly dark'' in which young
American women lay awake in those years wondering about their lives, not yet
able to marshal themselves to wonder aloud or to any purpose. Only after Susan
is dead of an overdose, after the narrator herself has borne a child, does she
begin to see that her own life in history is a matter of inventing, forming,
imposing her will on shapeless matter. ''Perhaps all women die to their old
lives when a new one grows inside them,'' the narrator says. It is her companion
of childbirth, the woman in the same labor room, whose Lamaze breathing she
heard through the white curtain, who is her guide, first to transformation, then
to the imagining of her own death, not as an untimely mischance but as the
mundane fatality that awaits everyone.

If there is any criticism to be made of this dense and beautiful book, it is
that the form - stories of the dead - drains ''Breaking Bread'' of forward
motion, narrative drive. For while we always know that life ends, and rarely
well, we manage most of the time to hold that knowledge in suspension. Even in
the early stories, wonderful tapestries of the past within the present, one
longs to have more of the child's mind pressing forward into the future. And in
the later stories of her contemporaries, for all their powerful presence, one
wants something more than death as the answer to the reader's most basic
question: what happens next?

THE JOE MCCARTHY SHOW

My parents might talk politics from time to time. We watched the McCarthy
hearings on television - my father maintaining a running critique of [the
Senator], my mother more distressed that Roy Cohn, ''a nice Jewish boy like
that,'' should be McCarthy's devoted counsel - but how did that spectacle
impinge on our lives? How different was it, really, this public purge, from the
other shows we watched together, my mother bringing out a steady supply of
snacks - a bowl of fruit, cookies on a plate, a bag of potato chips she warned
us ''makes a mess if you're not careful.''

If my family existed in such unworldly innocence, I imagined for the Rocks an
even more protected world, affluence invoking a pristine order in their daily
lives.

From ''Breaking Bread.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Joyce Reiser Kornblatt (Lili Bezner)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TAKING IT LYING DOWN

BYLINE: By Thomas Winship: Thomas Winship, the president of the Center for
Foreign Journalists in Reston, Va., is the former editor of The Boston Globe.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 930 words


THE WAR AGAINST THE PRESS Politics, Pressure and Intimidation in the 80's. By
Peter Stoler. 226 pp. New York: Dodd, Mead & Company. $17.95.

HERE is a piece of news. Stop the presses. After volume upon volume of press
bashing by scholars, politicians and journalists themselves, ''The War Against
the Press'' is a spirited defense of the press in the 1980's.

Peter Stoler, a senior correspondent for Time, is not a classroom theorist. He
writes from solid experience as a reporter and a former aide to Elliot
Richardson when he was the Attorney General of Massachusetts. The author has
stout complaints about the press, but he delivers them more in sorrow and
exhortation than distrust. He does, indeed, march readers through the news
media's most traumatic years of challenges wrought by Vietnam, Watergate, the
growing vise-grip of television, terrorism, radical conservatism, voodoo
rightist pulpitry, libel mania, pollsterism and a Hollywood-trained President's
capture (until recently) of the press. And in each instance, he raises the flag
for the beleaguered press. The book went to the printer before the
arms-for-hostages scandal. But, for Mr. Stoler's purposes, it would have been
just another example of the challenges that have thwarted the news media.

The central message of this deadly serious work is that the press has nothing to
fear but fear itself. It has taken widespread criticism lying down, the author
laments. ''To a far greater extent than many of them are willing to admit,'' he
writes, ''editors and publishers and news executives are avoiding the kinds of
investigative stories that make headlines while making people angry. Some are
turning their editorial pages into mixtures of bland mush, avoiding strong
positions for fear of offending someone - readers, advertisers, rivals.'' The
press, he says, ''should fight back, first, by realizing that its attackers are,
in most cases, no more powerful than a timid press makes them out to be.''

For newspapers, Mr. Stoler's polemics are sweet music, rarely heard in recent
years. He displays a hefty bias against television for trivializing the issues
and public discussion of them. ''Television has, in a way, become the tabloid
press of the eighties,'' he writes, ''the medium that attracts and keeps its
following by selecting the sensational, that finds major conflict in honest
disagreement, that sees doom where there is only disaster - and not always very
great disaster at that.'' He blames television, too, for fostering the public's
vision of journalists as mean, overly aggressive and prying because television
journalists, at least, have changed from witnesses to participants.

No, Mr. Stoler argues, the press is not the big bad villain of society or the
all-powerful shaper of events, as its critics often insist. According to Mr.
Stoler, ''The press did not . . . make it impossible for the United States to
win the war'' in Vietnam. ''It was the public, not the press, that made the
Administration withdraw from a war it could not - at least at a price Americans
were willing to pay - win.''

Ditto for Watergate. That a diligent press brought President Nixon to his knees
is the popular mythology. Not so, says Mr. Stoler, who asserts that ''the
American press as a group slept through Watergate.'' To buttress his point, he
cites the research of Ben Bagdikian, a press historian who has calculated that
only 15 of the 433 Washington reporters available for assignment during the
Watergate years were ''actually assigned to stay with the story.'' Mr. Stoler
concedes that The Washington Post carried the day and deserves ''most of the
credit'' for exposing the affair.

''The War Against the Press'' does pay obligatory attention to the scruffy
manners and attitudes of some journalists, but it plows no new ground. Mr.
Stoler chides the press for often being too adversarial, disrespectful of
people's privacy, preachy and carried away by what a few journalists see as
their God-given right to ply their trade. So, what else is new? THE strength,
significance and power of this book lie in the passion of Mr. Stoler's call to
his brethren for greater self-scrutiny and for ever so much more vigor and
bravery in performing their daily work.

''The news media,'' he concludes, ''should fight back by being more aggressive,
not less, in the defense of their rights. . . . The media must never lose sight
of the fact that in a democracy public business is, by definition, the public's
business. . . . The media should be more aggressive, not less, in their
questioning of public officials, remembering only that a pointed question can
still be asked in a manner that shows respect for the office an individual
holds, if not for the individual himself. . . . Most important, the media must
realize that, whether the American people like them or not, the nation needs
them. We Americans cannot, in fact, survive without a free press. . . . The
American press . . . cannot discharge [its] duty by hunkering down and waiting
until its attackers go away. It is time for the press to fight back.'' Amen.

Mr. Stoler's message comes during another momentous crisis in Government. Once
again a President and the freest press in the world are engaged in a public
face-off. The timing of the book's appearance is propitious, for now everyone
will be judging anew how the press grapples with that sensitive journalistic
conflict - respect for the full truth and respect for a high office. ''The War
Against the Press'' sets the stage admirably for the President and the press at
Irangate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE OTHER PARIS ACCORDS

BYLINE: By George McT. Kahin: George McT. Kahin, a professor of international
studies at Cornell University, is the author of ''Intervention: How America
Became Involved in Vietnam.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 962 words


THE PALACE FILE By Nguyen Tien Hung and Jerrold L. Schecter. Illustrated. 542
pp. New York: Harper & Row. $22.95.

WRITTEN largely from a Saigon perspective, this book provides significant new
data on United States relations with South Vietnam from 1968 to 1975 and fresh
insights into the character of Nguyen Van Thieu, the general whom the United
States supported as South Vietnam's President from 1967 to 1975. An
extraordinary collection of previously undisclosed exchanges of letters between
Mr. Thieu and Presidents Nixon and Ford combine with the authors' interviews
with many key Americans and Vietnamese to make this an important study.

Nguyen Tien Hung, an American-trained economist who currently teaches at Howard
University, was with the International Monetary Fund before being appointed
special assistant to President Thieu in 1973. He later became Minister of
Economic Development and Planning and one of Mr. Thieu's closest advisers.
Jerrold Schecter, author of an earlier book on Vietnam, ''The New Face of
Buddha,'' covered Vietnam for Time magazine in the early 1960's; from 1971 to
1975 he was the magazine's White House correspondent and then its diplomatic
editor.

The authors of ''The Palace File'' establish that a reluctant Mr. Thieu was
induced to support the 1973 Paris accords, which for Americans ended the Vietnam
War, because of Mr. Nixon's repeated private promises that the United States
would punish North Vietnam with heavy bombing if it significantly violated the
agreements, and by his clear threat that American economic support might end if
the South Vietnamese President refused to sign them. ''For President Thieu and
his government, the real agreement in Paris was not what had been signed . . .
with North Vietnam and the Provisional Revolutionary Government, but the private
promises Nixon had made in his letters to Thieu ever since December 1971.'' Mr.
Nixon's commitment, and Mr. Ford's somewhat less explicit private assurances,
led Mr. Thieu to believe that despite the mounting antiwar mood in Congress the
White House could still be counted on to back up the Paris accords with United
States air and naval power.

The authors persuasively present a charge of duplicity, directed primarily
against former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, but also implicating Mr.
Nixon and ultimately Mr. Ford, who, with his eye on the 1976 election, shied
away from greater assistance to Mr. Thieu for fear of ''making it his war
instead of Nixon's.'' Mr. Thieu was especially bitter toward Mr. Kissinger: ''If
Kissinger had the power to bomb the Independence Palace to force me to sign the
[Paris] agreement, he would not hesitate to do so.''

Mr. Thieu had assumed Mr. Nixon was in his debt for his help in getting Mr.
Nixon elected in 1968, for he had refused President Johnson's request to
participate in negotiations with Hanoi, thereby undercutting Vice President
Humphrey's efforts to present himself as a man of peace who could end the war
through negotiation. The authors show that Mr. Thieu made a major mistake in his
reliance on Mr. Nixon and Mr. Ford and in his fear that he would antagonize them
if he released their letters, incorporating their firm commitments, to Congress
and the American public, even after Hanoi had begun its 1975 offensive. But they
do not provide the facts to warrant their assertion: ''The weight of the
evidence shows that had the United States kept the promises made in writing to
Thieu to convince him to sign the Paris Accords, the Republic of South Vietnam
could have survived.''

Even if after 1973 Congress had restored earlier levels of economic support and
military supplies and agreed to punitive United States bombing of the north, it
is doubtful Mr. Thieu's regime could have been shored up much longer. There was
too much wrong with it. Sotto voce, the authors acknowledge its weakness - an
ineffective, repressive government artificially sustained from the outset by
massive American economic support and military supplies, honeycombed with
corruption and led by a man whose popular support was so weak that he perceived
his ''mandate from heaven'' as issuing predominantly from Washington. Having
earlier helped overthrow Ngo Dinh Diem in an American-supported coup, Mr. Thieu
constantly worried that his fate might be similar if Washington became
dissatisfied with his own stewardship. THE book treats the Washington-Hanoi
dimension of the Paris accords and the negotiations leading up to them less
comprehensively than it treats the Washington-Saigon level, and there are some
serious inaccuracies in this treatment. For example, the authors write, ''Hanoi
scorned aid offered by the U.S. to 'heal the wounds of war.' '' Indeed, in order
to consummate the negotiations, Mr. Nixon felt obliged to offer Hanoi $3.25
billion in reconstruction aid, and that offer - though never implemented - was
certainly not scorned.

As for the 1973 accords, the authors conclude: ''Although Kissinger made it
appear that the North Vietnamese had made concessions, in fact it was the U.S.
which totally backed down on all major issues.'' As one of his aides referred to
the Christmas bombings: ''We bombed them into accepting our concessions.'' And
what did the Nixon Administration actually accomplish? ''During the nearly four
years Kissinger negotiated for an agreement, the bloodshed mounted: 15,000
Americans were killed and 100,000 Americans wounded while hundreds of thousands
of Vietnamese lives were lost.'' In the end, Mr. Kissinger ''arrived at an
agreement that was essentially the same as the one the Communists presented to
him in May 1969.'' But he had secured his ''decent interval,'' and Mr. Nixon
found it easier to sustain his claim of achieving ''peace with honor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Korea with President
Richard Nixon (AP)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND OPINION;
'BABY BOOMER' STIGMA STILL STICKS AT 40

BYLINE: By ROBERT M. CALICA; Robert M. Calica lives in Hewlett.

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 27, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1392 words


LAST year was a long, strenuous year. Like 3.5 million other Americans, I turned
40 -several times.

Turning 40 this year became something of a national event, the marking of an
epoch chronicled by a legion of articles in newspapers and magazines. Apparently
a distinct phylum worthy of close and repeated study, millions of ''baby
boomers'' were, once again, catapulted to a quasi-celebrity status, as if
reaching 40 was a feat no one expected us to be able to accomplish. The
generation that went to Woodstock had finally grown up.

Traditionally, the 40th has always been a birthday one tried to forget. It's
been viewed as a milestone poised on a thin precipice between youth and old age,
with only one way to fall. Birthday cards printed specifically for 40-year-olds,
disguised as humor, actually bear a close resemblance to that genre of get-well
cards designed for someone who won't be recovering.

The truth is, I was thrilled to become 40. The pressure would be off. I would no
longer be a high-achieving, driven young man, but a seasoned attorney. I planned
ways to work my new age into every conversation, sure that clients and
colleagues would be impressed and more inclined to take me seriously.

Forty would also, I was sure, mark the end to those days when I lived in fear
that an astute colleague would sense the masquerade and expose me for what I
felt I was: an adolescent in adult's clothing.

A college freshman at 16, I had always been the baby among my peers. And since I
had to exaggerate my age in order to drink with my friends, I had always
operated with the embarrassing expectation of being ''carded'' by an authority
figure.

Obtaining my degree and being admitted to the bar did little to relieve this
anxiety. I was still young, I looked younger, and my first position out of law
school was a legal clerkship in an appellate court. It was an appointment that
others may have considered prestigious, but which I thought of as only an
extension of college. Each day I rode the Long Island Rail Road, changing at
Jamaica to reach the courts in Brooklyn. The ''real'' attorneys worked in
Manhattan, I thought. I was just playing. I watched them on the train with their
Mark Cross briefcases and three-piece suits and longed for the days when I'd
ride all the way into Penn Station and experience the full power of my
profession.

Two years later and finally established in a Manhattan firm, I began to develop
my first sense of adulthood. I still had the problem, however, of looking even
younger than I actually was. When I tried my first case in the State Supreme
Court, I was terrified that the jurors might question the value of my argument
because of a perception of inexperience, so I manufactured an aura of venerable
judgment by arranging for a gray-haired associate to join me in the courtroom.

During the jury selection process, the judge asked the prospective jurors if
they had ever known any of the litigants or attorneys in any social or business
context. Looking through the jurors' cards, I saw, ''Morton Roman, retired
schoolteacher, Valley Stream.'' It rang a bell, but I couldn't place it.

Slowly, Morton himself raised his hand. In front of the judge, jurors, and my
five properly grayed adversaries, he cried out, ''Isn't that little Robbie
Calica from Camp Roosevelt?'' And indeed it was. My trousers shrank up to my
knees, and my shirt and tie were replaced by a familiar wrinkled T-shirt
complete with camp insignia.

In spite of my humiliation, the case was resolved favorably for my client, and I
was constrained to admit that I had acquired the skills, sophistication and
maturity to argue a complex issue and win. Eventually, I even felt mature enough
to make the move out of Manhattan to a Long Island law firm without my ego
suffering, though I was still occasionally plagued by the imposter complex I had
developed at age 16.

It was this complex that I expected to leave behind at the stroke of 40.

The week of my birthday I was scheduled to face former Attorney General Ramsey
Clark in the Federal Court of Appeals. Always thorough in my pretrial
preparation, I found myself overpreparing for this particular case, in the way I
used to overprepare for my high school science exams. I dreaded the hours the
night before the court appearance. Would I manage to sleep, or would my dreams
be plagued with some adult equivalent of finding myself on the schoolbus, still
in my underwear?

It wasn't Ramsey Clark's professional abilities that resurrected the Little
Robbie nightmare. I had fought and won far more complicated cases against
opponents equally formidable. Nor was it the relative visibility of the case.
Although high visibility is hardly usual for a commercial litigator, an
occasional artist's sketch or court proceeding televised on the nightly news had
accustomed me to a certain degree of media attention.

The problem was that Ramsey Clark made me feel like a kid, in much the same way
a mother's reprimand has a cowering effect on her child, long after that child
has grown old. I was instantly transported back to 1965.

My three-piece gray suit and Mark Cross briefcase evaporated. In their place
were a leather motorcycle jacket, turtleneck sweater, ripped jeans and an
Army-surplus knapsack. My hair grew several inches, and sunglasses materialized
on the bridge of my nose. I was a 19-year-old college senior and prime draft
bait to the Johnson Administration.

Ramsey Clark was part of an era when government seemed as distant and merciless
to college students as a sovereign prince on a palanquin paraded before the
peasants. When L.B.J. said, ''We're gonna nail their coonskins to the wall,'' he
was talking about the enemy, but I was thinking of my own skin pinned to a tree
in Vietnam. Even if you weren't an activist - which I wasn't - it seemed like
the fearsome gap between the adult generation and its offspring was beyond
repair.

The gap did close, of course, once we alienated adolescents had to assume
mundane responsibilities, but there in the courtroom, the chasm miraculously
reappeared. Ramsey Clark was the mature elder - the one with power, prestige,
and influence -and I was Little Robbie Calica.

The day after the trial, and a few days after my birthday, I was jogging along
the beach, trying to put the experience in order. It had not been Ramsey Clark
the attorney who so awed me, but his status relative to mine during the most
impressionable period of life for those of us in the forefront of the baby boom.
He was one of the elders to a generation defined by its youth.

Two miles into the four-mile run, I began reveling in the sense that by turning
40, I had, at last, bridged the gap between us. I too had reached an age and
level of competence in my field that qualified me as an elder. At that point, I
quickened my pace and began an energetic assault on the dune that stands halfway
along my jogging route. My tendon twinged, but my spirit soared. I was on the
upside of the Great Divide.

Back in the lobby of my condominium, I picked up the news magazine stuffed into
my mailbox. The cover story, illustrated by a cake crammed with candles, was
entitled, ''Baby Boomers Turn 40.'' Riding up the elevator in my sweat-drenched
jogging togs - a faded gymsuit from my alma mater - I skimmed through the
article. It was exciting to have my birthday announced on the cover of a
national publication, even if I had to share the glory with 3.5 million other
40-year-olds.

It wasn't until several weeks later, when a favorite men's magazine devoted an
entire issue to ''The American Man, 1946 to 1986,'' and my local paper began a
weeklong series on baby boomers, that the awful truth struck. Instead of
receiving respect as the result of age, those of us born in that time slot would
always, if just out of sheer numerical significance, be analyzed, categorized
and scrutinized.

The irony was that at age 40, we were still being referred to as ''baby''
boomers. I could envision the magazine and newspaper headlines 25, 35, even 65
years from now. ''Baby Boomers Enter Retirement.'' ''Baby Boomers Confined to
Nursing Homes.'' ''The Last Baby Boomer Is Dead.''

For all my attempts to attain the stature of venerated eldership, the honor was
slipping from my grasp. Down to my last breath, I'd still be a baby boomer
trying to grow up.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ VISITS AFRICA WITH GIFTS AND EXHORTATIONS

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 862 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


GIVING foreign aid is the process of doing good for somebody else in pursuit of
your own self-interest. That seemed to be the governing proposition of Secretary
of State George P. Shultz's 14,889-mile trip, concluded last week, to six
countries in Africa. As he arrived at one airport or presidential palace after
another, often to the accompaniment of drums and dancers brought out in his
honor, Mr. Shultz stressed again and again Washington's desire for
''partnership'' in helping the Africans help themselves.

Pure altruism was rarely mentioned as he and his aides offered a list of motives
for providing American money to countries whose people suffer from deep poverty,
illness and malnutrition. The Reagan Administration is interested in minimizing
Soviet influence, maximizing markets for American exports, securing the sources
of raw materials for American industry and seeing developing countries remake
their economies in the American image.

Economic and strategic concerns drew the European colonial powers into Africa in
an earlier era. Now, 20 to 30 years after the colonies gained independence, the
industrialized nations must play a much different game to maintain their
interests. They try to woo Africans with aid, and encourage steps to make
Western investment safe and profitable.

That was Mr. Shultz's mission as he traveled to Senegal, Cameroon, Kenya,
Nigeria, the Ivory Coast and Liberia. It was the first time that a Secretary of
State in the Reagan Administration had visited sub-Saharan Africa. And as he
flew toward the continent, he reflected on what priority he would give the
strategic, economic, ideological and altruistic factors in determining American
aid to African countries.

''There's nothing wrong with wanting to help people and see them do better,''
Mr. Shultz said. ''So in saying that I believe the things we're seeing are in
the American interest and that's our primary motive, I don't want to be knocking
generosity. But I think it's important to be more hardheaded than that. So I
think that it is in our interest to see countries become market-oriented in
their economic system. It relates itself to openness and democracy, a form of
government that we think is not only good for the people involved but basically
good for us.

''There is a sense in which everything has a strategic dimension to it,'' he
continued. ''We want to see a way of thinking that's congenial to us flourish.
Beyond that, of course, a very heavy proportion of our exports go to the
developing countries, something like 40 percent. So, as these economies develop,
it is good for our economy. So, I think across all these dimensions of our
interests, a stable and prosperous and democratic developing picture in these
countries is positive for us.''

Private enterprise was Mr. Shultz's favorite theme. In the sultry cities of
faded French colonial charm such as Dakar, Senegal, and in the modern cities of
high-rises, such as Abidjan, in the Ivory Coast, Mr. Shultz argued that
free-market systems could rescue African economies. And he hailed the growing
trend in that direction. For example, Senegal is ending price controls and
subsidies of food and some imported goods. The subsidies have helped the urban
classes -the leaders' main constituents - at the expense of the poorer farmers,
who have been discouraged from producing by the artificially low prices.

Mr. Shultz urged belt-tightening, especially in Liberia, whose main exports -
iron ore and rubber -face declining world market prices. Liberia uses the United
States dollar as currency but also mints its own coins, which are considered so
worthless that even supermarkets print their own scrip to give out as change.

Mr. Shultz stepped into controversy when he praised Liberia for making progress
on human rights. Some Liberians took issue with his assertion that the country
had a free press and no political prisoners.

To a certain extent, Washington's desire to foster free enterprise is a mirror
image of the Soviet Union's aid objectives.

Where Moscow provides substantial economic and military support, it often
presses the receiving country to adopt a socialist system. A notable example is
Vietnam. After the war, the Russians induced the country to move toward a
Government-run economy in the south, where the marketplace had flourished. The
results have been devastating for what was formerly South Vietnam.

With the United States, linking aid to national interest means that the
countries that get the most money are not always the poorest ones but are
regarded as strategically most important. Thus, Israel and Egypt are the major
recipients of American aid. And sub-Saharan Africa, where the average life
expectancy is the mid- to late 40's, has been receiving less and less from the
United States in recent years - $664 million in economic assistance this year,
out of a foreign aid budget of $13.4 billion. An additional $52 million is being
provided in military grants.

Expressed another way, sub-Saharan Africa can expect slightly more than one-half
of 1 percent of the entire budget of the United States Government next year, or
about $2.50 per capita.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Secretary of State George P. Shultz with President Felix
Houphouet-Boigny of the Ivory Coast (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 18, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1271 words


Fiction
1       2  25  RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.) Without
              using nuclear weapons, the West staves off the Russians in
              World War III.
2       1  19  IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood horrors
              haunt six men and a woman who grew up in a small Maine
              town.
3       3  11  WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.) Iran during
              the month following the Shah's departure.
4       5  12  A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $18.95.)
              Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal double
              murder.
5       6  16  THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton Mifflin,
              $19.95.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's
              low country and New York City.
6       4  14  HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster,
              $18.95.) A top New York model encounters three of Los
              Angeles's most dynamic men.
7       7  12  FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
              Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over Vietnam.
8           1  BANDITS, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $17.95.) A gang
              of three plots to heist millions being sent to the contras
              in Nicaragua.
9       9  14  FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,
              $16.95.) In the fifth volume of the ''Foundation'' series,
              the hero continues his search for the lost planet Earth.
10      8  27  WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $17.95.) A rich
              orphan comes of age while she travels the world.
11          1  NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon & Schuster,
              $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans from being
              discovered by the Germans.
12 *   11  15  THE GOLDEN CUP, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $17.95.)
              Continuing the saga of a turn-of-the-century New York
              family begun in ''Evergreen.''
13         15  THE BEET QUEEN, by Louise Erdrich. (Holt, $16.95.) Forty
              years in a small North Dakota town near an Indian
              reservation.
14         24  A PERFECT SPY, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $18.95.) The tale
              of Magnus Pym, a British secret agent, and his father,
              Rick, a flamboyant con man.
15     12  20  THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random House,
              $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and greed mark a
              young woman's life in 18th-century England and France.


Nonfiction
$
1       1  37  FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday, $14.95.)
              Anecdotes and ruminations from the television star and
              father of five.
2       2  15  HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.) From Hoboken
              to superstardom: an unauthorized biography of Frank
              Sinatra.
3       3   9  WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Putnam, $16.95.) A
              new collection of columns by the journalist and television
              personality.
4       6  35  JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot. (St.
              Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire veterinarian
              about his favorite animal.
5       8  45  YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $9.95.)
              A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme;
              the first Dr. Seuss book for adults.
6       4  17  McMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi. (Warner, $16.95.)
              The autobiography of the quarterback for the Chicago Bears.
7      10   7  THE CHRISTMAS DAY KITTEN, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
              $9.95.) An illustrated true story.
8       7  16  ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with Dave
              Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on football by
              the television commentator and former coach of the Oakland
              Raiders.
9           1  THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE,
              by Jane Wagner. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb observations
              on life today; script of the show starring Lily Tomlin.
10     15  15  THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $19.95.) The
              crisis in the American automobile industry and Japan's role
              in it.
11 *   12   8  PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon Eisenhower.
              (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A biography of the wife of the
              37th President written by her daughter.
12     11   3  A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein. (Macmillan,
              $16.95.) A chronicle of one season spent with the coach Bob
              Knight and his Indiana University basketball team.
13          9  DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with Greg
              Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina recalls her
              checkered career.
14     13   3  ACROSS CHINA, by Peter Jenkins. (Morrow, $18.95.) The
              author of ''A Walk Across America'' takes his wanderlust to
              Asia.
15          1  MARILYN, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, $24.95.) A biography of
              Marilyn Monroe, with many photographs by her friend George
              Barris.


AND BEAR IN MIND
  (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

REAGAN'S AMERICA: Innocents at Home, by Garry Wills. (Doubleday, $19.95.)
Thoughtful and rich in detail, Mr. Wills's study of the President's origins sees
him as the product and the embodiment of an American mythology very many of us
share.

ANYWHERE BUT HERE, by Mona Simpson. (Knopf, $18.95.) Ann and Adele, a
sturdy-minded girl and her lying, dreamy mother, are locked in combat for over
20 years in this challenging first novel of love, hate, fear, need and loyalty.

THE ICE: A Journey to Antarctica, by Stephen J. Pyne. (University of Iowa,
$37.50.) An audacious exploration in time and space of the planet's underside,
including its historical, geological and economic dimensions, by a professor of
history at Arizona State.

THE COUNTERLIFE, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) Mr. Roth's
latest novel about Nathan Zuckerman (who resembles the author in some things,
sometimes) turns the form inside out in a brilliant whir of self-contradictory
narrative concerning Jewishness, life, truth and other inescapable issues.

THE COLLECTED POEMS OF WILLIAM CARLOS WILLIAMS: Volume One, 1909-1939, edited by
A. Walton Litz and Christopher MacGowan. (New Directions, $35.) The products of
the first half of the great American modernist's career, in chronological order.

TONGUES OF FLAME, by Tim Parks. (Grove, $14.95.) A clever, original novel about
adolescence in a vicarage where people speak in tongues and think the hero's
brother is inhabited by Satan.

RAPE, edited by Sylvana Tomaselli and Roy Porter. (Basil Blackwell, $24.95.) In
this provocative collection of essays, scholars from disciplines as various as
psychoanalysis, classics, sociobiology and popular culture turn their lights on
the subject.

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1     1  12 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.
            (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at moderate cost.
2        31 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton, $15.95.) A
            regimen based on the Vanderbilt University Weight
            Management Program.
3     2  49 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) A
            television chef's inexpensive dishes.
4        15 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM, by Susan
            Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with
            overbearing men.
5        71 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.
            (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard reference work in a
            1983 revision.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.
  *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 19, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

To Geneva, With Firmness

BYLINE: By Kenneth L. Adelman: Kenneth L. Adelman is director of the United
States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


As we begin the seventh round of the nuclear and space talks in Geneva this
month, we look with satisfaction on one conspicuous fact: this past year, the
United States succeeded, for the first time in history, in drawing the Soviet
Union into serious negotiations on proposals for deep reductions in offensive
nuclear arms. The agenda in arms control is now, irreversibly, deep offensive
weapons reductions. To remain effective in our negotiations with the Soviets, it
is essential that we hold staunchly to the principles that have guided our
efforts over the past six years.

To have gotten this far was not a sure thing. Ten years ago, American proposals
for deep reductions were dismissed out of hand by the Soviets. Contrary to the
American hope and expectation, the strategic arms limitation agreements in the
1970's never succeeded in achieving cuts in offensive weapons; on the contrary,
the SALT process permitted vast increases in the arsenals of both sides - a
fourfold expansion in the number of Soviet strategic ballistic-missile warheads
since the signing of SALT I in 1972.

Will the Soviets, in the end, be willing to put their signature to a genuinely
equitable and effectively verifiable arms agreement that deeply reduces
offensive weapons? Will they comply with it fully? The jury is still out - and,
based on the available evidence, justifiably uncertain. But as the talks resume,
we should be clear about the principles that have moved us toward our goal
during the last half-decade.

Be patient. One of the most successful treaties we ever concluded with the
Soviet Union was the Austrian State Treaty, signed in 1955. Negotiations on that
agreement - which guaranteed Austria's freedom and removed Soviet occupation
forces -took 10 years. To succeed with the Soviets, we have to be able to
outwait them, to restrain our national craving for instant results, to take the
long view. We have to be able to get up from the table without an agreement if
we are to get a sound agreement. In arms control, no agreement is always
preferable to a bad one.

Bargain from strength. Twenty-five years' experience has discredited the view
that unilateral concessions by the United States will inspire matching
concessions from the Soviet side. It never happens that way. In 1977, after
President Jimmy Carter canceled production of the B-1 bomber, Senator John Tower
asked the academician Aleksandr Shchukin in Moscow what the Soviets might be
prepared to do in return. Mr. Shchukin's answer was as illustrative as it was
memorable: ''Sir, I am neither a pacifist nor a philanthropist.''

The Soviets see unilateral American concessions - such as those legislated from
time to time by Congress - as a sign not of good will but of lack of will.
Congressional ''arms control amendments'' merely encourage the Soviets to stall,
hoping that Congress will deliver free of charge what the Soviets would
otherwise have to pay for with their own concessions at the bargaining table.
This pulls the rug right out from under our positions. It makes things harder,
not easier, on our negotiators.

Focus on substance, not ''negotiability.'' A few years ago, when President
Reagan first proposed a ''zero option'' for intermediate-range missiles and deep
reductions in offensive nuclear arms, the conventional wisdom held that the
Soviets would never play ball. Such proposals were dismissed by some as
inherently not ''negotiable.'' This past year and at Reykjavik the conventional
wisdom was proved wrong. President Reagan has transformed the definition of what
is ''negotiable'' by insisting on what he thought was right.

Keep arms control in perspective. Neither negotiations nor arms control
agreements in themselves will guarantee improved relations with the Russians.
Nor will they save us from our larger responsibilities for safeguarding freedom
and peace. We saw this in the late 1970's, when a vigorous American push for
arms control and the signing of a major arms agreement (SALT II) did nothing to
prevent Soviet or Soviet-sponsored aggression from engulfing South Vietnam,
Angola, Ethiopia, Cambodia and Afghanistan year after year in rapid succession.

What counts in arms control and relations between the United States and the
Soviet Union is the broad picture. The broad trend since 1981 has been toward
more stable relations because of renewed American strength and self-confidence;
our central task is to preserve this trend, with or without new agreements.

Insist on compliance. Ironically, the Reagan Administration has been under more
fire from some quarters for calling attention to serious Soviet violations of
arms control agreements than the Soviets have for actually violating them. A few
years ago, the conventional wisdom held that the Soviet Union would not cheat on
arms control agreements. Now we know that not to be true. But unless we can find
some way to get the Soviets to kick their habit of noncompliance, the future of
arms control is in jeopardy. Those who soft-pedal Soviet violations do not help
the arms control process but weaken it.

Hope lies with the defensive option. Logically, there is no contradiction
between progress in arms control and movement to greater reliance on strategic
defenses. Strategic defenses, if anything, would make reductions to far lower
levels of offensive weaponry possible by providing crucial physical insurance
against Soviet cheating.

The key issue for arms control has never been defenses or offenses in and of
themselves but political intentions. We ask: Are the Soviets willing to trade a
genuine reduction in the threat to us in exchange for a genuine reduction in the
threat to them? That has always been the nub of the problem. Thus far, strategic
arms control agreements have failed to achieve this goal: they have coincided
with huge increases in offensive weapons on both sides and a disproportionate
increase in American vulnerability.

If the Soviets are unwilling to permit us to reduce our vulnerability through a
mutual deployment of strategic defenses, there is little basis to believe they
would permit a genuine reduction in our vulnerability through an arms control
arrangement. Logically and strategically, there is no better way to achieve
greater security for both sides than strategic defense deployments in
combination with deep reductions in offensive arms. Defenses are not part of the
problem in arms control - they are part of the solution.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ENDANGERED SPECIES: BIRD'S NEST SOUP

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 3; Living Desk

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Jan. 20


Nothing that a Chinese host can put on a table has more cachet than a bowl of
viscous bird's nest soup. For centuries, it has been a delicacy throughout the
Chinese world, a dish famed for its ability to keep people young and healthy.

But bird nests are becoming increasingly scarce. While the shortage is not yet a
crisis, Chinese connoisseurs are obliged to pay more each time they bargain for
nests - up to $1,000 a pound for top-quality nests.

''The price will definitely continue to increase,'' Stephen Tam, owner of the
Cheong Loong Swallow's Nest store, said as he sorted the dozens of varieties of
nests in his small shop here. ''Most places the birds live have been developed
into farmland or towns, and that reduces the number of birds that are left.''

In addition to the encroachment of humans on the birds' habitat, pollution is
eroding some of the cliffs where they live and build their nests. Meanwhile,
rising prices are leading the ''harvesters'' of nests to become more aggressive,
sometimes snatching nests as soon as they are built, or grabbing nests that have
eggs in them.

The nests used to make the soup belong to a kind of swallow, which builds on
rocky cliffs or inside caves in several countries in Southeast Asia. Most of the
nests today come from Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Vietnam or China.

The nests are not, as most Americans assume, a thatch of twigs and grass such as
a robin might manufacture. Rather, they are made of the birds' saliva, which
hardens into cementlike threads. When collected, the nests contain liberal
amounts of feathers and even droppings, but are carefully washed and cleaned
until they are white strips that look more like sponges than nests.

While swallow saliva soup may not send tingles across a Western palate, the
Chinese rave over it. It is usually cooked with crab meat, shrimp or ham to make
a gelatinous soup that is renowned principally for its healthfulness .

''The taste of the nests is nothing great,'' said Fok Kam Tong, head chef at the
Man Wah Restaurant in Hong Kong's Mandarin Hotel, where a bowl of bird's nest
soup ranges in price from $14 to $38. That is why crab and other embellishments
are added, he said.

But bird's nest soup has virtues other than mere taste. ''It's very good for
you, very nourishing,'' Mr. Fok added. ''It's good for women, for their skin, so
they don't look old. But it's not just for women; it's good for everybody.''

Mr. Fok disputes the pessimists who say that bird's nest soup could eventually
disappear. While scarcity of the proper nests is a concern, he and many Chinese
food experts say, the resulting price increase would make it even more prized as
a delicacy.

''If it becomes more expensive, it will be even more popular in Hong Kong,''
said Sunny Lan Kun Ying, a salesman at Yuen Wo Bird's Nest store near Hong
Kong's business district.

Not according to the owners of the small Hong Kong shops that sell bird nests,
who say most people are being priced out of the market. The cost of bird's nests
has more than doubled in the last few years, they say, making it more difficult
to afford a nest for a daughter with a skin blemish or a son who is about to
take an important examination.

Some kinds of nests are becoming particularly rare, such as the red ones called
''blood nests.'' These have a reddish tinge that chefs say derives from blood in
the birds' saliva. It is even better for one's health than regular bird nests,
they say.

So, while regular bird nests sell for about $500 for a catty - a Chinese unit of
weight amounting to just over a pound - the best-quality blood nests sell for
nearly $1,300 a catty at the most exclusive shops.

Meanwhile, the swallows are seeking more and more remote locations to build
their nests in places where humans will not intrude. They must avoid not only
youths who scamper along the cliffs or climb bamboo scaffolding to cave
ceilings, but also monkeys that have been trained to climb the rock walls and
retrieve nests.

''The swallows are very careful,'' said Mr. Fok, the chef. ''They will never
build a nest where it is easy to get to.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Stephen Tam weighing nests (NYT/Hubert Van Es)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 21, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'KEEP YOU FOREVER,' ON MISSING IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 530 words


''WE CAN KEEP YOU FOREVER'' is maddening; it bumps and slithers in and around
factual material, falls back on flashy technique and weakens its own best case.
At the same time, it makes a provocative, even compelling, argument that
American prisoners are still held in Vietnam and Laos. The 90-minute
documentary, on Channel 9 at 9 o'clock tonight, examines an emotional issue.

Officially, American prisoners in Southeast Asia were repatriated in 1973. ''All
of our courageous POW's -set free and back home,'' President Nixon said
jubilantly at a White House celebration. The documentary says the Nixon
Administration was not candid and privately had reservations. Since then, of
course, many reports of sightings of prisoners have surfaced.

The documentary presents a selection of the reports; many are difficult to
dismiss. In an interview, Lars Arvling, a Swedish engineer, says he saw ''two
tall white men'' in a prison near a Swedish-built paper mill in Vietnam.

Mr. Arvling says guards then arrested him and the Swedish Ambassador had to
intervene on his behalf. Another Swede says he was arrested near the same paper
mill. His captors, he says, thought he was an escaped American.

''We Can Keep You Forever'' also presents Southeast Asian refugees who say they
saw Americans: 20 or 30 are supposedly held in a house with a corrugated roof;
two Americans were seen at a naval base; two were seen on a road. Is it possible
some of the men were deserters, who chose to stay in Vietnam? The question isn't
raised. It is clear, however, that the refugees are specific in their
identifications.

The documentary - a production of the BBC, Lionheart Television and Landreth
Associates - raises disturbing problems. It also addresses an obvious question:
Why would the Vietnamese bother to keep American prisoners? ''We Can Keep You
Forever'' offers possible answers, one of them based on history.

When the French withdrew from Indochina in 1954, the documentary says, the
Vietminh supposedly freed all its prisoners. In fact, the documentary asserts,
the Vietminh did not; some 1,000 prisoners were quietly released over the next
16 years while France paid ransom.

''We Can Keep You Forever'' suggests that Americans were held after 1973 in the
hope they might be ransomed. It also says, citing what are supposed to be
reports from the Defense Intelligence Agency, that American pilots were held
because they were sources of information about advanced military technology.
Much of this sounds persuasive. What is less persuasive, however, is the
documentary's insistent attempts at dramatization. A Laotian, supposedly an
anti-Communist guerrilla leader, is filmed in the dark near the Laotian-Thailand
border. He says he saw two American prisoners only two weeks before. Eventually,
he disappears, to no avail, in the darkness.

The documentary also uses film of the Vietnam War, some of it striking but not
all of it germane. Meanwhile, there is an obtrusive musical signature and some
film editing straight out of rock video. Nonethless, ''We Can Keep You
Forever,'' which will be followed by a live 30-minute discussion, makes its
points. Viewers will be disturbed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Platoon' Meets Rambo

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 288 words


A father inclined to worry about his son finds reason to be grateful for the
ultra-realistic Vietnam war movie ''Platoon.''

''My 13-year-old is a bit small for his age and has always felt he needed to
defend himself against the world. So he was enthralled by the Rambo movies. He
loved watching Sylvester Stallone defeat police forces and enemy armies all by
himself.

''He also responded to Clint Eastwood in 'Heartbreak Ridge.' Eastwood plays a
marine who takes a bunch of undisciplined kids and leads them to glory in
Grenada. That was remarkably clean glory. As with Stallone, Eastwood's fire
always brings down the target, while he dodges enemy fusillades. The Cubans he
kills die so antiseptically that he is glad to steal cigars from their bodies.
The movie presents the Grenada victory as reinstating the honor of the Marines
after Vietnam. If I were a marine, I would find that offensive. But it only
reinforced my son's plan to join up.

''So he was looking forward to 'Platoon.' But it worked a dramatic cure. Now, he
says, he's having second thoughts about a military career. He saw young men, not
much older than he, enduring sleepless nights and days in a place of dust, filth
and blood, a place where venomous snakes strike as suddenly as the shadowy North
Vietnamese. Here it was not so easy to dodge enemy bullets, and death wasn't
clean. Soldiers killed each other as well as their foes, and found no military
victories, only small triumphs over fear, fatigue and madness. The young actors
struggling with those issues make Stallone and Eastwood look like clowns.

'' 'Platoon' is rated R for good reasons: profuse gore and strong language. For
the sake of the Rambo generation, it ought to be PG-13.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CHARLES E. GOODELL, FORMER SENATOR, IS DEAD AT 60

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 661 words


Charles E. Goodell, who shifted from establishment Republican to critic of the
Vietnam War and the Nixon White House as he moved from the House of
Representatives to representing New York in the United States Senate, died
yesterday in Washington. He was 60 years old and had been a Washington lawyer
and lobbyist for the last 16 years.

Mr. Goodell, appointed to the Senate in 1968 by Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller to
succeed Robert F. Kennedy after his assassination, served only two years in the
Senate, but he emerged as a leading critic of the Vietnam War and as a result, a
leading target of President Richard M. Nixon and Vice President Spiro T. Agnew.

Mr. Goodell joined liberal Democrats in sponsoring legislation to cut off money
for the war effort, legislation that was essentially adopted five years later
after he had left Congress.

Before his appointment to the Senate he was a moderate to conservative member of
the House of Representatives from Jamestown in western New York State.

'Radical Liberal'

Two years later and now a liberal Republican with Mr. Agnew publicly castigating
him as a ''radical liberal'' and even Mr. Rockefeller publicly questioning his
''undercutting'' of the President, Mr. Goodell sought a full six-year term.

He failed largely because he split the moderate to liberal vote with
Representative Richard L. Ottinger of Westchester, a Democrat, permitting James
L. Buckley, running on the Conservative Party line, to win the Senate seat with
less than a majority.

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, referred to the heat and
emotions of that campaign and that time when he said yesterday that Mr. Goodell
was ''called to public service at a time of travail and tragedy.'' He added that
''I have not known a finer member of Congress.''

''He fell on his sword politically,'' said a former aide, Michael C. Smith, a
former city official and now a vice president of E. F. Hutton & Company.

Another former aide, George Mitrovich, who had also worked for Mr. Kennedy,
noted that there had been considerable criticism of the Goodell appointment
originally because he was not a statewide figure but that Mr. Goodell proved to
be ''a worthy successor of Senator Kennedy.''

One of 'Young Turks'

As a member of the House for 10 years, he had been part of a group of Republican
''young Turks'' who helped oust Charles A. Halleck as House Republican leader
and elect Gerald R. Ford as the new Republican leader.

Later, Mr. Ford appointed him chairman of the Presidential Clemency Board, which
reviewed in 1976 clemency applications by 21,729 Vietnam War resisters,
including many who had fled to Canada and other countries to avoid conscription.

After leaving the Senate and practicing law in New York Ciy for two years, Mr.
Goodell became chairman of the board of DGA International, a public relations
and lobbying concern.

His second wife, Patricia Goldman, was another continuing link to government.
She is vice chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board.

Mr. Goodell was born and raised in Jamestown and was a varsity baseball and
fooball player at both Jamestown High School and Williams College, where he was
also elected to Phi Beta Kappa, the national honorary society. He graduated from
Yale Law School and received a master's degree at the Yale Graduate School of
Government.

He first went to Washington in 1954 as a Congressional liaison assistant at the
Justice Department and then returned to Jamestown to practice law and eventually
become the Chautauqua County Republican chairman in 1958. A year later,
following the death of the veteran Representative Daniel A. Reed, he won a House
seat in a special election.

Survivors, in addition to his wife, include five sons, William R., Timothy B.,
Roger S., Michael C. and Jeffrey H. A memorial service is scheduled for tomorrow
in Washington. The funeral and burial will be in Jamestown, but plans were
incomplete yesterday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Charles E. Goodell (UPI, 1974)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 22, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
Don't Call Him Rambo

BYLINE: By Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section D; Page 31, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: COSTA MESA, Calif.


It turns out that he played five games this season with a fractured jaw. Two
other games on a cracked big right toe. And when Mark Bavaro speaks, he sounds
as if Sylvester Stallone were his voice coach. But as imposing as the Giants'
all-pro tight end is at 6 feet 4 inches and 245 pounds, he doesn't like to be
called Rambo. ''Why not?'' somebody asked. ''Because Rambo exploited the Vietnam
veteran,'' he said, ''I have a lot of respect for the people in my family who
were in Vietnam.'' ''Who in your family?'' ''My uncle, Donald Bavaro, and my
cousin, Bobby Rossi.'' ''Were they Army officers?'' ''No,'' he said. ''Just
regular old soldiers.''

''Don't your teammates call you Rambo?''

''Yeah, but they stopped calling me that.'' ''Why?'' somebody said. ''I asked
them not to.''

''If you had been born 10 years earlier, how do you think you would have felt
about the Vietnam war?

''I don't know. You have to live in that time period and be that age.'' Wearing
jeans and a gray Chelsea (Mass.) High School T-shirt with red lettering and a
red devil, Mark Bavaro twirled his metallic sunglasses at a table in the Westin
South Coast Plaza hotel, where the Giants are lodged. After the Super Bowl XXI
team photo had been taken Tuesday, he bolted the interviews, saying, ''I don't
do these things.'' But yesterday, with his shyness even more obvious than his
muscles, this 23-year-old Notre Dame graduate with a degree in history sat still
for what amounted to an interrogation. ''Why the Chelsea T-shirt?'' ''My
father's the coach.'' ''How come you're here?'' ''It's on the itinerary.''

''But,'' he was reminded, ''you didn't do interviews yesterday.''

''Yesterday was picture day, I went down for my pictures. Today's interviews
day.''

''What did you do after the pictures?''

''Got a haircut, then I went to the beach with Billy Ard. We walked around, got
some lunch.'' ''Did the coach tell you to be here?'' ''No, nobody told me,'' he
said.

One way or another, however, Mark Bavaro got the ''message'' from Bill Parcells
to appear at yesterday's interview session. But it wasn't as if Bavaro prefers
not to talk that much to reporters. He doesn't talk that much to his coaches and
teammates.

''The most Mark's ever talked to me,'' Phil Simms said earlier, ''was when I got
hit pretty hard in the 49er game and he asked me, 'Are you all right?' I figured
this guy must really like me.''

Bavaro knows what it is to get hit. And get hurt. Against the New Orleans Saints
in the season's fourth game, he suffered what the Giants announced as a
''chipped tooth,'' but what he described yesterday as a fractured jaw. About the
time his jaw healed, he suffered what the Giants announced as a ''sprained
toe,'' but what he described as a cracked toe. Although he didn't start one game
because of the toe, he didn't miss a game. ''H ow badly hurt was your jaw?'' he
was asked.

''It was wired inside, it was broken,'' he said, fingering the right side of his
jaw. ''But no one knew about it.'' ''Could you eat solid food?'' ''I had to put
everything in a blender.'' ''Did it hurt your talking?'' ''Not that anyone
noticed.''

''Did they deaden the pain in your toe?''

''It didn't hurt that much, I had a lot of padding on it. I just couldn't run
that good.''

''Were you surprised at being named all-pro?''

''No, I had the stats. That's how they pick all-pro.''

During the season he caught 66 passes for 1,001 yards and 4 touchdowns, only the
seventh tight end in National Football League history to surpass 1,000 yards.
During the two playoff games, he caught 4 more passes for 83 yards and 1
touchdown. But he is best remembered for having carried several 49ers for 23
yards in a Monday night game. And now he was asked what he thought when he saw
that play on film. ''It looked pretty funny.'' ''But not to the 49ers?'' ''I
guess not,'' he said. ''What do you like about football?'' ''It's a job.'' ''A
job you like?''

''For two or three years it's a living. When it's over, I'll find something else
to do.'' ''What do you want to do then?'' ''That's personal,'' he said. ''What
history did you major in? ''American, European, Ancient. You have to do it all
to get your degree.''

''Is there one person in history who has appealed to you more than others?''
''Jesus Christ.'' The other Giants live in houses or apartments in New Jersey,
but Bavaro lives in a hotel not far from Giants Stadium.

''I'm not settled down enough yet to live in an apartment,'' he said. But in May
he is scheduled to marry Susan Downes of West Hartford, Conn., whom he met when
they were at Notre Dame.

''When I made all-American at Notre Dame, it was as much a surprise to me as
anybody else. They didn't push me.''

''Why didn't you get much publicity there?

''As a tight end, we were a running team and I blocked for 'em.'' ''What about
Gerry Faust?'' ''I don't talk about Gerry Faust.'' ''Any reason why?'' ''He's
just a nice man.'' ''How nice?'' ''Extremely nice.''

''Have you ever talked for this long?'' ''Not to the media,'' he said. But soon
the media's time was up.

''You only have to do this once more,'' he was told. ''Tomorrow, and that's
it.''

Mark Bavaro shook his head. ''This is it,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mark Bavaro (NYT/Barton Silverman)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 24, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Arms and Votes, East and West

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 417 words


In two very different and important nations, there's a discernible shift away
from the long-held belief that voters are allergic to any increase in nonnuclear
defense spending. Yesterday Japan agreed to end a decade-old policy of keeping
military expenditures below 1 percent of gross national product. And in Britain,
the opposition Labor Party finds it expedient to proclaim the need to strengthen
NATO's conventional forces. It's a welcome shift, though the new Laborite gift
horse comes with a mouthful of old teeth.

Japan's distaste for military spending goes back to defeat in World War II, to a
resulting Constitution that restricts spending to ''self-defense forces'' and to
a resurgence of pacifism during the Vietnam War. In 1976, Japan decided ''for
the time being'' to limit military spending to 1 percent of annual output in
goods and services. The distress in Washington that followed was ameliorated by
creative juggling of accounts that enabled Japan to claim compliance while
contributing a bit more.

As a practical matter, the United States has reason to cheer the end of the 1
percent dogma, especially since the 1987 allocation of $23 billion -1.004
percent of projected G.N.P. - includes cost-sharing provisions for American
forces stationed in Japan. Washington rightly pushed for more from Tokyo in the
common defense, but not so hard as to trigger a resurgence of Japanese
militarism.

The Laborite shift in Britain was announced in a new policy statement
reaffirming the party's opposition to a $15 billion program for replacing
ballistic-missile Polaris submarines with more up-to-date Trident submarines.
But for the first time, the party declares it will spend money saved on
strengthening NATO's conventional forces. And the statement ''Modern Britain in
a Modern World'' barely refers to the party's earlier demand for closing down
American nuclear-weapon installations in Britain.

What's happened is not so much a change of heart as of wind. Heading into a vote
this year or in early 1988, Labor's leader, Neil Kinnock, is finding a
responsive audience when he attacks the Conservative Government's economic
failures. But polls show that Britons are dubious about Mr. Kinnock's proposal
to pull down the nuclear umbrella, in the form of American bases and the British
deterrent. Defense is Prime Minister Thatcher's potential trump, as Mr. Kinnock
finally seems to grasp. He appears to be scrambling toward the center on
security issues; he has a long way to go.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOSTAGES' FAMILIES SAY THEIR EFFORT IS A CASUALTY OF THE IRAN ARMS AFFAIR

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1215 words


When the Iran arms deal became public, Peggy Say's mail began to turn ugly.

''You should be shot or sent to Beirut,'' one American wrote to Mrs. Say, the
sister of Terry A. Anderson, chief Middle East correspondent for The Associated
Press, who was kidnapped at gunpoint in Beirut on March 16, 1985.

Until yesterday, Mr. Anderson was one of five American hostages in Lebanon. Now
he is one of eight; with the kidnapping of three more Americans, a new set of
families is being initiated into the agony of waiting, hoping and receiving hate
mail.

Mrs. Say and other hostage relatives see the effort to win the hostages' release
as a casualty of the Iran affair.

A Loss of Sympathy

For a time last year, the hostage families had the ear of the White House and
the heart of the nation.

But the White House arms sales, intended to win the hostages' release, have
instead paralyzed the United States Government's efforts to free them. The
relatives say the State Department has indicated that their only hope is Terry
Waite, an envoy of the Archbishop of Canterbury who is in Lebanon, bargaining
for the hostages' freedom.

And the nation's heart, it seems, has turned cold. Mrs. Say believes that many
Americans now blame her and other hostage families for having dragged the
President into the Iran affair.

''It seems as if some of the public blames the hostages for what was done on
their behalf,'' Mrs. Say said. ''My mail indicated that I was personally
responsible for Ronald Reagan getting himself into a jam.''

Some letter-writers also accuse the hostages' families of wasting the United
States' time in a forlorn effort to secure the freedom of their loved ones.
Others suggest that it was the hostages' fault for being in Lebanon, thereby
risking capture.

'A Major Setback'

''This Iran thing was a major setback for the hostages,'' says Thomas Cicippio,
whose brother Joseph, the chief accountant for the American University of
Beirut, was seized on Sept. 12, 1986.

He and others now know that the White House was making efforts more dramatic
than any they had dared imagine to win freedom for their imprisoned relatives.
Indeed, the apparent success of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, the former National
Security Council aide, in securing release of three hostages has made the
failure to win freedom for the others all the more heartbreaking.

''I have to wonder,'' Mrs. Say observes in gratitude for the effort if not the
methods, ''if it hadn't been for Ollie and his merry band, where would we all
be?''

But now, she and the others place their faith in Mr. Waite. ''As long as someone
is over there trying, we are very grateful,'' said Mr. Cicippio. ''I believe
Terry Waite when he says he has no ties to any Government.''

Steeled for a Long Haul

Jean Sutherland, whose husband, Thomas, the dean of agriculture at the American
University of Beirut, has been a captive since June 9, 1985, said she remains
hopeful about her husband's release but has steeled herself for a long haul.

''Whenever anything happens on the international scene, we, the families and the
hostages, somehow seem to be caught up in it,'' she said.

For Marilyn Langston, whose father, Frank H. Reed, was kidnapped on Sept. 9,
1986, the worst agony is not knowing whether he is dead or alive. No group has
taken responsibility for seizing him, and Islamic Holy War, the group holding
Mr. Anderson and Mr. Sutherland, has denied that it kidnapped Mr. Reed, the
director of a private school in Lebanon.

''It's four months, and I have heard zero - it's like he vanished into thin
air,'' Mrs. Langston said. Like the other hostage relatives, she speaks to an
official at the State Depatment once a week, but so far she has found little
reason to be optimistic about official diplomacy.

'The Back Burner'

''I'd like to think the State Department was doing something. I'd like to think
the President was doing something,'' she said. ''But I think this Iran thing has
taken attention away from the hostages who are still there. I think we've been
put on the back burner. The State Department told us not to expect much until
things settle down.''

In the meantime, she is putting together a plea for information on her father's
whereabouts and condition. The State Department has given her the names of
Beirut newspapers in which she might want to run it as an advertisement.

Mrs. Say has tried that tactic. She has appeared on television talk shows and
radio call-in programs and at lecture halls around the country. She has traveled
countless times to Washington and even once to the Middle East in the hope that
something or someone would emerge to speed the captives' release. From the day
her brother was captured, she has waged a relentless campaign, first behind the
scenes and later in public, to demand that the Administration pay attention to
Mr. Anderson and the other American hostages in Beirut.

Last spring, just before what she now knows was a trip by Robert C. McFarlane,
the national security adviser, and Colonel North to Iran to deliver arms, she
began meeting regularly with Colonel North in his office across the street from
the White House. They became friends after a fashion, and she figured it was
because Colonel North took a special interest in her brother since both men had
served in the Marines in Vietnam.

''Ollie was there when the families met with Vice President Bush in the fall of
1985 and then the next month when we met President Reagan,'' Mrs. Say recalled.
''He seemed to me to have a lot of moxie.''

The last time Mrs. Say saw Colonel North was in was in mid-October of 1986. She
remembers that he seemed particularly sympathetic and intense when he assured
her that day that the President was doing everything he could to free the
hostages.

She also remembers that she didn't believe a word of it. In frustration and
despair, she sat at his desk and wept.

In late November, shortly after the White House acknowledged the arms sales to
Iran, Mrs. Say wrote President Reagan to tell him that she appreciated the
initiative undertaken on the hostages' behalf. Mrs. Say said the President
called her the day before Thanksgiving to say he was not going to give up and
that he would continue to explore contacts with Iran.

Now she fears that the backlash from Colonel North's efforts will extend to her
brother and the other hostages.

Arms Sales Not Seen as Factor

David P. Jacobsen, who spent a year and a half in captivity in Lebanon, is
convinced that the Iran arms sales had little to do with his release from
captivity three months ago.

''I don't think I was exchanged for arms,'' he said. ''I just don't think
President Reagan would endanger the whole country for us.''

Besides, he said, ''the people I was held by were Lebanese, and they don't take
their orders from anybody.''

Mr. Jacobsen also believes President Reagan is not as powerless in the matter as
the Government seems to believe. ''You must understand,'' he says, ''my guards
really believed that a call from President Reagan to the Emir of Kuwait would
solve all of the this.''

''I don't want to give anybody the impression I liked the men who kidnaped me,''
he added. ''They are not nice, but they are pragmatic. I think they are looking
for a way out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Thomas Clcippio changing the signs at his home in Norristown,
Pa. (NYT/Arthur W. Wilkinson)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A POLEMICIST WHO AIMS AT POLITICAL AND CORPORATE TARGETS

BYLINE: By GRACE GLUECK

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1781 words


Hans Haacke, a diligent provocateur whose controversial art is aimed at
political and corporate might, has not exactly had a high-profile career. His
untrendy, hard-to-pigeonhole work is shunned by most American collectors, and -
though he's had regular gallery shows - his current exhibition at the New
Museum, 583 Broadway (through Feb. 15), is his first one-man museum exhibition
in the United States.

That is, his first realized museum exhibition. In a famous art-world
contretemps, a Haacke show scheduled for the Guggenheim Museum in 1971 was
cancelled by the director, Thomas Messer, who felt that some of its components
weren't suitable. Haacke had included some documentary pieces that dealt with
the holdings of several less-than-model Manhattan real-estate moguls. And Messer
explained his rejection by saying - among other things - that the policies of
the museum excluded ''active engagement toward social and political ends'' and
that it was ''not the proper place in which to expose slumlords.''

But the German-born artist - now a boyish-looking 50 - has kept at it, digging
away with the zeal of a driven investigative reporter to expose what he sees as
the sometimes dubious links between real estate and the city, art and public
relations, corporations and heads of state. To be sure, his art hasn't earned
him a living, but he has his own institutional connection: The Cooper Union,
where he has taught since 1967 (he is now a tenured professor). ''Otherwise, I
couldn't afford to do what I'm doing,'' he says.

But now there are signs that establishment recognition is nipping at his heels.
To his astonishment, Haacke was notified the other day that he would be one of
this year's recipients of the Skowhegan Medal, a respectable art award given
annually by the Skowhegan School of Painting and Sculpture in Skowhegan, Me.
Skowhegan's criterion: ''A significant body of work that has been influential on
American art for a period of time.''

One of the real-estate pieces that upset the Guggenheim is in the New Museum
show: a deadpan photo-documentation of 142 mostly grubby buildings - many in
Harlem and on the Lower East Side - owned by Harry Shapolsky and associates, a
major holder of minor properties in the city. Other than detailing the location,
ownership, valuation and mortgaging arrangements for each building, the piece
makes no comment. What it does illustrate is the intricate web of corporate and
other identities behind which some landlords appear to hide from accountability.

''I wanted to do something about power in New York, and that is real estate,''
says Haacke. ''At the time I was also part of the Art Workers' Coalition [a
now-defunct group formed in the late 1960's to advocate social reform and the
end of the Vietnam war] and there was the Guggenheim with its white walls and
immaculate environment, situated in the most expensive part of town. I felt
somehow one had to remind this other world that the majority of people in New
York don't live that way.''

Among Haacke's more recent targets has been the Reagan administration, as seen
in a 1982 work titled simply, ''Oil Painting, Homage a Marcel Broodthaers''
(Broodthaers was a Belgian conceptual artist, now deceased, whose work Haacke
feels communion with.) In it, a portrait of the President, laboriously painted
from a photograph (''It took a long time to find the right one,'' Haacke says)
and looking parodically regal, is set off from its surroundings by a velvet rope
and stanchions. A long red carpet further separates the portrait from a hugely
blown-up photograph, on the facing wall, of an anti-nuclear march that occurred
in Manhattan in June 1982, several days after Mr. Reagan had visited West
Germany to rally support for the stationing of new American missiles there.

''MetroMobiltan'' is one of Haacke's most telling thrusts at the joint
culture-mongering of museums and corporations. Before an entablature that mimics
the wonderfully pompous Beaux-Arts facade of the Metropolitan Museum hang three
banners. One proclaims the Mobil-sponsored show, ''Treasures of Ancient
Nigeria,'' held at the Met in 1980 on the other two banners he has lettered
statements from Mobil justifying the corporation's sales of petroleum to the
South African police and military. Almost concealed by the banners is a blown-up
photo of a funeral procession for blacks shot by South African police near Cape
Town in 1985. And on the entablature is engraved a text from a booklet produced
by the Met. It promotes the idea of exhibition sponsorship as an aid to
furthering the corporate image, particularly in areas where ''international,
governmental or consumer relations may be a fundamental concern.''

But does Haacke really believe that, however pungent his tableaux appear in the
context of a museum, they have any reverberations in the world outside? ''Art
can't affect the course of politics, but at a level where one can't trace it, I
believe it has an impact,'' he says. And he quotes a German writer he admires,
Hans Magnus Enzensberger: ''Culture is a little like dropping an Alka Seltzer
into a glass - you don't see it, but somehow it does something.''

The global advertising empire built by the Saatchi brothers - Charles and
Maurice - and the high-powered art collection (which does not include Haacke) of
Charles have recently come in for some close Haacke scrutiny. Two pieces in the
show bear witness. One is a large black cube whose sides are elegantly
stencilled - black on black - which includes the names of Saatchi & Saatchi
affiliate agencies in South Africa and the government and private entities that
are their clients and a sample ''message'' from one of the affiliates that,
Haacke says, was hired in 1983 by the Nationalist Party of South African Prime
Minister Pieter Botha to promote a change of the South African constitution
unbenficial to blacks. The other is ''Taking Stock,'' a high-camp Victorian
portrait of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher - whose two election campaigns were
run by the Saatchi firm - hand-painted by Haacke and riddled with Saatchi
references. The brothers' portraits appear on a pair of broken plates, a symbol
of Charles's heavy investment in the art of Julian Schnabel, who in his early
work used smashed crockery.Leather-bound books in a bookcase are titled with the
names of Saatchi clients, ranging from Cambell's Soup to the British
Conservative Party. A paper hanging off the edge of a table reveals the amount
for which a Saatchi investment company sold art works in 1983.

But is Haacke's work art? The question is inevitable, evoked by the factuality
and, well, low esthetic priority of Haacke's projects. ''There's no definition
of art that can stand up,'' responds Haacke, a great admirer of Marcel Duchamp
for whom esthetic boundaries existed only to be breached. ''In practice, there's
a kind of consensus that anoints certain things as art but is subject to change.
Throughout history, some people have had more power than others in promoting
such a consensus.''

In a sparkling essay for the show's catalogue, the distinguished art historian
Leo Steinberg steers his way nimbly through the ''art'' issue. ''It's an odd
question to be asking these days,'' says Mr. Steinberg, pointing out the Duchamp
readymades, the knife-slashed canvases, the happenings, and the Warhol Brillo
boxes that came down the pike before Haacke's own brand of conceptualism. And
Mr. Steinberg goes on to suggest that while all these manifestations were
harmless enough, pitched as they were to the art world itself, Haacke's work has
stepped outside of it to commit the ''sin'' of asking how the money that
supports art is actually made. ''I don't love Haccke's Guggenheim System as I
love the art of Mantegna; but I respect the ingenuity with which it inserts
itself in the cracks of modern esthetics,'' says Mr. Steinberg. And he concludes
that it is Haacke's ''troubling of the art lover's psychic life that makes his
work art.''

Born in Cologne during the Hitler era, Haacke is not overly communicative when
asked how his life has contributed to his work (he refuses to have his
photograph taken, on the ground that it plays up to ''the cult of personality,
and besides, it's easier to get around when your face isn't known.''). But he
remembers that his father, who worked for the city and was a Social Democrat,
refused to join the Nazi party and so lost his job. ''Perhaps there was
something in the family that militated against political opportunism,'' he
muses.

With his grandfather, a Sunday painter, as a role model, Haacke was further
inspired by a ''hard-working'' art teacher in high school, ''who made me
understand that art didn't just copy the world, but that ideological and
philosophical ideals went into the making of it.'' He got a degree from the art
academy in Kassel, of Documenta fame, then went to Paris in the early 1960's on
a West German Government fellowship. France was winding down its Algerian war,
and student demonstrations were rife. ''I didn't participate, but I saw the
police in action,'' Haacke says. From Paris, he visited the United States on a
Fulbright grant, then moved to New York in 1965.

Haacke's work early on was concerned with systems, and the interdependence of
biological phenomena. He exhibited such pieces as ''Ant Co-Op,'' an ant farm
that showed ants as social beings whose existence depended on cooperation, and
''Rhine-Water Purification Plant,'' which involved filtering polluted Rhine
water into a tank of goldfish and eventually back into the ground. ''I began to
see things as belonging together; the world as not compartmentalized, but one
organic whole,'' he says. ''Like other artists of the 1960's, I got politicized
by the war and the racial situation. But while many of them couldn't extend
their work into the social field, there were no barriers for me,'' he said,
referring to contemporaries bounded by the strictures of Abstract work. ''I
decided to incorporate my concerns in my work, and went from biological to
political-social systems.''

Since the beginning of the 1980's, Haacke has noticed that more of his fellow
artists seem to have developed a political consciousness in their work.''Yet
much of the art world is not to my liking,'' he says. ''The Salles and the
Schnabels and the young stars of the East Village project an ideal of success -
sales and a house in the Hamptons and a place in the Saatchi collection - that
is absolutely devastating to the artists themselves.'' For himself, Haacke would
simply like to go on doing what he's doing. And that is to stop us in our tracks
by giving his political perceptions visual eloquence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of work by Hans Haacke

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ASTRONAUTS AFTER CHALLENGER

BYLINE: By James Reston Jr.; James Reston Jr. is the correspondent for the PBS
''Frontline'' documentary on space risk that will be shown on Tuesday.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 46, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2941 words


BEFORE THE unthinkable happened on that bitterly cold January day in Florida,
they were the elite's elite, operating in that strange, unforgiving stratosphere
where only several hundred humans have ever been. They were trained to set aside
their feelings, groomed to spout clipped, noncommittal responses in public. With
space flight becoming virtually routine, they came to be seen as near-flawless
human robots - those ''genetically perfect Texans,'' as a British commentator
once put it.

The explosion of the space shuttle Challenger on Jan. 28, 1986, changed all
that. In one single tragic moment, the 100 or so highly trained, highly
motivated astronauts suddenly became as fragile and vulnerable as earthbound
mortals. Following subsequent revelations that in many shuttle missions the O
rings in the joints of the solid rocket boosters had been dangerously
compromised, the astronauts have been beset by a torrent of often conflicting
emotions.

They have been torn between loyalty to NASA and a feeling of betrayal; pride in
past missions and shame for spouting the company line; fear at past risks taken
and fear of not getting another space flight. Astronauts have openly expressed
their anger at the management of the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, or confessed that the euphoria of their job has been shattered,
perhaps forever.

For Capt. Frederick H. Hauck, who had commanded the spectacular
satellite-retrieval mission of November 1984, the initial shock lasted about six
weeks. It was followed by a longer, much more painful, period of grief and of a
coming to terms.

''Some of us, including me,'' he says, ''had this underlying feeling that we at
NASA knew how to do this business of space flight. Then comes the accident, and
there's . . . my God, I had faith in this system, and now that's no longer a
foregone conclusion. I and most everyone began to look at the safety process
from a different, more conservative angle.''

As if to signal the end of a year of profound grief, confusion and rancor, NASA
earlier this month presented Hauck as the commander of the first space-shuttle
flight since the Challenger explosion (the mission is scheduled for February
1988). Today, as a measure of normality returns to the space agency, the
reactions of crew members of the 1984 retrieval mission to the events of the
past year and what they perceive as the lessons of the shuttle disaster reveal
much about the thoughts and concerns of the astronaut corps as they prepare for
the post-Challenger era of space exploration.

RICK HAUCK HAS THE square build of a wrestler and the startling blue eyes one
almost always expects of a naval-carrier pilot. He flew more than 100 combat
sorties in Vietnam, and in 1974 returned to carrier duty as an F-14 test pilot.
Before commanding the 1984 retrieval mission, designated 51-A, he had piloted an
earlier shuttle flight. Within the corps, the 45-year-old astronaut is regarded
as a model of patience and dispassion.

Hauck's pilot on the 51-A mission was David M. Walker, then 40 years old, a wry,
intense Floridian who was also a naval officer and a test pilot. The two men
have been close friends since the early 1970's when they tested F-14's together
at the Patuxent Naval Air Test Center.

They were joined by three ''mission specialists,'' the nonpilot astronauts who
make up half the corps and who handle the space cargo.

Joseph P. Allen - a merry, relentlessly upbeat elfin figure and a Yale-educated
physicist - was, at age 47, the old-timer in the crew.

The mission's flight engineer was 35-year-old Anna L. Fisher, who had graduated
from the medical school of the University of California at Los Angeles, and who
specialized in emergency medicine. Fisher, like many astronauts, is cheery and
upbeat; her husband, William, is also an astronaut-physician.

The third mission specialist was Comdr. Dale A. Gardner, then age 36, a
thoughtful naval navigator from Illinois who had flown in the back seat of
F-14's at Patuxent with Hauck and Walker.

Together, this crew provided some of the most thrilling moments of the early
shuttle era. As the world watched, they took up two satellites and launched
them, then retrieved two broken satellites, placed them in the payload bay and
brought them home safely.

Prior to the Challenger disaster, Hauck, Walker, Fisher and Gardner had been
assigned to various missions. (Allen had resigned from the corps in June 1985 to
join a new space company.) Three days before the incident, Hauck was in training
for a high-risk shuttle flight called Ulysses, scheduled for launching in May
1986. Ulysses was coupled with another high-risk mission, known as Galileo,
which was to be under Walker's command. The destination of Galileo's payload was
Jupiter; that of Ulysses', the sun.

These shuttle missions -to be launched within five days of each other - were to
be the space spectacular of 1986, one the scientific world had excitedly awaited
for years. What made them particularly risky was the volatile quality of their
payload: high-energy rockets called Centaurs. To propel them on their 14-month
trip to Jupiter, the rockets would be laden with liquid hydrogen and liquid
oxygen, even though liquid fuel had never before been carried in the payload
bay. Once the shuttles were in orbit, and barring any glitches, the rockets
would be released and sent on their way to Jupiter and beyond. The mission crews
would then return home.

If a mission needed to be aborted, the liquid fuels would have to be dumped in
space. But in December 1985, the valve for this hazardous space dump had failed
its qualification test. Furthermore, a component of the Centaur was a small
generator that was powered with radioactive material. In Congress, there were
questions. What would happen if there were an explosion on the launching pad or
in the ascent phase? Would it mean the detonation of a nuclear device over
Florida?

In the days before the Challenger disaster, Hauck and Walker were caught between
a desire to fly in space again and their rising concern over the dangers of the
Centaur system. To the commanders, the political talk about a launching-pad
nuclear explosion was beside the point.

''Personally, we didn't care what happened to the generators if the orbiter blew
up on the pad,'' recalls Walker, ''because it would have zero consequence for
us. We didn't really care if there was going to be an increase in cancer deaths
over the next 50 years, because we would be transformed into hunks of
radioactive hydrocarbon. We were a lot more concerned that we didn't blow up at
all.''

Although the technical problems were coming faster than the solutions, the
Centaur launching dates in May remained fixed. (Along the hallways of Building 4
at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, where the astronauts have their offices,
the Centaur came to be known as ''the death star.'') The space program was
''success oriented,'' with that can-do spirit that the Rogers Commission, set up
to investigate the Challenger explosion, would say was part of NASA's delusion
of infallibility.

THEN, 73 seconds after takeoff, the Challenger exploded.

Dale Gardner felt as if he and his fellow astronauts had been surfers upon high
waves. ''We did the Solar Max repair in space and people said, 'My God! What can
they do now?' Then 51-A came. We brought two satellites back, and they said,
'Wow, that's got to be the limit.' Then a subsequent crew fixed a satellite in
space and put it back into orbit, and they said, 'Christ, where can this whole
thing stop?' It was like waves coming into shallow water. They rise and rise and
rise. Maybe we didn't realize that eventually all waves crash on the beach.''

Within a week of the accident, the entire Centaur program - Ulysses and Galileo
and all the Centaur flights on the shuttle that might have followed -came under
intense re-evaluation. ''The Centaur program was recognized as one of the
riskier flights planned,'' says Hauck, ''and now concerns we might have been
comfortable with before the accident, we took a very, very close look at. We
asked ourselves, 'Is the net risk one we can now afford to take?' ''

Central to the Centaur discussion was a point that came out of the Challenger
investigation. The O ring flaw on the solid rocket boosters had become
acceptable as a flight risk after a number of flights escaped catastrophe, and
Hauck worried not so much about his own flight but about Centaur flights that
would follow his.

''We felt that even if we got away with it, the serious design deficiencies
might later be disastrous,'' says David Walker. ''So we took the position, we'll
march like good soldiers. If anyone flies Centaur, we want to do it. But it's
also our duty to tell you that it isn't a good idea to charge this particular
hill.''

For Hauck, the ambivalence of that position went against the most sacrosanct
code of the test pilot. In that cult, the aviator never wants to be in a
position of saying, ''I don't want to go.''

Could the ''new environment,'' as Hauck calls the post-Challenger ethos, be
compared to a post-Watergate morality? ''Morals were not involved in the
Challenger accident,'' he replies testily. ''I don't think anyone willingly
subverted the system within NASA. In the new environment, we were brought back
to earth. We were suddenly fallible. Some of us, including myself, may have
begun to think we were infallible.''

On June 19, 10 days after the Rogers Commission released its report, the Centaur
program was formally canceled. At the final meeting, led by James C. Fletcher,
the new NASA administrator, the Ulysses and Galileo commanders were asked
directly for their recommendations, and they recommended cancellation.

Walker's disappointment was profound. In January 1986, he was a few months away
from commanding what could have been the most significant scientific space
mission of the century. A month later, he was part of a four-man astronaut
detail combing the beaches of Cape Canaveral for the body parts of the
Challenger crew.

ASTRONAUTS CALL THE process of judging risk ''risk assessment''; the Rogers
Commission called it ''risk management'' or ''hazard analysis.'' Whatever it is
called, it implies that there is no such thing as zero risk in the space
business. In the aftermath of the Challenger incident, the astronauts have been
especially angered by the revelation that they had been kept in the dark about
the unreliability of the O rings in the solid rocket boosters. Without
knowledge, there can be no assessment.

''There was not a single member of that astronaut office who did not feel a
profound sense of betrayal at not being told about the O rings,'' says Joseph
Allen, now an executive at Space Industries, a company formed by Max Faget, the
NASA engineer who had designed the Mercury capsule. Soon after the 51-A mission
touched down, Allen began to plan his departure. He felt there was a satisfying
symmetry in his being on the first shuttle flight to take cargo into space (in
1982) and in being on the first to return cargo from space. He was pushing 50
and it was time, as he puts it, ''to decide what I was going to do when I grew
up.'' Within Allen's own family, there was great relief when he left NASA. His
wife, Bonnie, had never gotten used to her husband's occupation. ''It seemed
strange to me that once Joe was assigned to a flight, for two years we would
prepare for that day,'' she says, ''not knowing whether something might happen
or whether he would come back with joy. That to me was bizarre, because any of
us know that our husbands can go to work in a car and possibly have an
automobile accident and not come home. But you never prepare for that day. It
just happens, and then you take it from there.''

Anna Fisher has always prided herself on her honest, unvarnished attitude toward
risk. Since joining the astronaut corps in 1978 (which puts her in the same
astronaut class as Hauck, Walker and Gardner), she had never watched a shuttle
launch without anxiety. Her husband, Bill, had a very different attitude toward
risk. ''His assumption,'' she says, ''was that nothing was going to happen, and
that's how he acted.''

For those like Dale Gardner, Fisher's fellow mission specialist on the 51-A
mission, who has tested high-performance jets, there is a magical curtain drawn
across risk. ''Accidents are on the other side of that curtain,'' he says.
''Anyone who comes from the test-pilot side of the business feels that an
accident is never going to happen to him. If something happens, it will be to
someone else. We all have that. I can objectively remove myself and say, 'Dale,
that's stupid. If that airplane has a flaw, it's going to blow up, and it
doesn't know who the pilot is.' It's the way your brain rationalizes away the
risk. That's a positive thing. It takes away the worry and lets you concentrate
on your job.''

For Gardner, the Challenger accident had no bearing on the attitude toward risk.
For Anna Fisher, such an attitude has its consequences. ''In a sense, the
accident may help the program,'' she says. ''Some people are denying the risk.
Others wouldn't take abort decisions seriously. Anyone who thinks that is
kidding himself.''

At the time of the shuttle launch last January, Fisher was three weeks away from
her second space flight. In fact, the makeup of her crew and that of the
Challenger had been announced at the same time, and the two groups held their
celebratory beer bust together. The manifest kept changing, a normal enough
occurrence in the days of ''routine'' space flight, and at one point Fisher's
crew, rather than Francis R. Scobee's, was scheduled to fly the Challenger on
the 28th.

While she appreciates risk as an inherent component of her job, Fisher has to
reconcile that risk with her role as mother. (She was the first American woman
with a child to go on a space mission.) By the date of the 51-A liftoff, her
daughter, Kristin, was 15 months old. The hardest thing she ever did in that
mission, Fisher recalls, was to leave her daughter and head for the launching
pad.

She had written her child a note and sealed it. The note did not address risk.
It addressed uncertainty. ''I was trying to tell her . . . who knows how things
will go,'' Fisher says. ''No matter what happens in the future . . . in space
flight or in our relationship . . . she came along and gave me incredible joy, a
balance and perspective that made me a better person. That's mainly what I
wanted to say in that letter. I intend to give it to her when she's older.''

D ALE GARDNER, too, has a young child, a son named Todd who is seven months
older than Kristin Fisher. But he declines to comment on such an emotional
matter as parenthood and space risk. The classic test navigator, he prefers to
discuss his work.

A year ago, he was anticipating his mission on the first shuttle flight out of
Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. If there was any mission that could top
his capture of the stray satellite on the 51-A flight (a picture of that feat
made the cover of Time magazine), being one of the first five Americans to enter
polar orbit was it.

The first Vandenberg flight was originally planned for October 1986. Six months
after the Challenger exploded, the entire Vandenberg space facility was
mothballed. The Department of Defense has predicted that the first shuttle
flight into polar orbit will not take place from Vandenberg until 1992.

In the summer, Gardner found the atmosphere in Houston disheartening. ''The
astronaut's dream is to come off one flight and immediately begin training for
another,'' he says. ''That is great fun, believe me. Then all of a sudden
nobody's training because we're not flying. Everybody is put on jobs trying to
get the shuttle to fly its first flight again. . . . Depressing isn't the right
word for it, but the lack of euphoria was definitely there.''

Quietly, throughout the corps, astronauts like Gardner began to think seriously
about their futures. In late summer, Gardner got in touch with the Navy and
expressed his desire to return to active service. He did not tell any of his
fellow astronauts what he had done.

Encouraged by President Reagan's Star Wars program, those with a military
background and a space specialty are increasingly looking to a career that
combines both areas of expertise. A year or so ago, the military services
consolidated all space activities under one unified command - the United States
Space Command - located at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado Springs. In
October, Gardner took up his new post as deputy chief, space control operations
division, United States Space Command.

Gardner is among the 18 astronauts who have either left NASA or been assigned
management posts since the Challenger disaster. Neither Anna Fisher nor David
Walker is likely to join that group. In Houston, Walker waits, the rookie
commander without a mission and without any signal that he would fly early.

''I've learned enough about NASA to know that whatever I speculate upon will
have zero bearing on what happens,'' he says matter-of-factly. ''This is a
situation one can't control, and it's best not to stew about it. No one wants to
be perceived as being concerned with personal benefit, as opposed to the future
of the program. It is a good enough reward to fly at all. I'm really addicted. I
cast my lot with this outfit when things looked good. Now that things don't look
so good, I'm not going to pull my hat out of the ring. I love the idea of going
back to space - and the idea of commanding a space ship. Until I have done so,
I'll stick.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Capt. Frederick H. Hauck (Key Chernush) (page 46)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: JANUARY 25, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1285 words


                                                                      Weeks
This                                                             Last    On
Week Fiction                                                     Week  List
1    RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.)             1    26
     Without using nuclear weapons, the West staves off the
     Russians in World War III.
2    IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood horrors       2    20
     haunt six men and a woman who grew up in a small Maine
     town.
3    WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.) Iran during     3    12
     the month following the Shah's departure.
4    BANDITS, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $17.95.) A gang      8     2
     of three plots to heist millions being sent to the contras
     in Nicaragua.
5    THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton Mifflin,         5    17
     $19.95.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's
     low country and New York City.
6    A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $18.95.)            4    13
     Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal double
     murder.
7    FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval              7    13
     Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over Vietnam.
8    NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon & Schuster,         11     2
     $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans from being
     discovered by the Germans.
9    HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster,      6    15
     $18.95.) A top model encounters three of Los Angeles's most
     dynamic men.
10   FOUNDATION AND EARTH, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday,             9    15
     $16.95.) The hero of the ''Foundation'' series searches for
     the lost planet Earth.
11*  WANDERLUST, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $17.95.) A rich    10    28
     orphan comes of age while she travels the world.
12*  THE COUNTERLIFE, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,     1
     $18.95.) More about the ambitions and anxieties of Nathan
     Zuckerman, who resembles the author in some things,
     sometimes.
13*  THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday, $17.95.) A      #1
     financial wizard undertakes to defuse the crisis besetting
     Wall Street and the American economy.
14   THROUGH A GLASS DARKLY, by Karleen Koen. (Random House,       15    21
     $19.95.) Romance, family conflict, power and greed mark a
     young woman's life in 18th-century England and France.
15   DEATH QUEST, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge Publications,         #1
     $18.95.) A hit man sets out to kill Countess Krak and seal
     the fate of the Earth; sixth volume in the ''Mission
     Earth'' series.

     Nonfiction
1    FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday, $14.95.)       1    38
     Anecdotes and ruminations from the television star and
     father of five.
2    A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein. (Macmillan,         12     4
     $16.95.) A chronicle of one season spent with the coach Bob
     Knight and his Indiana University basketball team.
3    A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins Publishers,            11
     $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as recorded in pictures
     by 200 photojournalists.
4    HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.) An                 2    16
     unauthorized biography of Frank Sinatra.
5    THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE,      9     2
     by Jane Wagner. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb observations
     on life today; script of the show starring Lily Tomlin.
6    McMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi. (Warner, $16.95.)      6    18
     The autobiography of the quarterback for the Chicago Bears.
7*   YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $9.95.)     5    46
     A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme.
8    WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Putnam, $16.95.) A        3    10
     new collection of columns by the journalist and television
     personality.
9    JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot. (St.            4    36
     Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire veterinarian
     about his favorite animal.
10   DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with Greg             13    10
     Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina recalls her
     checkered career.
11   ACROSS CHINA, by Peter Jenkins. (Morrow, $18.95.) The         14     4
     author of ''A Walk Across America'' takes his wanderlust to
     Asia.
12*  THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $19.95.) The     10    16
     crisis in the American automobile industry and Japan's role
     in it.
13*  MARILYN, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, $24.95.) A biography of    15     2
     Marilyn Monroe, with many photographs by her friend George
     Barris.
14*  ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with Dave             8    17
     Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on football.
15   NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst. (Simon & Schuster,        32
     $17.95.) Life is a series of losses, the author argues, and
     we must confront them to grow.
16*  PAT NIXON: The Untold Story, by Julie Nixon Eisenhower.       11     9
     (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The life of the wife of the
     37th President, by her daughter.

     Advice, How-to and
     Miscellaneous
1    THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.             1    13
     (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at moderate cost.
2    THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton, $15.95.) A       2    32
     regimen based on the Vanderbilt University Weight
     Management Program.
3    MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM, by Susan         4    16
     Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with
     overbearing men.
4    THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) A         3    50
     television chef's inexpensive dishes.
5    WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.                     5    72
     (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard reference work in a
     1983 revision.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

FAITH, SEX, MYSTERY: A Memoir, by Richard Gilman. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) In
a sort of rueful tranquillity, tinged with the pain of loss, the writer and
critic recollects and reflects on his conversion from Jewish atheist to Roman
Catholic nearly 35 years ago, and his lapse from the church eight years later.

SPHINX, by D. M. Thomas. (Viking, $17.95.) The third (so far) in a series that
began in 1983 with ''Ararat,'' Mr. Thomas's bravura novel of a Russia
reconstructed in the imagination is fed with the literature of the past and
charged with sex, poetry and politics.

KEEPING WARM, by Mary Gardner. (Atheneum, $17.95.) In this engaging, sometimes
ingenuous first novel, a girl's cowboy fantasies come true in adulthood, but in
unpredictable ways.

MUTINY ON THE AMISTAD, by Howard Jones. (Oxford University, $22.95.) The true,
and quite amazing, story of a shipload of newly enslaved Africans who in 1839
seized their ship, killed its captain and won their freedom in the American
courts.

PERON AND THE ENIGMAS OF ARGENTINA, by Robert D. Crassweller. (Norton, $22.95.)
This informed, politically wise account of the popular, durable dictator Juan
Peron may also be the best one-volume history of 20th-century Argentina.

REAGAN'S AMERICA: Innocents at Home, by Garry Wills. (Doubleday, $19.95.)
Thoughtful and rich in detail, Mr. Wills's study of the President's origins sees
him as the product and the embodiment of an American mythology very many of us
share.

ANYWHERE BUT HERE, by Mona Simpson. (Knopf, $18.95.) Ann and Adele, a
sturdy-minded girl and her lying, dreamy mother, are locked in combat for more
than 20 years in this challenging first novel of love, hate, fear, need and
loyalty.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: Q&A: LARRY SPEAKES;
REFLECTIONS UPON LEAVING THE WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1190 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


Larry Speakes has been the main press voice of the White House since the press
secretary, James S. Brady, was wounded in the assassination attempt on President
Reagan in March 1981. Come Feb. 2, Mr. Speakes will leave the White House to
become a vice president for communications at the investment concern Merrill
Lynch & Company.

As one of the longest survivors among Mr. Reagan's senior White House aides, Mr.
Speakes, who is 47 years old, has amassed a reputation as crafty and combative,
much in the image of his ''Mississippi Catfish'' nickname. Warmed by a blazing
fire in his spacious West Wing office and sipping a diet cola, he relaxed a bit
the other day and reminisced about his years in Washington and about his job.

Q. Is the press doing a good job of covering the White House?

A. The press does a good job and has for the six-year period I've been here.
They have covered us fairly. They have covered us in depth. They have held our
feet to the fire. That's their role.

I do question the press preoccupation with minutiae. There was a time in this
business that the lead story was determined by the number of people it affects.
Now it seems that the key ingredient and the No. 1 determinant of news is
controversy, and even more so if it's personal conflict. The budget, the basis
for everything we do in Government, is a ho-hum item and not a news story until
you get the conflict between the Secretary of Defense and O.M.B.

Q. Should a White House try to shape, or control, press reports?

A. We decide policies that we think are good policies and we try to explain them
as good policies. But there's no way that you can pull the wool over the eyes of
the press and control the news. We try to be more action-oriented than
reaction-oriented. That's difficult in a day when there's a dozen leaks of
policy initiatives before they're ready to be announced.

Q. The White House press corps has grown dramatically over the years, even
during your time at the White House, from being just a few print journalists to
a large corps that now includes even local television. That's a lot of White
House press coverage. What have these changes meant?  A. In my years in the
White House, which began in the Nixon Administration in '74, the way a press
secretary has to do business has changed dramatically. And it's largely based on
the growth of television.

The ratio in 1974 was probably 3-to-1 print press over electronic press. Now
it's directly reversed. Television dominates the way the White House is covered.
In 1974, the press secretary would prepare for eight or 10 subjects going into a
briefing. Today you prepare for eight or 10 subjects but you're only asked about
one or two. And that, in my opinion, is because television covers, can cover,
only one story a day from the White House beat. And that story tends to
dominate.

That's not to say the print press doesn't have influence. The lead story in the
major morning newspapers is very often the television lead story on the evening
news, and that means television follows the print press. So no White House can
afford to ignore the newspapers.

Q. While Mr. Reagan may have enjoyed a tremendous amount of success with the
press early on, be it a honeymoon or good press relations or public relations or
something else, that seems more or less changed in recent months, beginning with
the Icelandic summit and now including the Iran-contra affair. What's gone
wrong?

A. I don't think anything's gone wrong. Any Administration has controversial
subjects to deal with. It's interesting that in the first year victories were
news. But by the second year, victories, legislative victories, were no longer
news. Success was not news. But failure was news. And that predominates. The
press expects a President to succeed. That's not news. If he succeeds, then
that's what he was supposed to do. But if there is a failure anywhere in the
Administration, then that becomes news and receives the spotlight.

Q. Is the Iran-contra affair a public relations nightmare?

A. I wouldn't characterize it as a nightmare, but on the other hand, it's a very
difficult public relations problem to handle. And public perceptions are not
made or changed overnight. And, you just continue to tell your story. It's the
old advertising man's creed of tell 'em and tell 'em again. That's what we're
doing. Q. Making the President available to the press or in public events, or
keeping him out of view, is one way you have to ''manage'' the news. What's your
thinking on that?  A. The Presidential press conference is an important
institution because it's the one time that the public sees the President in what
many times is a difficult and adversarial relationship, and they see how he
performs.

But the press conference in its present form is in danger of outliving its
usefulness because of the fact that it is boiled down to an East Room
extravaganza, and the questions do not come in a coherent fashion and stay with
a subject and explore the depth of the President's thinking. It boils down to
more a battle of the wits.

There is in the press corps, since Vietnam and Watergate, many times, an
automatic presumption that the Government is lying. And a Government spokesman
is forced day in and day out to prove he isn't lying. And too much of it boils
down to: How can we get 'em to say what they don't want to say? Somehow we need
to get away from this ''I gotcha'' syndrome. Q. Another area that's been
sensitive to the Reagan White House, at least for press operation, has been the
subject of leaks. Is too much sensitive, classified, secret material being
leaked?

A. Yes. Our ability to try to control leaks has been misrepresented in the press
throughout the Administration. It's been represented that we were trying to stem
the flow of information in general. We've been trying to stem the flow of
top-secret documents, out of national security agencies and departments into the
newspapers, that are harmful to the national interest. The only real way to stop
a person who had leaked national security documents is to fire that person and
then punish him to the fullest extent of the law.

Q. Every Administration, every White House has leaks and, to some extent, what's
the difference between those self-serving leaks and leaks that might damage
national security?

A. When it says top-secret, then it means don't leak it. There are a lot of
self-serving leaks within an Administration; a lot of bureaucratic warfare takes
place with sources talking day in and day out in the newspaper. Perhaps even
some of us have been guilty of it from time to time. It's a pretty good tactic.

And, you know, maybe it's time for newspapers and the White House to decide that
everybody talks on the record. The Administration official who's quoted a
thousand times a day without his name attached would have to drop the cloak -
the mask that he's always worn to speak publicly - and have his name attached to
it.

Q. One final question. What will the public remember about Larry Speakes?

A. Well, I hope they remember - I hope my epitaph will read, ''He told the truth
always.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Larry Speakes (NYT)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DIRECTOR'S REMARK BARRED IN TRIAL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 373 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 24


The judge in the manslaughter trial stemming from the making of ''Twilight Zone:
The Movie,'' has barred prosecutors from introducing a statement by the film's
director, John Landis, that he ''didn't care'' about the location of a
helicopter on the movie set moments before the helicopter crashed and killed
three people.

Deputy District Attorney Lea Purwin D'Agostino said in Los Angeles Superior
Court that Judge Roger Boren's ruling, issued Wednesday, was ''unfair to the
prosecution.''

The actor Vic Morrow, 53 years old, and two children, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee
Shinn Chen, 6, were killed when the helicopter, disabled by special-effects
explosions, crashed in filming a Vietnam War scene on July 23, 1982.

Mr. Landis is accused of involuntary manslaughter, along with George Folsey Jr.,
the film's associate producer; Dan Allingham, the unit production manager; Paul
Stewart, the special effects coordinator, and Dorcey Wingo, the helicopter
pilot.

At issue was the statement Mr. Landis made to investigators from the National
Transportation Safety Board two weeks after the helicopter crash.

Mr. Landis was asked where the helicopter was at the time of the crash and where
it had been in a rehearsal flight 20 minutes earlier.

He said the helicopter was ''basically'' in the same position both times, but
added: ''It wasn't exactly where it was going to be, but I figured I didn't
care. I thought it was going to be further out over the river and when it came
in stopped and it was hovering, it was like, well, there, it's hovering - 'O.K.,
I'm going to get my shot.' ''

Mrs. D'Agostino has contended that Mr. Landis issued a last-minute order for the
pilot to bring the craft lower.

Judge Boren said he had no alternative but to exclude the statement because
Federal and California laws forbid prosecutors from presenting statements made
out of court by one defendant that could possibly implicate another in a trial
with more than one defendant.

The judge said that jurors could infer from Mr. Landis's statement that Mr.
Wingo had been responsible for the positioning of the helicopter, and that the
pilot's lawyers would not be able to cross-examine Mr. Landis if the director
declined to testify in the trial.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ON 5, AMERICAN P.O.W.'S

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 34, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 359 words


THE original black-and-white enemy footage in ''P.O.W. -Americans in Enemy
Hands: World War II, Korea and Vietnam'' strongly resembles and confirms the
wild battle scenes in the current movie ''Platoon.'' The voices of nine
Americans who were prisoners of war are heard tonight at 8 o'clock on Channel 5.

War is not neat, even ordinary, small-bore-rifle, nonnuclear war. From war to
war, the unexpected causes chaos and destroys the best-designed plans of those
in command. The Americans who were captured in World War II in Europe and the
Pacific, and during the Korean and Vietnamese Wars prove that something went
wrong, at least for them, before their wars ended.

The former prisoners of war have similar tales to tell of cruelty and
deprivation; but they, of course, are survivors. Some of the tales are sadder
than others. One World War II prisoner tells of receiving word that his wife had
divorced him. Another, captured in Korea, says he was sustained by prayer.
Another, who survived the Bataan Death March, says in retrospect that the
Japanese never realized that they would capture so many Americans and did not
know how to handle them.

One Jewish soldier, caught in the Battle of the Bulge, says he threw away his
dog tags because he feared the letter ''H'' (for Hebrew) on them would cause him
to be killed by the Germans on the spot. A prisoner of the North Vietnamese
lightly remarks that he would have tried to get home sooner had he known that
women were wearing miniskirts.

One of the prisoners from the Korean War who decided to remain in China and now
lives in Chicago says he was not brainwashed. At the time, he explains, he was
sincere about his desire for peace; he did not hate the United States. ''I was
caught up in the times,'' he says. Another former American P.O.W. still
considers those who remained in China traitors.

Arnold Shapiro is the executive producer of the documentary, which is produced,
written and directed by Carol L. Fleisher. Robert Wagner, the actor, serves as
the host. His introductory remarks, asking whether you, the viewer, could have
survived being a prisoner of war, are shallow and banal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 28, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE TO NATION ON STATE OF UNION

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4425 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's State of the Union Message,
delivered to Congress last night in Washington, as recorded by The New York
Times:

May I congratulate all of you who are members of this historic 100th Congress of
the United States of America. In this 200th anniversary year of our
Constitution, you and I stand on the shoulders of giants, men whose words and
deeds put wind in the sails of freedom.

However, we must always remember that our Constitution is to be celebrated not
for being old, but for being young, young with the same energy, spirit and
promise that filled each eventful day in Philadelphia's State House. We will be
guided tonight by their acts and we will be guided forever by their words.

Now, forgive me, but I can't resist sharing a story from those historic days.
Philadelphia was bursting with civic pride in the spring of 1787, and its
newspapers began embellishing the arrival of the Convention delegates with
elaborate social classifications.

Governors of States were called ''Excellency.'' Justices and Chancellors had
reserved for them ''Honorable'' with a capital ''H.'' For Congressmen, it was
''honorable'' with a small ''h.'' And all others were referred to as ''the
following respectable characters.''

Well, for this 100th Congress, I invoke special executive powers to declare that
each of you must never be titled less than Honorable with a capital ''H.''

Incidentally, I'm delighted you are celebrating the 100th birthday of the
Congress. It's always a pleasure to congratulate someone with more birthdays
than I've had.

Now, there's a new face at this place of honor tonight, and please join me in
warm congratulations to the Speaker of the House, Jim Wright. Mr. Speaker, you
might recall a similar situation in your very first session of Congress 32 years
ago. Then, as now, the Speakership had changed hands, and another great son of
Texas, Sam Rayburn - ''Mr. Sam'' - sat in your chair. I cannot find better words
than those used by President Eisenhower that evening: ''We shall have much to do
together; I am sure that we will get it done, and that we shall do it in harmony
and goodwill.''

Tonight, I renew that pledge. To you, Mr. Speaker, and to Senate majority leader
Robert Byrd who brings 34 years of distinguished service to the Congress, may I
say: Though there are changes in the Congress, America's interests remain the
same. And I am confident that, along with Republican leaders Bob Michel and Bob
Dole, this Congress can make history.

Six years ago, I was here to ask the Congress to join me in America's new
beginning.

Well, the results are something of which we can all be proud. Our inflation rate
is now the lowest in a quarter of a century. The prime interest rate has fallen
from the 21 1/2 percent the month before we took office to 7 1/2 percent today
and those rates have triggered the most housing starts in eight years.

The unemployment rate, still too high, is the lowest in nearly seven years and
our people have created nearly 13 million new jobs. Over 61 percent of everyone
over the age of 16, male and female, is employed, the highest percentage on
record. 'Roll Up Our Sleeves And Go to Work' Let's roll up our sleeves and go to
work and put America's economic engine at full throttle.

We can also be heartened by our progress across the world. Most important,
America is at peace tonight and freedom is on the march. And we've done much
these past years to restore our defenses, our alliances and our leadership in
the world. Our sons and daughters in the services once again wear their uniforms
with pride.

But though we've made much progress, I have one major regret. I took a risk with
regard to our action in Iran. It did not work, and for that I assume full
responsibility.

The goals were worthy. I do not believe it was wrong to try to establish
contacts with a country of strategic importance or to try to save lives. And
certainly it was not wrong to try to secure freedom for our citizens held in
barbaric captivity. But - but we did not achieve what we wished and serious
mistakes were trying - made in trying to do so. We will get to the bottom of
this and I will take whatever action is called for.

But in debating the past in debating the past, we must deny - not deny ourselves
the successes of the future. Let it never be said of this generation of
Americans that we became so obsessed with failure that we refused to take risks
that could further the cause of peace and freedom in the world.

Much is at stake here and the nation and the world are watching, to see if we go
forward together in the national interest, or if we let partisanship weaken us.

And let there be no mistake about American policy: We will not sit idly by if
our interests or our friends in the Middle East are threatened nor will we yield
to terrorist blackmail.

And now, ladies and gentlemen of the Congress, why don't we get to work?

I am pleased to report that, because of our efforts to rebuild the strength of
America, the world is a safer place. Earlier this month, I submitted a budget to
defend America and maintain our momentum to make up for neglect in the last
decade. I ask you to vote out a defense and foreign affairs budget that says
''yes'' to protecting our country.

While the world is safer, it is not safe.

Since 1970, the Soviets have invested $500 billion more on their military forces
than we have. Even today, though nearly 1 in 3 Soviet families is without
running hot water, and the average family spends two hours a day shopping for
the basic necessities of life, their Government still found the resources to
transfer $75 billion in weapons to client states in the past five years, clients
like Syria, Vietnam, Cuba, Libya, Angola, Ethiopia, Afghanistan and Nicaragua.

With 120,000 Soviet combat and military personnel and 15,000 military advisers
in Asia, Africa and Latin America, can anyone still doubt their single-minded
determination to expand their power? Despite this, the Congress cut my request
for critical U.S. security assistance to free nations by 21 percent this year,
and cut defense requests by $85 billion in the last three years. 'There Is No
Surer Way To Lose Freedom' These assistance programs serve our national
interests as well as mutual interests, and when the programs are devastated,
American interests are harmed. My friends, it's my duty as President to say to
you again tonight that there is no surer way to lose freedom than to lose our
resolve.

Today, the brave people of Afghanistan are showing that resolve. The Soviet
Union says it wants a peaceful settlement in Afghanistan, yet it continues a
brutal war and props up a regime whose days are clearly numbered. We are ready
to support a political solution that guarantees the rapid withdrawal of all
Soviet troops and genuine self-determination for the Afghan people.

In Central America, too, the cause of freedom is being tested. And our resolve
is being tested there as well. Here, especially, the world is watching to see
how this nation responds.

Today, over 90 percent of the people of Latin America live in democracy.
Democracy is on the march in Central and South America. Communist Nicaragua is
the odd man out, suppressing the church, the press and democratic dissent and
promoting subversion in the region. We support diplomatic efforts, but these
efforts can never succeed if the Sandinistas win their war against the
Nicaraguan people.

Our commitment to a Western Hemisphere safe from aggression did not occur by
spontaneous generation on the day that we took office. It began with the Monroe
Doctrine in 1823 and continues our historic bipartisan American policy. Franklin
Roosevelt - Franklin Roosevelt said we '' . . . are determined to do everything
possible to maintain peace on this hemisphere.'' President Truman was very
blunt: ''International Communism . . . seeks to crush and undermine and . . .
destroy the independence of the Americans, . . . we can't let that happen
here.''

And John F. Kennedy made clear that '' . . . Communist domination in this
hemisphere can never be negotiated.''

Some in this Congress may choose to depart from this historic commitment, but I
will not.

This year- this year - this year we celebrate the second century of our
Constitution. The Sandinistas just signed theirs two weeks ago, and then
suspended it. We won't know how my words tonight will be reported there, for one
simple reason: there is no free press in Nicaragua.

Nicaraguan freedom fighters have never asked us to wage their battle, but I will
fight any effort to shut off their lifeblood and consign them to death, defeat
or a life without freedom. There must be no Soviet beachhead in Central America.

We Americans have always preferred dialogue to conflict and so we always remain
open to more constructive relations with the Soviet Union. But more responsible
Soviet conduct around the world is a key element of the U.S.-Soviet agenda.
Progress is also required on the other items of our agenda as well, real respect
for human rights and more open contacts between our societies, and, of course,
arms reduction.

In Iceland last October, we had one moment of opportunity that the Soviets
dashed because they sought to cripple our Strategic Defense Initiative, S.D.I. I
wouldn't let them do it then. I won't let them do it now or in the future. This
is the most positive and promising defense program we have undertaken. It's the
path, for both sides, to a safer future; a system that defends human life
instead of threatening it. S.D.I. will go forward.

The United States has made serious, fair and far-reaching proposals to the
Soviet Union and this is a moment of rare opportunity for arms reduction. But I
will need, and American negotiators in Geneva will need, Congress's support.
Enacting the Soviet negotiating position into American law would not be the way
to win a good agreement. So I must tell you in this Congress I will veto any
effort that undercuts our national security and our negotiating leverage.

Today, we also find ourselves engaged in expanding peaceful commerce across the
world. We will work to expand our opportunities in international markets through
the Uruguay round of trade negotiations and to complete an historic free trade
arrangement between the world's two largest trading partners, Canada and the
United States.

Our basic trade policy remains the same: we remain opposed as ever to
protectionism because America's growth and future depend on trade. But we will
insist on trade that is fair and free. We are always willing to be trade
partners but never trade patsies.

Now from foreign borders, let us return to our own because America in the world
is only as strong as America at home.

This 100th Congress has high responsibilities. I begin with a gentle reminder
that many of these are simply the incomplete obligations of the past. The
American people deserve to be impatient because we do not yet have the public
house in order.

We've had great success in restoring our economic integrity, and we've rescued
our nation from the worst economic mess since the Depression.

But there's more to do. For starters, the Federal deficit is outrageous.

For years I've asked that we stop pushing onto our children the excesses of our
Government. What the Congress finally needs to do is pass a constitutional
amendment that mandates a balanced budget and forces Government to live within
its means. States, cities and the families of America balance their budgets. Why
can't we?

Next, the budget process is a sorry spectacle. The missing of deadlines and the
nightmare of monstrous continuing resolutions packing hundreds of billions of
dollars of spending into one bill must be stopped.

We ask the Congress, once again: Give us the same tool that 43 Governors have, a
line-item veto so we can carve out the boondoggles and pork -those items that
would never survive on their own. I will send the Congress broad recommendations
on the budget, but first I'd like to see yours. Let's go to work and get this
done together. Keeping 'Commitment' To Balance the Budget' But now, let's talk
about this year's budget. Even though I have submitted it within the
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction target, I've seen suggestions that we
might postpone that timetable. Well, I think the American people are tired of
hearing the same old excuses. Together, we made a commitment to balance the
budget; now, let's keep it.

As for those suggestions that the answer is higher taxes, the American people
have repeatedly rejected that shopworn advice. They know that we don't have
deficits because people are taxed too little; we have deficits because big
government spends too much.

Now next month, I will place two additional reforms before the Congress.

We've created a welfare monster that is a shocking indictment of our sense of
priorities. Our national welfare system consists of some 59 major programs and
over 6,000 pages of Federal laws and regulations on which more than $132 billion
was spent in 1985.

I will propose a new national welfare strategy, a program of welfare reform
through state-sponsored, community-based demonstration projects. This is the
time to reform this outmoded social dinosaur and finally break the poverty trap.
Now e will never abandon those who, through no fault of their own, must have our
help. But let us work to see how many can be freed from the dependency of
welfare and made self-supporting, which the great majority of welfare recipients
want more than anything else.

Next, let us remove a financial specter facing our older Americans, the fear of
an illness so expensive that it can result in having to make an intolerable
choice between bankruptcy and death. I will submit legislation shortly to help
free the elderly from the fear of catastrophic illness. Now, let's turn to the
future. It is widely said that America is losing her competitive edge. Well,
that won't happen if we act now. How well prepared are we to enter the 21st
century? In my lifetime, America set the standard for the world. It is now time
to determine that we should enter the next century having achieved a level of
excellence unsurpassed in history.

We will achieve this: first, by guaranteeing that Government does everything
possible to promote America's ability to compete. Second, we must act as
individuals in a quest for excellence that will not be measured by new proposals
or billions in new funding. Rather, it involves an expenditure of American
spirit and just plain American grit.

The Congress will soon receive my comprehensive proposals to enhance our
competitiveness, including new science and technology centers and strong new
funding for basic research.

The bill will include legal and regulatory reforms and weapons to fight unfair
trade practices. Competitiveness also means giving our farmers a shot at
participating fairly and fully in a changing world market.

Preparing for the future must begin, as always, with our children.

We need to set for them new and more rigorous goals. We must demand more of
ourselves and our children by raising literacy levels dramatically by the year
2000. Our children should master the basic concepts of math and science and
let's insist that students not leave high school until they have studied and
understood the basic documents of our national heritage.

There's one more thing we can't let up on. Let's redouble our personal efforts
to provide for every child a safe and drug-free learning environment. If our
crusade against drugs succeeds with our children, we will defeat that scourge
all over our country.

Finally, let's stop suppressing the spiritual core of our national being. Our
nation could not have been conceived without divine help. Why is it that we can
build a nation with our prayers but we can't use a schoolroom for voluntary
prayer? The 100th Congress of the United States should be remembered as the one
that ended the expulsion of God from America's classrooms.

The quest for excellence into the 21st century begins in the schoolroom but must
go next to the workplace. More than 20 million new jobs will be created before
the new century unfolds, and, by then, our economy should be able to provide a
job for everyone who wants to work.

We must also enable our workers to adapt to the rapidly changing nature of the
workplace and I will propose substantial new Federal commitments keyed to
retraining and job mobility.

Over the next few weeks, I'll be sending the Congress a complete series of these
special messages, on budget reform, welfare reform, competitiveness, including
education, trade, worker training and assistance, agriculture and other
subjects.

The Congress can give us these tools, but to make these tools work, it really
comes down to just being our best. And that's the core of American greatness.

The responsibility of freedom presses us toward higher knowledge and, I believe,
moral and spiritual greatness. Through lower taxes and smaller government,
government has its ways of freeing people's spirits. But only we, each of us,
can let the spirit soar against our own individual standards.

Excellence is what makes freedom ring. And isn't that what we do best? 'With No
Boundaries To What We Can Do' We're entering our third century now, but it's
wrong to judge our nation by its years. The calendar can't measure America
because we were meant to be an endless experiment in freedom, with no limit to
our reaches, no boundaries to what we can do, no end point to our hopes.

The United States Constitution is the impassioned and inspired vehicle by which
we travel through history. It grew out of the most fundamental inspiration of
our existence: that we are here to serve Him by living free, that living free
releases in us the noblest of impulses and the best of our abilities. That we
would use these gifts for good and generous purposes and would secure them not
just for ourselves, and for our children, but for all mankind.

Over the years - over the years, and I won't count if you don't - nothing has
been so heartwarming to me as speaking to America's young. And the little ones
especially, so fresh-faced and so eager to know. Well, from time to time, I've
been with them, they will ask about our Constitution. And I hope you members of
Congress will not deem this a breach of protocol if you'll permit me to share
these thoughts again with the young people who might be listening or watching
this evening.

I have read the constitutions of a number of countries, including the Soviet
Union's. Now some people are surprised to hear that they have a constitution,
and it even supposedly grants a number of freedoms to its people. Many countries
have written into their constitution provisions for freedom of speech and
freedom of assembly. But if this is true, why is the Constitution of the United
States so exceptional?

Well, the difference is so small that it almost escapes you, but it's so great
it tells you the whole story in just three words: We the People.

In those other constitutions, the Government tells the people of those countries
what they are allowed to do. In our Constitution, we the people tell the
Government what it can do and it can do onlb those things listed in that
document and no others.

Virtually every other revolution in history has just exchanged one set of rulers
for another set of rulers. Our revolution is the first to say the people are the
masters and government is their servant.

And you young people out there, don't ever forget that. Someday, you could be in
this room, but wherever you are, America is depending on you to reach your
highest and be your best, because here in America, we the people are in charge.

Just three words, some words. 'This Unique Breed We Call Americans' We the
people. Those are the kids on Christmas Day looking out from a frozen sentry
post on the 38th Parallel in Korea or aboard an aircraft carrier in the
Mediterranean. A million miles from home. But doing their duty.

We the people. Those are the warm-hearted whose numbers we can't begin to count
who'll begin the day with a little prayer for the hostages they will never know
and M.I.A. families they will never meet. Why? Because that's the way we are,
this unique breed we call Americans.

We the people. They're farmers on tough times, but who never stop feeding a
hungry world. They're the volunteers at the hospital choking back their tears
for the hundreth time caring for a baby struggling for life because of a mother
who used drugs. And you'll forgive me a special memory, it's a million mothers
like Nellie Reagan who never knew a stranger or turned a hungry person away from
her kitchen door.

We the people. They refute last week's television commentary downgrading our
optimism and our idealism. They are the entrepreneurs, the builders, the
pioneers, and a lot of regular folks, the true heroes of our land who make up
the most uncommon nation of doers in history. You know they're Americans because
their spirit is as big as the universe, and their hearts are bigger than their
spirits.

We the people. Starting the third century of a dream and standing up to some
cynic who's trying to tell us we're not going to get any better.

Are we at the end? Well, I can't tell it any better than the real thing, a story
recorded by James Madison from the final moments of the Constitutional
Convention, Sept. 17, 1787. As the last few members signed the document,
Benjamin Franklin - the oldest delegate at 81 years, and in frail health -
looked over toward the chair where George Washington daily presided. At the back
of that chair was painted the picture of a sun on the horizon. And turning to
those sitting next to him, Franklin observed that artists found it difficult in
their painting to distinguish between a rising and a setting sun.

Well, I know if we were there, we could see those delegates sitting around
Franklin, leaning in to listen more closely to him. And then Dr. Franklin began
to share his deepest hopes and fears about the outcome of their efforts, and
this is what he said:

''I have often . . . looked at that picture behind the President without being
able to tell whether it was a rising or setting sun: But now at length I have
the happiness to know that it is a rising and not a setting sun.''

Well, you can bet it's rising, because, my fellow citizens, America isn't
finished, her best days have just begun.

Thank you. God bless you and God bless America.

THE PRESIDENT ON IRAN

Nov. 24: ''I am not going to lie about that. I did not make a mistake.''

Nov. 25: ''I believe our foreign policy goals toward Iran were well founded.
However, the information brought to my attention yesterday convinced me that in
one aspect, implementation of that policy was seriously flawed.''

Nov. 29: ''So, while we've been occupied with the Iranian issue over the past
two weeks, let's not forget that there are many other issues that concern us.''

Dec. 1: ''If actions in implementing my policy were taken without my
authorization, knowledge or concurrence, this will be exposed and appropriate
corrective steps will be taken.''

Dec. 6: ''While we are still seeking all the facts, it's obvious that the
execution of these policies was flawed and mistakes were made.''

Dec. 16: ''There is urgent need for full disclosure of all facts surrounding the
Iranian controversy. I want to get this information out. We must get on with the
business at hand and put this issue behind us. It is my desire to have the full
story about Iran come out now - the alleged transfer of funds, the Swiss bank
accounts, who was involved - everything.''

Jan. 27: ''But though we have made much progress, I have one major regret. I
took a risk with regard to our action in Iran. It did not work, and for that I
assume full responsibility. . . . We did not achieve what we wished, and serious
mistakes were made in trying to do so. We will get to the bottom of this, and I
will take whatever action is called for.''

THE REAGAN YEARS: HOW HE VIEWED THE STATE OF THE UNION

1982: President Reagan announced a sweeping plan to give states and localities
control over Federal programs costing $47 billion a year by 1984. He spoke of
the ''truly ominous'' situation when he took office a year before. ''Americans'
faith in their governmental process was steadily declinining,'' he said, but
added that was changing and ''an era of American renewal'' had begun.

1983: Mr. Reagan addressed the nation's economic problems and urged Congress to
support a broad freeze in non-military domestic spending. He called for a
''standby'' tax increase of up to $50 billion a year for the fiscal years
1986-88. Butpolls showed that Mr. Reagan's approval among Americans slipped to
41 percent, the lowest point ever. Americans disagreed with the President's tax
and military spending policies, and believed he had failed to deal with
unemployment.

1984: In a speech that would set the tone for the Presidential campaign, Mr.
Reagan said the nation had gained renewed hope since he took office. He again
focused on reducing Federal spending and declared that the United States was
''safer, stronger and more secure,'' than before. He said his Administration was
ready to negotiate in earnest with the Russians on all issues.

He endorsed the idea of large increases in military and economic aid to Central
America and defended the American presence in Lebanon.

1985: Mr. Reagan urged the nation to forge ''a second American revolution of
hope and opportunity,'' with an agenda of economic growth and elimination of the
threat of nuclear war. He also proposed a sweeping overhaul of the nation's tax
code.

In a year in which Americans increasingly blamed foreign trade for the loss of
jobs and supported restrictions on imports, Mr. Reagan said the Administration
would study potential changes in trade policy and urged a new round of trade
negotiations next year.

1986: The President's message was delayed for a week by the explosion of the
space shuttle Challenger. Mr. Reagan singled out the American family as a major
theme of the remainder of his term. He proposed a study on the nation's welfare
system and what he termed the ''web of dependency'' among recipients.

The speech, shorter and with fewer specific domestic proposals than usual, came
shortly after passage of the budget-balancing law and reflected uncertaintly as
to its impact on spending.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of President Reagan (NYT)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 28, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 894 words


THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION:

Spies and Spying in the 20th Century.

By Phillip Knightley. Illustrated. 436 pages. W. W. Norton. $19.95.

THE world's intelligence services, in the estimate of Phillip Knightley, are
distinguished neither for intelligence nor service to their nations. Mr.
Knightley, a British journalist whose last book was ''The First Casualty,'' a
history of war correspondents, once again covers a century of colorful
activities, usually by off-color types. Relying largely on anecdotes about
espionage flops, some of which sound too bad to be true, he finds that boasts by
former operatives have cloaked dubious accomplishments.

From their start around the turn of the century, he observes, intelligence
agencies have thrived on ''international tension and foreign threat'' -doing
their best to exacerbate the one and exaggerate the other. Telling the story in
a most readable way, he reminds us that even Mata Hari was a victim of such
exaggeration, there being ''not a shred of evidence'' that the exotic dancer who
was executed by the French in World War I had ever given the Germans any
information.

After some interwar dabbling in derring-do by upper-class youths infected by the
adventure tales of John Buchan, the European powers went in for spying in a big
way during World War II. Mr. Knightley dismisses as minimal the contribution to
victory of the American Office of Strategic Services, or O.S.S., and is just as
skeptical of the vaunted achievement of his own country's Secret Intelligence
Service (S.I.S.) in breaking the Germans' ''Enigma'' code. In his telling, the
code breakers at Bletchley Park often erred - but it's not easy to fault them.
What is a cryptographer to do, for example, with an intercepted message that
says: ''Be careful of Axel. He bites.'' The experts labored over its real
meaning, only to receive a few days later another message that a German guard
was in hospital: ''Axel bit him.'' Yes, Axel turned out to be a guard dog with
teeth.

According to Mr. Knightley, the code breakers were further misled by lies the
German commanders told one another - and when they were on the mark (reporting,
for example, that the Allied bombing of Germany was costing more than it was
worth), their information was ignored by bomb-happy commanders. He concludes
that despite all that we have read about it, British code-breaking ''did not win
the war and it is doubtful if it even shortened it.''

The obstacles encountered by intelligence gatherers in getting their information
accepted when it goes against what their leaders want to believe have not been
confined to Britain. Stalin resisted warnings of German plans to invade his
country in 1941, and Lyndon Johnson preferred upbeat accounts of how the war in
Vietnam was getting on.

The Central Intelligence Agency and the K.G.B., the Soviet intelligence agency,
fare no better than the S.I.S. in Mr. Knightley's report. Both seem to him to be
overblown agencies: ''By removing themselves from the scrutiny which other
governmental organizations undergo to ensure their efficiency, intelligence
agencies have been able to proliferate unchecked for much of this century.''
Reviewing the C.I.A.'s ''successes'' in placing friendly regimes in Iran and
Guatemala during the 1950's, he concludes that such covert action is ''little
more than a gimmick, effective only when the internal forces were already moving
in the direction that the C.I.A. wished to push them.''

Mr. Knightley notes that when the C.I.A. fails in an important matter -such as
not foreseeing the North Korean invasion of South Korea or the overthrow of the
Shah - it only serves as an excuse for asking for more money. He is
appropriately critical of the agency for spreading propaganda in the West about
Soviet and Cuban aggression, in part, he charges, for its own aggrandizement.
Had the timing been better for him, he could assuredly have drawn a few
cautionary paragraphs from revelations of the C.I.A.'s role in the
Administration's recent dealings with Iran.

A main defect of ''The Second Oldest Profession'' is overkill. Like some of the
intelligence agents he criticizes, Mr. Knightley is so bent on making a case
that he weakens it by refusing to give the other side an inch. You're left
suspecting that the spies must be at least a little more useful than Mr.
Knightley is willing to concede.

In a previous book, about the famous Soviet ''penetration agent'' or mole,
Harold (Kim) Philby, he credited Mr. Philby with being of use to his masters in
Moscow; for purposes of his new book, Mr. Knightley takes away much of that
credit. He finds defectors generally worthless to whatever country receives
them. And he is typically unimpressed by atomic spies such as Klaus Fuchs: ''The
spies may have advanced the date of the first Soviet bomb, but even this remains
somewhat doubtful and it would appear to be a matter of months rather than
years.''

Although Mr. Knightley completed his work before fame struck Lieut. Col. Oliver
L. North and he gives only a couple of pages to the National Security Council,
his characterization of the sort of people who are attracted to covert
activities gains meaning from today's headlines: ''Those who practice secret
intelligence work are always likely to fall prey to destructive fantasies and a
conspiratorial view of the world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Philip Knightley

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 28, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PLAINTIFF DENIES 'BELL JAR' FILM EVENTS

BYLINE: By ELEANOR BLAU, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Jan. 27


A 1979 film of Sylvia Plath's novel ''The Bell Jar'' was shown on two television
screens here today in Federal District Court, and a psychiatrist who contends
she is the basis for one of its characters denied vehemently that certain scenes
in the movie had ever taken place in real life.

''I never, never in any way attempted to seduce Sylvia Plath into a homosexual
relationship,'' said the psychiatrist, Dr. Jane V. Anderson, who is also an
assistant clinical professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School. She is
suing for defamation and invasion of privacy over the movie.

''I never in any way attempted to get her into a 'suicide pact like lovers,' ''
she said, referring to a phrase in the film. ''I also never made any suicide
attempts or had scars on my breast. And certainly, I never hung myself.''

In a scene that does not take place in the novel, Joan Gilling, the character
that Dr. Anderson asserts is based on herself, and Esther Greenwood, the
character said to be based upon Miss Plath, are in a field at a mental hospital
where both are patients, and Joan shows Esther scars on her chest from a suicide
attempt.

'You Choose the Way'

Esther hugs her in sympathy. ''Oh, Esther, let's go together,'' Joan pleads,
sinking down so that her arms encircle Esther's waist. Suggesting ''a suicide
pact, like lovers,'' she says ''You choose the way,'' adding, ''What's wrong
with being lovers?''

Dr. Anderson previously testified that she and Miss Plath went to the same
Unitarian Church and junior high school and were both at Smith College, where
Dr. Anderson, in the class of 1953, was a year ahead of the author.

Questioned by her attorney, Harry L. Manion 3d, Dr. Anderson detailed scenes in
the film that she said did resemble real life.

She said, for example, that Miss Plath really did take an overdose of
barbiturates, as in the film, and ''did go into the basement of her house'' in
Wellesley, Mass., and did ''lie behind a woodpile where she remained at least
two days.''

Aspects of the college in the film, including its lawns and ponds, resemble
Smith, she said, and the hospital resembled McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass.,
where she and Miss Plath were mental patients.

'A Series of Flashbacks'

Mr. Manion replayed four scenes that Dr. Anderson found particularly
objectionable. She said she was ''horrified beyond words at the scene in the
field'' and shocked by the ''horrifying and totally, absolutely unnecessary
representation'' of Joan hanging from a tree after Esther rejects her suicide
proposal.

''It was an ethical outrage,'' said Dr. Anderson, reporting that soon after
viewing the film alone in a Boston movie house in 1979, she suffered ''a series
of flashbacks such as Vietnam war veterans have of their experiences.''

She described these as ''colored, visual images of various components of the
painful aspects'' of her experiences at McLean in 1953 and 1954, which would
''start and stop in a way I did not have control over.''

They lasted 72 hours, she said, and they prompted her to get in touch with the
psychiatrist she had seen at McLean and as an outpatient until 1958.

Dr. Anderson said she was still in therapy, twice a week when she had time, but
with a different doctor because the McLean psychiatrist has retired from private
practice. She said she was still afflicted with insomnia, which she suffered
after viewing the movie, although somewhat less severely.

Implications of Homosexuality

Testifying before a jury of four men and four women on the fourth day of the
trial, Dr. Anderson said she had not realized, upon reading the novel in 1971 -
the year it was published in the United States - that it implied Joan had
homosexual tendencies. ''It had not registered with me,'' Dr. Anderson said.

She said her first inkling of this implication was in 1976, when she read a
biographical book about Miss Plath by Edward Butscher that linked Dr. Anderson
with the Joan Gilling character and described the character as a lesbian.

Dr. Anderson got in touch with a lawyer, she said, but decided at the time
against a lawsuit for fear it would make public her medical record at McLean.
She said she examined that record and found that it revealed that half of the
hospital's staff thought she was schizophrenic.

The defendants in the case include companies and individuals involved in the
production and distribution of the film and its television and video-cassette
versions. They also include Ted Hughes, Britain's poet laureate, who was Miss
Plath's husband and who sold the book's movie rights. Miss Plath committed
suicide in 1963.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Arrest the Customers as Well as the Drug Dealers in Our Parks

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 280 words


To the Editor:

Your news article on drug dealing in Washington Square Park (Jan. 12) presents a
critical problem concerning the quality of life in New York City - the public's
loss of such areas as parks and plazas to the intimidating presence of drug
dealers. Even the Vietnam veterans' memorial park (in the financial district)
suffers this problem. On workdays it is not possible to approach the memorial
without passing through a line of dealers hawking their wares.

The obvious reason that the drug dealers are in our public areas is that our
citizens are also there giving them handfuls of 10's and 20's. These
transactions are no more secretive than the purchase of a pretzel from the
corner cart.

The dealers, you tell us, don't care about being arrested since they are out and
back in business in a day or two. I believe that the middle-class customers are
the really weak link in the drug-dealing chain. Why not arrest them also? They
should be much easier to intimidate with the threat of possible incarceration.

Law permitting, lists of names of those arrested for illegal drug sales and
purchases might be published as was done for those caught using Connecticut
Turnpike tokens in subway turnstiles. I remember there were a number of
''respectable'' businessmen on the token-cheat-list. I imagine that there were
not very many repeat offenders, especially after their bosses read about the
episodes in the newspaper.

I think that arresting the customers as well as the dealers would be the only
feasible method by which society can rid itself of the drug dealers and return
our public areas to the public.

PHILIP GRIEVE
  New York, Jan. 17, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
Contra Connection: Stalking Film Rights

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1061 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Given the mystery surrounding the Reagan Administration's secret effort to keep
the Nicaraguan rebels supplied with arms, perhaps it was inevitable there would
be talk about a movie.

Two groups are said to be vying to buy the film rights to the story from people
involved in the operation, among them Eugene Hasenfus, the cargo handler who was
detained for weeks by the Sandinistas after the supply plane he was on was shot
down while on a mission over Nicaragua. But whether the movie will ever be made
is something of a mystery itself.

Either group could run into censorship problems if it turns out that
participants in the covert operation were tied to the Central Intelligence
Agency.

Further compounding matters, one group says the other group appears to be going
after the story rights so as to tie up the secret details of the operation and
perhaps preclude any film ever being made.

Money and Phone Calls

Both groups reportedly have been touring the country this month, courting Mr.
Hasenfus and others involved in the supply operation. Large offers of money are
said to have been tendered, and phone calls are said to have been made by
celebrities including the actor Marlon Brando.

A key figure in one of the film groups is Larry Spivey, a former Navy
counterinsurgency specialist. Mr. Spivey says he is now a freelance movie
producer. But his company is not listed with any of the standard Hollywood
unions or film production organizations, and the phone number he gives out
elicits only a loud electronic buzz.

The other film group is headed by Frank W. Snepp, a former Central Intelligence
Agency official in Vietnam who now writes books and works on films.

Mr. Snepp gained public prominence when he wrote a book about the fall of Saigon
in 1975, ''Decent Interval,'' and was sued by the Federal Government for
violating the agreement that agency employees make never to disclose information
about the agency or its activities without prior agency approval.

After the Supreme Court upheld his conviction, Mr. Snepp was forced to return
about $200,000 in profits from the book. Since then several other book and film
projects he has worked on have been screened by the C.I.A. for clearance, Mr.
Snepp said.

Mr. Snepp says Mr. Spivey seems in his movie offers to be trying to buy the
silence of Mr. Hasenfus and his colleagues. Mr. Snepp says provisions in the
contract Mr. Spivey offered to Mr. Hasenfus would give Mr. Spivey virtual veto
power over what Mr. Hasenfus says about his experiences and might actually
preclude any film being made.

Mr. Spivey strongly denies the charge. ''My god, no,'' he said.The Subject of a
Book Mr. Spivey has himself been the subject of a book, ''The Spivey
Assignment'' by Philip Rosenberg, based on his experiences as a Georgia Bureau
of Investigation informant in a case involving drug smuggling from Central
America. In addition, Mr. Spivey numbers among his acquaintances Lieut. Col.
Oliver L. North, the National Security Council aide who was dismissed over the
key role he had in the secretive Iran-contra arms scandal.

But Mr. Spivey says his relationship with Colonel North, who he says he met at a
briefing on Nicaragua in the Old Executive Office Building, has no bearing on
the film project.

A Congressional investigator who is familiar with the contra operation says that
Mr. Spivey was never actually involved in the contra supply effort but that he
knew much about it almost from the start.

''He was not part of it,'' the investigator said, ''but he met all the players
and was in all the right places at all the right times.''

Whatever the case, any movie about the supply operation that is based on
interviews with people who participated in that effort could run into censorship
problems because of the C.I.A.'s provision for secrecy pledges. Links to C.I.A.
Mr. Hasenfus has said he thought he was working for the C.I.A.

The Reagan Administration has denied that Mr. Hasenfus and his associates in the
contra supply effort were working for the agency when his C-123 aircraft was
shot down last October and he was taken prisoner. But Congressional
investigators say they believe Mr. Hasenfus may have signed a secrecy pledge
last spring when he joined the supply program through Southern Air Transport, a
concern formerly owned by the C.I.A.

According to people familiar with the film negotiations, Mr. Spivey has offered
Mr. Hasenfus and others involved in contra aid more money, in some cases double
Mr. Snepp's offer.

For example, when Mr. Snepp reportedly offered one cargo handler $25,000 to act
as a film consultant, Mr. Spivey is said to have jumped his offer to $50,000.

Still, sources say, in Mr. Hasenfus's case he was most impressed not by money
but by a phone call from Mr. Brando, who has become a friend of Mr. Snepp.

Mr. Snepp says Mr. Brando, who has not made a movie in more than five years and
shuns all public appearances, was simply interested in the politics of the story
but might decide later to play a more active role in the film.

Mr. Hasenfus said in a telephone interview from his home in Marinette, Wis.,
that he was not ready to decide which offer, if any, to accept. ''I'm just
trying to keep a low profile,'' he added.

But the people familiar with the talks say Mr. Hasenfus and his wife, Sally,
planned to fly to California this week to meet with Mr. Brando and Mr. Snepp and
possibly sign a deal with them.

'The Human Side'

Mr. Snepp says his film would not be ''an expose, an anti-C.I.A. movie.''
Instead, he says, it would focus on ''the human side.'' That side appeals to
him, Mr. Snepp adds, because ''I was a C.I.A official, but there was a lot more
to me than that.''

To impress the Hasenfuses and others in the contra operation, Mr. Spivey
reportedly showed them a letter from former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the
Philippines, proposing a film about his life. He is also said to have related
that he had worked for Orion Pictures in Hollywood. A spokesman for Orion said
Mr. Spivey had brought the company one film property, about a rape victim, but
that Orion later severed relations with him.

Mr. Spivey said he did not have ''any idea'' whether his group would ever
proceed to the point of beginning to film the arms supply story.

''We still don't know the truth,'' he said. ''We only do true stories.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Larry Spivey (Bob Storer)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books;
U.S. and Arms

BYLINE: By Ronald H. Spector; Ronald H. Spector, the author of ''Eagle Against
the Sun: The American War With Japan,'' is working on a book about the Vietnam
War.

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 721 words


TO ARM A NATION: Rebuilding America's Endangered Defenses. By Richard Halloran.
Macmillan. 396 pages. $21.95. AMONG the more unexpected developments of the last
few years has been the growth of widespread public interest and debate about the
state of the armed forces. This debate goes well beyond the tired arguments
about who should serve or whether more or less money is required for national
defense. It now embraces such questions as the organization, composition,
command and control of the armed forces, their doctrine and training and the
entire weapons development and procurement process.

As Richard Halloran points out in ''To Arm a Nation,'' this debate comes at a
time when only a small minority of elected officials, educators, journalists and
other opinion leaders under the age of 40 have had any first-hand experience of
the armed forces. Moreover, as Mr. Halloran amply documents, the services
themselves have undergone such far-reaching changes over the last 15 years as to
make them almost unrecognizable to many veterans of World War II, Korea or even
Vietnam.

All of this makes the appearance of ''To Arm a Nation'' especially timely and
valuable. It will be hard to find a clearer introduction to most of the major
issues concerning national security. A longtime military correspondent of The
New York Times, the author draws on his extensive personal experience to present
an absorbing human portrait of American armed forces. Not the least of the
attractions of ''To Arm a Nation'' is Mr. Halloran's frequent deft translations
of Pentagonese into comprehensible English.

Mr. Halloran calls for comprehensive changes in the way Congress, the President
and the Pentagon go about the business of providing for the common defense. To
his credit, he sees the problem in far broader terms than merely reorganizing
the Defense Department. While ''poor Pentagon management'' and ''lack of
interservice coordination'' come in for their share of criticism, Mr. Halloran
also amply documents the cost to the taxpayer of Congressional pork-barrel
legislation, inefficiency and dishonesty in the arms industries and lack of
equitable burden sharing by allies of the United States.

Nevertheless, this reviewer found portions of Mr. Halloran's diagnosis and
prescription for the ills of America's defenses to be less than completely
persuasive. Part of the problem is that the author sometimes appears to
contradict his own arguments. Thus, at the outset of the book, the Reagan
Administration is criticized for its failure to reach agreement ''on basic
principles governing the use of military force. There was, therefore, no
agreement on national strategy to defend the fundamental interests of the United
States.''

Yet a later section of the book is devoted to discussing ''a secret document
called Defense Guidance'' described as embodying ''the most ambitious'' military
strategy in decades. Similarly, Mr. Halloran tells us that today's officers are
''generally first class'' and that the services have long since purged most of
their incompetents and time-servers of the bad old days. Yet, at the same time,
he describes a 1985 Army self-evaluation in which more than half the officers
surveyed believed ''the bold, original, creative officer cannot survive in
today's Army,'' and that ''the Officer Corps is focused on personal gain rather
than selflessness.'' Again, after a devastating and convincing exposition of
American deficiencies in the area of air and sea lift, pointing up the fact that
these shortcomings are unlikely to be remedied in any period under 10 years, Mr.
Halloran then calls for withdrawal of most American troops stationed abroad and
reliance ''on the Navy, plus newly built air and sea lift, to project power.''

Finally, a few of Mr. Halloran's proposed reforms have an air of implausibility
to them. For example, his proposal to establish an independent public commission
to regulate the arms industry will probably prove less than appealing to anyone
familiar with the long, melancholy history of Government regulatory agencies in
the United States. Yet wherever one stands on these issues, one can only profit
from reading ''To Arm a Nation'' and for the concerned citizen who wants to know
what all the arguing is about, ''To Arm a Nation'' is a good place to start.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Platoon' and 'Critical' Lead Box-Office Sales

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 181 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Jan. 28


The Vietnam War film ''Platoon'' nearly equaled Richard Pryor's ''Critical
Condition'' at the box office last weekend, even though it played in about
one-sixth as many theaters.

Figures provided by the films' studios showed both films took in about $3.3
million, with ''Critical Condition'' garnering slightly more to hold the No. 1
spot for a second week. ''Platoon,'' however, appeared on only 214 screens while
''Critical Condition'' was shown on 1,343.

''Platoon,'' Orion's Vietnam War action drama starring Charlie Sheen and Willem
Dafoe, pulled in $15,378 per screen.

Paramount's ''Critical Condition,'' with Mr. Pryor as a man impersonating a
physician during a hospital emergency, averaged $2,484 per screen.

''Star Trek IV: the Voyage Home'' dropped to third place with $2.6 million worth
of tickets sold last week, while '' 'Crocodile' Dundee'' earned $2.6 million for
fourth place in its 18th week of release. The Australian film has earned a total
of $136 million.

In fifth place for the week was Eddie Murphy's ''Golden Child'' with $2.5
million in ticket sales.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 29, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'BAD GUYS' WEAR PIN STRIPES

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1675 words


On the season opener a year ago of ''Miami Vice,'' the stylish crime drama, the
detectives Crockett and Tubbs trace a Colombian-based drug ring to its money
center - a prestigious New York bank.

There, the banker, a thin, evil, unctuous old man, tells the detectives that the
bank ''nurtures and protects'' drug dealers - and the underground economy they
support - so it can collect on its huge loans to Latin American countries.

''If those Latin borrowers default,'' he explains slowly, ''we would be
decimated. And we are America. When we sneeze, everybody catches cold.''

The role played by the banker is not unusual: The American businessman has
become television's most popular villain. People who follow these things say the
business executive appears as a character on prime-time television an average of
14 times each week, often as the ''bad guy,'' murdering, stealing, lying and
cheating his way into the popular consciousness.

In one episode of ''Spenser for Hire,'' for example, businessmen are involved in
bribery and murder in connection with the construction of substandard buildings.
In other plots, a toy manufacturer dumps toxic wastes into a city sewer system
(''Cagney and Lacey'') and a company president steals the idea for a new auto
part (''The Equalizer'').

No. 2 in Prime-Time Crime

''Except for professional criminals, no one commits more crimes on prime-time
television than the businessman,'' said S. Robert Lichter, a political scientist
who, with two other researchers, has been conducting an eight-year study of
television entertainment and how it portrays society.

Off-screen, there are, of course, business executives who are venal, corrupt,
criminal. But in prime-time television dramas, a full one-third of all business
executives are corrupt or criminal, according to George Gerbner, dean of the
Annenberg School of Communications at the University of Pennsylvania.

And while the business executive has always been a popular villain in books and
movies, some observers contend that the characters have never been more
villainous than now on prime-time TV, with such regulars as J. R. Ewing on
''Dallas'' and Alexis Carrington on ''Dynasty'' performing nefarious deeds on a
weekly basis.

Moreover, many of the business characters do not simply commit white-collar
crimes, such as trading illegal inside stock information, said Mr. Lichter, a
professor of political science at George Washington University and a fellow at
the American Enterprise Institute. Instead, they are often seen waving guns,
dealing drugs or ordering rivals beaten.

''Generally, few people in the television industry dispute the fact that
businessmen on TV today are the heavies out of all proportion to reality,'' said
Michael Pack, the director of an upcoming documentary for the Public
Broadcasting Service, ''Hollywood's Favorite Heavy: Businessmen on Prime Time
TV.''

For their part, business executives have tended to shrug off their TV image.
''On television, if you make money, you're dishonest,'' said T. Boone Pickens,
the Texas oilman who heads Mesa Limited Partners. ''When I see 'Dallas,' or some
such show, I just change the channel because it is not of interest to me.''

Impact on Viewers

But historians and social scientists say the negative images that flash across
the screen night after night raise intriguing questions about why business
people are so often portrayed as evil, and whether that portrayal has any impact
- if not on the business executive, then on the viewer.

''I don't know that there has been any serious study making a connection in a
causal or empirical way, but one would have to be boobish to think that the
negative image doesn't become something people see as normal,'' said Stephen A.
Greyser, a professor at Harvard Business School who specializes in the field of
communications.

Dr. Ronald Milavsky, vice president of news and social research of NBC, said,
however, ''Yuppies love businessmen, but generally the rest of the public
suspects them of exploitation.''

He added: ''I think television strikes responsive notes in people, but it does
not create them. Its drama is tailored to fit predispositions that are already
out there in the audience.''

Indeed, Malcolm S. Forbes, publisher of Forbes magazine, said, ''I think some of
the real-life crooks we read about do far more to undermine the public image of
businessmen than TV.''

''We try to be balanced and fair in all our portrayals,'' said John L. Barber,
vice president of current series programming for ABC. ''We may not always
succeed, but fairness is our goal.'' He said that on ''Dynasty,'' for example,
the scheming Alexis Carrington was balanced to a degree by the character of her
ex-husband, Blake Carrington, a powerful corporate figure.

An Easy Target

In interviews, writers and producers of television dramas said it was not that
they disliked the businessman, it was simply that he makes an easy,
noncontroversial heavy.

''Blacks, women, Italians, Hispanics, everyone writes letters complaining about
how they are portrayed on television,'' said Barney Rosenzweig, the executive
producer of ''Cagney and Lacey,'' the popular police series.

''Did you know we can't even use the word 'gypped' on TV anymore because it
offended the Gypsies?'' he said. ''That's why I love businessmen - they don't
write me letters.''

Barry Biederman, chairman of Biederman & Company, which specializes in corporate
advertising, said that if business executives did, in fact, organize to protest
their television image, the move would probably backfire. ''The Committee to
Help Put-Upon Executives - I just can't see it,'' he said.

In his documentary, Mr. Pack traces television's hard-line cynicism about
business people to the Vietnam War and Watergate, when many lost faith in some
of the country's key institutions. While television had always shown some
businessmen to be ''bad'' and greedy, he said, those characters were usually
presented as atypical people who tainted an otherwise honest system.

Today, he said, television reflects the general belief that the whole system is
suspect and corrupt.

Mr. Gerbner of the Annenberg School said that television ''knows how to deliver
a mass audience, and generally that means shows with a populist bent - anti-big
business, big government.''

Triumph of the 'Little Man'

In addition, television writers and producers said, TV audiences delight in
seeing the fall of rich and powerful villains, especially if they are done in by
the ''little man.''

Mr. Rosenzweig said that while in real life most criminals were not middle-class
businessmen, on television ''we don't do reality.'' And businessmen agreed that
very little about their television portrayal was realistic.

''When businessmen get together nobody ever says, 'Hey, wasn't that a neat
leveraged buyout deal J. R. pulled off on ''Dallas'?'' said Lawrence G. Smith,
executive vice president of the New York branch of the National Commercial Bank
of Saudi Arabia. ''The businessmen on TV don't do much business. Those shows are
melodramas and have nothing to do with the real world.''

But there are some signs that television may be intruding on reality.

Television's Lesson

''We are raised to absorb the values of our institutions - family, schools,
television,'' Mr. Pack said. ''And what is television telling us about
businessmen and how they succeed?

''On TV today,'' he continued, ''it's fun to be corrupt and almost everybody
who's anybody is.''

The Mobil Corporation provided major funding for Mr. Pack's documentary, which
is scheduled to be shown in March. Mr. Pack said that he and the producer,
Daniel B. Polin, approached Mobil about the project and worked independently of
the company.

Mr. Lichter, Mr. Gerbner and others pointed out that while the evil businessman
was once defeated by the hero, on the prime-time soap opera he returns to scheme
and plot and cheat, again and again. And in between all the scheming, he enjoys
the spoils of his corruption - gleaming jets, sleek limousines, lunches with
beautiful women in expensive restaurants.

In ''Hollywood's Favorite Heavy,'' there is a startling scene in which a group
of Brooklyn high school students, all steeped in prime-time soap operas, concede
they would do whatever was necessary to protect their business - even dumping
toxic wastes or selling drugs.

In the discussion, the students make it clear that they admire the unscrupulous
characters of J. R. Ewing and Alexis Carrington and accept their behavior as the
norm.

''I think it's very unintentional, but some of these shows are signaling the
audience that it's O.K. to lie and cheat, that that's what you have to do to be
a success,'' Mr. Lichter said.

George F. Schweitzer, vice president of communications for the CBS Broadcast
Group, said that even though businessmen were frequently portrayed as corrupt,
''this is entertainment, escapism.'' He added, ''We feel our audience is
intelligent enough to know these characters do not represent what American
business is all about.''

But, according to Mr. Lichter, ''there is a lot of general evidence that people
do tend to fuzz the boundaries between reality and television entertainment.''
He said, ''When Robert Young played Dr. Welby on television, he got half a
million letters asking for medical advice.''

Good Works Cited

Still, members of the business community said they believed they were known by
their good works in the community. ''They're out there on hospital boards,
charity boards, school boards,'' Mr. Forbes said.

''We're getting the real word out on news and public affairs shows,'' said Carl
Grant, vice president of the United States Chamber of Commerce in Washington.
''We think our image there can counter what people see on entertainment
programs.''

Yet Mr. Smith, the banker, conceded: ''Americans have always had ambiguous
feelings about business people. People consider banking a high-status job, for
example, but they generally hate their bankers.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Larry Hagman in 'Dallas'; photo of Joan Collins in 'Dynasty';
photo of Edward Woodwar in 'The Equalizer'

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 30, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
A MESS OF PACKAGES

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING AND IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 178 words


The Army has a problem: What to do with 2,000 parcels weighing 2 to 20 pounds
that were dumped on the lawn of the White House's new National Security adviser,
Frank Carlucci.

The packages, collected from all over the country by an orgnization calling
itself Vietnam Veterans Inc. and deposited at the Carlucci residence Tuesday
night, are intended for Vietnam soldiers the organization says are still missing
in action and perhaps being held in Indochina.

Once collected, the packages were loaded up and taken by the veterans
organization to the Laotian Embassy in Washington on Tuesday afternoon. The
Laotians said they knew nothing of any missing soldiers, and the would-be
benefactors were turned away, packages and all.

With that, they repaired to Mr. Carlucci's house and deposited the packages
there.

On Wednesday, soldiers from Fort Myer in suburban Virginia picked them up and
took them to the base for safekeeping. Their fate is still unknown.

''Frankly,'' said one National Security Council staffer, ''we still don't know
what to do with them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              January 31, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

RESTORING ANGKOR WAT, A VAST, SIX-YEAR JOB

BYLINE: By SANJOY HAZARIKA

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


Armed with chemical cleaners, preservatives and experience, a team of Indian
archeologists has begun restoring Angkor Wat, the vast and ancient capital of
Cambodia.

''Our approach is that the restored monuments should be complete in all respects
- the landscaping, the structure and the monuments themselves,'' said Dr. M. S.
Nagaraja Rao, India's former director general of archeology, who has been in
charge of the project. ''If necessary, we will dismantle and rebuild those parts
which are in bad shape.''

Dr. Rao, who visited the 850-year-old Khmer capital last year and drew up plans
to clean and repair it, says the job will take six to eight years both because
of the bad condition of the stone structures and because the country's hot,
summer rainy season will prevent work six months a year.

Extending over an area of 40 square miles, the ruins contain some of the world's
most imposing monuments in what may be the world's largest religious structure.
Angkor was abandoned as the Khmer capital in the 15th century in favor of Phnom
Penh and the ruins were rediscovered by the French only in 1861.

Dr. Rao says he has set out four major tasks for this year for his team, which
will include scores of Cambodian masons and workers.

Starting With Western Gate

The Indians plan to begin with the restoration of the main entrance to the
enormous complex of temples, chapels and corridors. This entrance, with its
carvings of mythological battles between gods and demons and depictions of life
in paradise and hell as well as the Khmer court, is known as the Western Gate
and is the largest of four gates. Its rows of windows with stone screens of
turned balusters are now badly damaged - many of the slim pillars are broken,
cracked or missing. They are to be made whole again.

The second task is restructuring a battered building known as a library. The
third phase will be the excavation of a pond and the fourth is setting stone
steps leading to the moat on the left of the Western Gate.

Visitors to the site say that decades of civil strife under Pol Pot and
continuing fighting between opponents and supporters of the current Vietnam
-backed Government have left few visible scars, although they say there are some
bullet holes.

''There is colossal damage but it is natural - cracked pillars and facades
caused by water seepage, weathering and cracking of the stone in the tropical
climate, overgrown vegetation,'' said Krishna Murari Srivastava, who led the
first Indian archeological study team to Angkor in 1983. Mr. Srivastava said in
an interview some figures on the walls have been completely washed away. ''At
places, the sandstone falls away like powder even to a mild touch.''

The archeologist added that the central complex was affected the worst by water
seepage: entire pillars and sections of the stone floor have sunk into the
ground. Insects have weakened the foundations of the pillars by burrowing into
the earth and stone, while colonies of bats have dropped mounds of excreta on
the floor and figures. The growth of moss, lichens and algae also hastened
disfigurement.

In 1986, India and Cambodia signed a cultural agreement authorizing Indian
specialists to start the restoration. India is paying for the project but
officials decline to give a figure on the cost. Sources close to the project say
it will run into millions of dollars.

When Dr. Srivastava visited the complex in 1983, he asked one of his chemical
experts to treat one of the apsarases - there are thousands of these graceful,
celestial nymphs carved out of stone - and remove the stains caused by water
discoloration.

Three years later, Dr. Rao visited the site and remarked on the figure that now
glows seductively in contrast to the blackened walls and weathered sculptures
near it. ''We have the competence to make the entire place come alive and become
a great culture center again,'' Dr. Rao said.

India's expertise in archeology is internationally recognized.

The Cambodians gave the job to the Indians after turning down offers from France
and Poland. The country is a former French colony and French archeologists
undertook some restoration work before the Vietnam War spilled over into
Cambodia.

Parts Must Be Dismantled

Indian experts say that some parts of the Angkor Wat complex must be dismantled
and rebuilt, pillar by pillar, slab by slab, with cranes hoisting stone blocks
and pillars while mechanical jacks push up the structure and allow engineers to
re-lay the foundations.

The size of the task is matched by the dimensions of the place. Angkor Wat was
built by the Khmer monarch Suryavarman II in the 12th century. It has three
concentric great enclosures, with the sanctuary, which could be visited only by
the King and his inner circle, at the center of the last enclosure. There are
four corridors of bas-relief nearly a mile long, while the central pyramid
temple rises 215 feet from a rectangular base and is surrounded by four other
temples.

This inner enclosure has three terraces, ascending to the central tower, with
steep stairways and galleries.

The entire complex is approached by crossing a moat 660 feet wide. The stone
causeway across the moat leads to the western entrance and is 50 feet wide. The
road between the main gate and the second enclosure is a quarter mile long, 30
feet wide and raised 5 feet above ground level.

Throughout the complex are constant reminders of the close cultural relationship
between India and Southeast Asia. Hindu myths, legends and events are depicted
on the walls of the temples and the vast, roofed corridors that stretch for
miles. Hindu princes, religious teachers and traders traveled to the Khmer
kingdom and settled in the area.

The Khmers profited by the intercourse: they acquired knowledge of Sanskrit,
astronomy, mathematics and technology and assimilated it into their culture,
achieving a rare blend of traditions that is reflected in the grace and delicacy
of the reliefs at Angkor. Hindu rituals were used at weddings, and the Hindu
calendar was used to divide the year into seasons.

At the height of its power and splendor, the Khmer empire was larger than modern
Cambodia. Fifty-four sovereigns ruled the empire between the first and 14th
centuries. The Angkor period began about 802 and continued under 14 rulers over
327 years.

Angkor Wat's decline began after the 12th century with a drop in rice production
and repeated attacks by Thais and Vietnamese. Finally, the capital moved to
Phnom Penh and the splendid stone temple cities in and around Angkor - some had
existed before Suryavarman II began his work and a few were built elsewhere by
his successors - were abandoned to the jungle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a relief from the ruins of Angkor Wat (Archaeiological Survey
of Indis)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE CELEBRATE TRADITIONAL NEW YEAR

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 36, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


Hundreds of Vietnamese gathered joyously yesterday at Public School 124 in
Chinatown to celebrate Tet -or the lunar new year - and call for freedom for
Vietnam.

Dao Phung Xuan, president of the Vietnamese Refugee Communities of New York and
New Jersey, extended greetings to compatriots in ''our second homeland'' and was
loudly applauded when he expressed hope for ''peace and the liberation of
Vietnam.''

After solemn renditions of the Vietnamese and American national anthems, Thien
V. Nguyen, a former captain of the Vietnamese Navy, led the traditional ceremony
of the Veneration of Ancestors, bowing and placing incense on an altar.

The stage was decorated with Vietnam's national colors of red and gold, a map of
Vietnam, a banner saying ''To Quoc Tren Het'' or ''Country Above All,'' and two
paper dragons -the Vietnamese consider themselves descendants of a dragon.

'We Shall Return'

The organizers wore yellow and red buttons saying ''We Shall Return.''

There were also slogans celebrating the Year of the Cat, a year of love and
grace. While the Chinese are honoring what is expected to be the mild and
peaceful Year of the Rabbit, the Vietnamese prefer what they call ''a shrewder
and more agile creature'' in the form of a great, bulbous cat.

Generally the Chinese and the Vietnamese observe the same sign of the Zodiac
representing each year of a 12-year cycle on the lunar calendar. There are three
exceptions, with the Vietnamese celebrating the cat, the boar and the water
buffalo, while the Chinese honor the rabbit, the pig and the ox.

Vietnamese families from all over the metropolitan region assembled for the Tet
celebrations - lasting from noon until midnight - featuring karate, and
traditional songs and dances. The program was organzed by eight Vietnamese
social, political and cultural organizations that united this year for the first
time.

''We're trying to keep our Vietnamese traditions and adjust to American life at
the same time,'' said Rev. Joseph Hien, director of the Vietnamese American
Cultural Organization. This agency, located in Manhattan, provides social and
educational services to Vietnamese refugees, who are said to number more than
20,000 in the metropolitan area.

On New Year's Day, the main activity for the Vietnamese, like the Chinese, is
eating, although the delicacies differ widely, from sauces to cakes, according
to the supervisor of the cultural agency, Mary Tuyet Mai. The Vietnamese holiday
specialty is Banh Chung, a glutinous rice and meat cake wrapped in banana
leaves, while the Chinese prefer dumplings filled with sweet sesame seed paste.
Both the Vietnamese and the Chinese consider that the red flesh of watermelon,
like red envelopes, brings good luck.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vietnamese girls performing a traditional dance at Public
School 124 in Chinatown to celebrate the lunar new year (NYT/Dith Pran)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
'LBJ' -- A POWERFUL PORTRAIT

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1312 words


The most moving scene in ''LBJ: The Early Years'' is this: It is 1955, and
Lyndon B. Johnson, the Senate majority leader, recovered from a heart attack,
has returned to Washington from Texas. As he approaches the Capitol, Senators
and their assistants pass the word. ''The leader's coming,'' ''The leader's
coming,'' they say, and spontaneously assemble in a corridor. Lyndon Johnson
appears, casting a huge shadow against the sunlit window behind him. It is a
mythic materialization; who is this towering figure? Then Mr. Johnson emerges
from the shadow. ''What the hell y'all looking at?'' he says testily to the
Senators, who break out in applause and cheers. At her husband's side, Lady Bird
Johnson begins to cry. Testiness or not, we are meant to know, some people loved
Lyndon Johnson.

''LBJ: The Early Years,'' a three-hour movie on NBC at 8 tonight, is a
wonderfully well done production. The details are right, including ties, shoes
and dresses. When Randy Quaid, as Mr. Johnson, gives a stump speech in
Grassville, Schwertner or Dripping Springs, Tex., his shirt collar wilts. Mr.
Quaid, who turns in a very juicy performance, looks like L.B.J. Indeed, he is
L.B.J., or at least the L.B.J. we knew in public life. Vanity, idealism and
ambition assemble in one man.

The movie begins in 1934 in Washington, when Mr. Johnson, already enamored of
power, is secretary to a Texas Congressman. It ends on Air Force One in Dallas
in 1963, when he takes the oath as our 36th President. Again the details are
right. Actually, they are perfect. The scene is almost an exact reproduction of
the famous photograph taken that horrendous day. Mrs. Johnson, played by Patti
LuPone, looks stricken. Jacqueline Kennedy (Robin Curtis), her face averted, is
in the raspberry-colored suit. The scene turns into a black-and-white freeze
frame, and a voice tells us that as President, Mr. Johnson sheparded through an
enormous amount of ''landmark legislation.'' Then, done in by Vietnam, the voice
concludes, he withdrew from public life.

There is, nonetheless, a problem: our ambivalence. The movie is almost a tour de
force, something like an NBC ''Masterpiece Theater.'' Maybe some of it is a
little glossy. The folks in the hard-scrabble hill country of east Texas, who
first elected Mr. Johnson to office, are a shade picturesque; some of the
politicians we see may not have been all that kind. Was Sam Rayburn (played by
Pat Hingle, who looks a little like Albert Finney playing Daddy Warbucks in
''Annie'') really that solicitous about Lady Bird Johnson? This critic doesn't
know, but that's not quite the problem.

It's a matter of Lyndon Johnson. We can't make up our mind about the
Quaid/Johnson character, any more than we could about the Johnson in real life.
We may admire him; we just don't know if we like him. Gossip, much of it
vicious, floats about all famous politicians. Favorable stories and rumors, some
of them planted by clever assistants, float about, too. In the welter of stories
that accumulated around Mr. Johnson, few ever indicated that he had tender
sensibilities. Able, yes; smart, of course, but you may have had to know him
intimately to feel great warmth. Mostly he was attracted to power.

The movie reflects this; ambition pursues Mr. Johnson like a hound of heaven.
Even his mother sounds messianic. She speaks about destiny and God. Mr. Quaid's
Lyndon Johnson, meanwhile, is full of himself. He whips Lady Bird to the altar;
marry him immediately and hang on for the ride to glory, or forget that she even
knows him. ''Only one thing I know for sure, honey,'' he says, ''I'm going
places.''

And he does, onward and upward - the House in 1937, the Senate in '48. Note now
that ''LBJ: The Early Years'' skips over details. We go from what seems to be
1940, for example, to 1948, with no hint that a world war has taken place. At
the same time, the movie suggests things about Mr. Johnson but never quite comes
out and says them. How serious was the affair with Alice Glass? Some of Mr.
Johnson's biographers have commented on it; the movie is cautious. Alice Glass
(Morgan Brittany) was beautiful, intelligent and, according to some accounts,
idealistic. She was also the mistress of Herman Brown, a wealthy businessman who
was one of Mr. Johnson's early patrons.

In the movie, Mr. Johnson and Miss Glass first exchange glances at Longlea, Mr.
Brown's famous estate in Virginia. It happens during a party, where Henry A.
Wallace (who one day will be Vice President), various lobbyists and Sam Rayburn
stand around in tuxedos and hold drinks. Miss Glass invites Mr. Johnson to play
billiards; Sam Rayburn looks alarmed. Shortly afterwards, we see Mr. Johnson in
Miss Glass's home, being measured for a suit by a fussy tailor. Then the phone
rings. It is Billy Bob (a composite of a long line of Johnson assistants) who
says Mrs. Johnson has suffered a miscarriage. Mr. Johnson rushes to the
hospital. ''God, I'm sorry,'' he says tearfully. We do not see Alice Glass
again.

There is delicacy here; that's a nice thing. There is also delicacy, maybe too
much, when the movie handles the question of Mr. Johnson's money. After all, he
did end up a rich man, while making a public servant's salary. ''LBJ: The Early
Years'' seems to suggest that the money was almost forced on Mr. Johnson, and
that he never cut a deal to earn it.

On the other hand, we do get one scene - Mr. Quaid is at his juiciest - in which
Mr. Johnson speculates on Texas real estate by phone at the breakfast table,
apparently profiting on inside knowledge about the space program. What's most
striking about the scene, however, is the way it ends. Mr. Johnson, a man who
smokes, drinks, talks and eats at the same time, and washes everything down with
a bottle of Milk of Magnesia, has a terrible temper tantrum. Then his face goes
rubbery. He clutches his chest and falls to the floor. It is his heart attack.

We forget the real estate deal, of course. Maybe it doesn't matter. In life,
Lyndon Johnson was often considered an outsized man, with outsized faults to
match outsized virtues. He presented an outsized target. What's a little real
estate deal now and then? The NBC movie says this is what Lyndon Johnson was:
driven, coarse, sometimes vulgar, often devious, even neurotic, but at the same
time an authentic populist with both the yearning and the ability to do some
political good. This is not a half-bad description for a successful politician.

The movie - written by Ken Trevey and directed by Peter Werner - also gives us
other politicians, Kennedys among them. We know them by their accents; on
television by now, there is a standard Kennedy portraiture. In the NBC movie,
the Kennedys and Lyndon Johnson inhabit separate planets. In one scene, Robert
Kennedy and John Kennedy (James F. Kelly and Charles Frank) huddle in the back
of a limousine on a rainy night with their father Joe (Kevin McCarthy). Robert
Kennedy calls Johnson ''a moral eunuch.'' Joe Kennedy says, ''We'll show that
cowboy what the Kennedys are really made of,'' and all three cackle maniacally.
Did the Kennedys really cackle like that? We don't know, but we do get a sense
of nastiness in politics at the top.

Meanwhile, we also get Mr. Quaid and Miss LuPone, who, at times, really does
turn into Mrs. Johnson; the resemblance is remarkable. Miss LuPone, however, has
a good deal less to do than Mr. Quaid; her principal task, splendidly achieved,
is to appear long-suffering, though she tempers this with insights into a woman,
married to a difficult man, who triumphantly grows up. Still, this is Mr.
Quaid's movie, and if he sometimes seems to be overdoing it - too much energy,
too much passion, too much everything - it may be that he's only reflecting the
real Lyndon Johnson. We may not love ''LBJ: The Early Years,'' but, like the
man, it's impossible to ignore.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Patti LuPone and Randy Quaid

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CBS News In Search of Itself

SECTION: Section 6; Page 78, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 84 words


I do not think that CBS News has to apologize for itself or to search for
itself. Dan Rather - ''the bulldog reporter,'' as you call him -has the right
instincts to keep CBS News in the proud tradition of Murrow and Cronkite. Anyone
who survived Vietnam, Afghanistan and the 1968 Democratic National Convention
ought to be able to handle those corporate intrigues quite well.

Who cares if some wimp in Dullsville, U.S.A., turns on a game show instead?

GERALD W. GRUMENT, M.D.
  Rochester

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Dan Rather (Alex Webb/Magnum)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CUBA'S STRANGE MISSION IN ANGOLA

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE; James Brooke is the West Africa bureau chief for The
New York Times

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3336 words


FEW MILES NORTH OF THE CONGO River, the sun is sinking into the South Atlantic.
Standing in miniature silhouettes against the orange glow are the palm trees and
American-operated oil wells of the Cabinda coast, in Angola's northernmost
province. While we watch the sunset, a man speaks to me in the rising and
falling rhythms of Caribbean-accented Spanish.

''The most beautiful and wonderful thing,'' the trim military officer in combat
fatigues and a jaunty red beret says, ''is for a Cuban to do his
internationalist duty.''

Capt. Pedro Valdez Alfonso, a graduate of Soviet and Polish military academies,
is one of an estimated 30,000 Cuban troops stationed in Angola to protect that
country's Marxist Government. For the last decade, the Cuban military presence
has bedeviled American policy in the region with the fear that the Cubans could
hopscotch south from Angola to Namibia, and eventually to South Africa.

A 10-day trip to Angola last November, including interviews with Cuban soldiers
and civilians in four cities, offered a rare glimpse to an outsider of Cuba's
presence in this nation of eight million people. Although the visit was closely
supervised by Cuban and Angolan authorities, the dimensions of Cuba's
involvement were apparent. Moscow and East Berlin affirm their support for the
Marxist Government by educating Angolans in their countries and providing some
military personnel to Angola. The Cuban soldiers are more deeply entrenched, and
prospects for their departure seem remote. International interest in Angola
extends back to 1975, when Cuba first airlifted thousands of troops across the
South Atlantic to the seaside capital of Luanda. Indeed, some say the Cuban
airlift was the rock on which American-Soviet detente foundered. The Portuguese
flag was coming down after 500 years of colonial rule, and Angola's Marxist
guerrillas, with Cuban backing, were establishing an independent ''people's
republic.''

MANY AMERICAN COMPANIES DO business in Angola; Chevron, for example, owns 49
percent of the oil complex at Cabinda; the Angolan Government retains majority
interest. But since 1975, the United States - the only major Western power to do
so - has refused to recognize Angola's ruling party, the Movement of the Popular
Liberation of Angola. Because of the Cuban presence, Washington has given its
support, and $15 million in arms, to Jonas Savimbi, leader of an anti-Government
guerrilla movement. Savimbi, whose National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola (Unita) was suppressed by the Marxists in 1975, continues to mount
assaults on Government targets, including Chevron's Cabinda complex, the main
source of hard currency in the Angolan economy. Savimbi, who is linked in the
minds of many black Africans with his principal backer, South Africa, receives
supplies through neighboring South-West Africa, also known as Namibia, the
disputed territory administered by South Africa. Washington, though officially
supporting independence for South-West Africa, has eased the pressure on South
Africa to relinquish its claim in light of the military presence of Cubans in
Angola - and the recurring fear of Cuban occupation of South-West Africa should
South Africa withdraw first.

Two years ago, the United States brokered a proposal for a step-by-step Cuban
withdrawal from Angola in return for a step-by-step South African withdrawal
from South-West Africa, as a precursor to independence. Talks broke off,
however, after a South African commando unit attempted to destroy the Chevron
complex. A few months later, the United States lost its ''honest broker'' status
in the eyes of the Angolans by giving aid to Savimbi's Unita forces. That
decision created a paradoxical, and still unresolved, situation: Cuban troops
are in the position of protecting an oil complex, owned in part by Americans,
while the United States aids the attackers.

In the current stalemate, Angolan officials seem to be waiting for what they
believe will be inevitable: the collapse of white South Africa. Such a collapse
would leave the Cubans with the most mobile and best-equipped troops in Southern
Africa.

SINCE MIDWIFING Angola's birth, Cuban troops have insured its survival against a
decadelong series of attacks by South African forces and Savimbi's Unita
guerrillas. From 1981 to 1985, according to Angolan figures, South Africa
conducted 168 bombing raids, 234 airborne troop landings, 90 strafing incidents,
74 ground attacks and 4 naval landings - figures that led Angola's President,
Jose Eduardo dos Santos to state in a letter to the United Nations that a full
Cuban withdrawal would amount to ''suicide'' for his country. Jonas Savimbi's
guerrillas exert de facto control over much of Angola's countryside, but they do
not appear strong enough to survive a direct confrontation with the combined
firepower of the Cubans and the Angolans.

The union of Cuban and Angolan forces is one of ideology as well as military
might. For Angola's Marxist leaders, who count among Africa's most devoted
imitators of the Soviets, the Cubans carry impeccable ideological credentials.
For the Cubans, the Angolan mission is seen as a means of reviving revolutionary
spirit in a younger generation. Moreover, the Cubans, with their Afro-Latin
roots, blend in easily. President dos Santos used his Nov. 11 Independence Day
address to defend the continued presence of the ''Cuban comrades'' in Angola,
and, by extension, elsewhere in the world; at last count, Cuba had military
advisers working in 13 countries and civilian advisers in 27. ''They say they
are fighting for freedom and independence against so-called Russo-Cuban
colonialism,'' the President said, referring to Jonas Savimbi's Unita
guerrillas. ''Yet everyone knows that there is no true national liberation
struggle in the world which does not have the support, direct or indirect, of
the Soviet Union or Cuba.''

CAPTAIN VALDEZ'S unit, part of the Third Congress Battalion, is stationed at a
bush camp two miles from the Chevron complex in Cabinda. There, signs abound
that the Cubans mean to stay. Bunkers have been freshly dug out of the brown
earth and reinforced with saplings cut from surrounding hills. Propaganda
posters are displayed on the dirt entrance road. (One reads ''In Angola, our
youth has its own Sierra Maestra,'' a reference to the lean years of Fidel
Castro's revolutionaries.) According to an Angolan military official, the unit
arrived there last March to protect Chevron after Savimbi had renewed his
threats to blow up the oil facility.

Each person I met on the trip had been selected by my guide, Col. Julio Garcia
Delgado, the Cuban military attache in Angola. All interviews were conducted in
Colonel Garcia's presence, and he frequently brought them to a halt with ''no
comment'' when conversation strayed into areas deemed sensitive. At the camp,
knots of young Cuban soldiers in combat fatigues watched me curiously from a
distance. They were not allowed to talk to visitors.

''The recruits are here for two years,'' I was told by Maj. Alberto Garcia
Maestre, the camp's political officer.

During an unusually candid conversation, Colonel Garcia told me that one of his
sons, an army officer, had volunteered for duty in Angola and was expected to
arrive last month. Most of the men are believed to have been drafted, and Angola
duty is said to be unpopular in Cuba.

In the boosterish pages of Olive Green on an International Mission, the weekly
newspaper for Cubans in Angola, one is likely to find stories stressing
volunteerism and sacrifice. In a recent issue, a Cuban army tank driver
explained why he had left his job in a metalworking shop in Cuba to answer the
call of duty in Angola: ''In my house, to be an internationalist is something
great,'' he was quoted as saying.

One rarely finds mention of Cuban casualties in Olive Green. The number of
casualties is believed to have dropped in recent years due to Angola's strategy
of keeping the Cuban soldiers in reserve along a ''tripwire'' at the 15th
parallel, near the southern border, ready to repel a South African invasion. A
Cuban air regiment is believed to fly about 60 fixed-wing MIG-21 combat planes,
but Soviet-trained Angolan pilots fly the remainder of Angola's air force - 23
MIG-23's, 10 SU-22 hunter bombers and about 150 helicopters. Other Cuban troops
defend fixed positions at airports, major towns and at the Chevron oil complex.

But there is evidence that war casualties may not be the only danger the Cuban
troops face. According to reports published in the United States, some Cuban
soldiers have gone home with AIDS. The assertions are denied by Cuban officers,
but the ailment is known to be present in the region, and to be spreading,
through heterosexual contact, from Zaire into northern Angola.

ANGOLA FEELS THE effects of the Cuban presence in a second, no less important,
arena -civilian life. For a society still trying to recover from the departure
of 90 percent of its white population at independence, the contingent of Cuban
teachers, construction workers and doctors, estimated at 9,000, provides
desperately needed skilled assistance.

Cuban civilians working in Angola seem drawn by an amalgam of political zeal, a
desire to help others and, undoubtedly, the knowledge that Angolan service looks
good on a resume in Havana.

In Angola's central highlands, Renato Barcelo Casanova, a surgeon who heads a
37-member Cuban medical team in Huambo, took a break during my visit from the
dank, dimly lighted wards of the city's Central Civilian Hospital. ''There are
diseases here we only read about in books,'' Dr. Barcelo said with undisguised
wonderment. ''And Friday, 30 people came in helicopters,'' he said, referring to
Angolans wounded in an attack by Unita forces. Like all the other Cuban
civilians interviewed, Dr. Barcelo said he had volunteered for service in
Angola. The Angolan Government, he said, provided free housing and a daily food
allowance, and paid his salary directly to his family in Cuba.

In addition to the diseased, a tour of Dr. Barcelo's wards found large numbers
of civilian war victims, largely amputees. Nationwide, Government officials
said, there are 20,000 amputees, most of them the victims of land mines placed
by Unita guerrillas. The life expectancy of a male Angolan, the officials said,
is 39 years.

IN ANGOLA'S TATTERED cities, most of them choked with some of the nation's
600,000 refugees from the countryside, the Cuban housing complexes are easily
identified by their freshly painted facades, their swept walks and cut grass.

''Their level of development is not very high - we try to set an example,'' one
Cuban said of his mission here. Well-schooled in the tenets of Marxism, Cuban
teachers help Angola's ruling party propagate the faith. ''Last year, we sent 20
students to college in Cuba, the Soviet Union and Bulgaria,'' said Carlos
Estrada Depestre, a Cuban teacher who works in Kuito. ''This year, we are
preparing a group of 25.''

In Kuito, Ernesto Rodriguez Hernandez, a Cuban dentist, described his service in
Angola as ''a great experience - I knew Africa only through radio and
television.'' But on questioning, Rodriguez admitted that in 15 months in Kuito,
he had never ventured beyond a 6-mile perimeter patrolled by Cuban troops. Most
Cuban civilians interviewed said they had received firearms training for
self-defense. Appropriately, a newsletter printed by the Cuban community in
Sumbe, Angola, is called The Trenches. The cover logo is a montage of the tools
of each trade: books, a hypodermic needle, a pickax and shovel -and an AK-47
rifle.

Despite the stress of war, the Cuban community in Angola has maintained some
traditions from home. In October, near the anniversary of the Bolshevik
revolution, ''cooperantes,'' as the Cuban civilians are called, participated in
Red Sunday, a day of voluntary labor for the state. Earlier in the month,
children from the Cuban kindergarten in Luanda had journeyed to the sea to throw
flowers on the water, part of an annual Cuban ritual recalling the memory of an
early revolutionary, Camilo Cienfuegos.

Day-to-day relations between Angolans and Cubans are not always strife-free. Few
Cubans bother to learn Portuguese, speaking instead in ''portunhol'' a salad of
both languages. Many Angolans are resentful that their country has become
dependent on a new group of foreigners so soon after throwing off 500 years of
Portuguese colonialism. But despite the fact that the country's road, sewer,
water and telephone systems have decayed sharply since 1975, many Angolans say
that the Cubans have improved the quality of life in Angola. ''The Cubans sent
us doctors and teachers after independence,'' said one Angolan woman who works
for Sonangol, the state oil company. ''The Americans didn't send us anything.''

In contrast to the Cubans, the Russians in Angola are poor mixers. On the Ilha
de Luanda, a stretch of sand fills up each weekend with a group of Russians.
Toting an AK-47, one swimsuit-clad Russian patrols the beach, ostensibly to
guard against thieves. As a result, Angolan bathers steer clear of the ''Russian
beach.'' One recent morning, as an Antonov-26 droned overhead, a Russian
military adviser, his slavic face ruddy and creased from the tropical sun,
talked guardedly in Russian about his assignment to Angola. A native of Moscow,
he came here two years ago with his wife. No, he had not learned Portuguese -
there were always translators wherever he went. Meetings with Cuban, Angolan and
East German comrades were usually conducted in Russian because the East Germans
had not learned Portuguese, either.

When asked if Angola was Russia's Vietnam, he laughed and replied: ''No, the
Russians aren't doing the fighting here.''

Despite the Angolan commitment to pure Marxist ideology, the oft-drawn
caricature of the Angolans as puppets of their Cuban and Soviet masterminds does
not entirely square with the facts. Aid has won the Cubans considerable
influence in Angola, but not control. When Angolan authorities detained a group
of American reporters who had photographed bomb damage at Cabinda airport,
thought to be the work of Unita guerrillas, the Cuban officer chaperoning the
group was unable to win its release. Relief came four hours later when the
provincial commissar, an Angolan, was found; he ruled in the group's favor.

In another incident, a representative of the Cuban Embassy tried to introduce me
to two Cuban doctors working at Luanda's Americo Boavida Hospital. The Angolan
hospital director had been contacted in advance, but when the Cuban Embassy
official arrived, the director dismissed him with a brusque wave of the hand.
The two Cuban doctors were found in a corridor, but they said they could not
give interviews without permission from the Angolan director. As he left the
hospital, the Cuban official complained about the ''bad manners'' of the
Angolans.

Despite these day-to-day frictions, the Cubans and the Russians can find little
fault with the Angolans' political orientation. A red machete and wheel - the
Angolan version of the hammer and sickle - is emblazoned at the top of Jornal de
Angola, Luanda's only daily paper. Front-page headlines in one recent issue
included ''Comrade President Hails M. Gorbachev and D. Ortega,'' ''Party
Delegation to Anniversary of Sandinista Front,'' and ''Bulgaria Offers Donation
to Angola.''

The affection for the East starts at the top. During the 1960's, President dos
Santos, a soft-spoken intelligent man, studied petroleum engineering in the
Soviet Union, and he was married for a time to a Soviet woman.

If there is a potentially discomfiting aspect for the Angolans in their
relationship with Cuba and the Soviet Union, it is in their avowed interest in
strengthening Angola's trade and diplomatic relations with the West. But some
businessmen here joke that the long-term goal is merely ''to use capitalism to
pay for socialism.''

These mixed signals were evident in a news summary issued recently by Angop, the
state news agency. One article, entitled ''Portugal -Paradise of Vultures,''
lambasted Portugal for giving shelter to Unita spokesmen. But just below, a
second story welcomed Portuguese businessmen to Luanda's annual trade fair. At
the fair, President dos Santos stopped at the Cuban stand to sip Cuban mango
juice, a superfluous import for a tropical country. The Soviet Ambassador,
Arnold Kalinin, announced that Soviet exports to Angola - presumably nonmilitary
-added up to $1 billion from 1976 to 1986. In contrast, only 2 percent of
Angola's exports went to Eastern bloc countries in 1982, the latest year for
which statistics are available.

Ninety-five percent of Angola's exports are in oil, and the oil is both produced
and purchased by the West. The United States, by far the largest customer, paid
out about $1 billion for Angolan oil in 1985 alone. But those revenues, critical
to Angola's economic survival, are diminishing. Last November, President Reagan
signed a law that prohibits the Department of Defense from buying oil pumped in
Angola. (Under the law, the Secretary of Defense could waive these restrictions
if national security were threatened.) In December, a group of Congressmen sent
a letter to the President that called for extending to Angola the United States
trade embargo against Cuba, on the theory that the embargo should cover ''any
U.S. trade and financial transactions with any territory under the control of
the Cuban army, navy or police forces.''

As recently as the early 1970's, Angola had a thriving and varied economy,
supported by exports of coffee, oil, diamonds and foodstuffs. Today, the coffee
plantations have gone to seed, and the diamond-mining machinery lies unused
because of guerrilla attacks. Many of the farms have reverted to subsistence
agriculture, and the country imports half of its food.

Angola's economic collapse is symbolized by the once-proud Benguela Railroad,
which used to take minerals from Zaire and Zambia across Angola to the coast. At
the station at Kuito, all 12 of the sidings have rusted. When the stationmaster
was found, he said a train had not come through in three weeks. In colonial
days, 24 to 30 trains went through each day, he said.

Refugees from the countryside have more than doubled the population in the
capital of Luanda - to 1.2 million from 500,000 at independence - but entire
city blocks are economically lifeless. ''For 10 years, we can't get anything -
clothes, wine, food -we aren't used to living like this,'' said an Angolan man
who agreed to drive a visitor from the airport to a hotel, a four-mile drive,
for a pack of foreign cigarettes. Instead of Africa's sprawling, chaotic
open-air markets, Angola has undersupplied state stores and a few
semiclandestine black markets for vegetables.

At one shop in Luanda, nicknamed Tira Bikini - loosely translated as ''down to
your underwear'' - vendors charge 1,000 kwanzas for a small pile of tomatoes. At
official rates of exchange - 30 kwanza to the dollar -the price is $33. At
black-market rates - 1,700 kwanzas to the dollar -the price is about 60 cents.

These shortages and hardships notwithstanding, finance officials say that the
overall defense budget has not been touched. The Cuban contingent in particular
has been spared the spending cuts. What remains unclear is the extent to which
the Angolan Government foots the bill for the Cuban presence. According to Cuban
and Angolan officials, military hardware, such as the MIG-21 combat planes from
the Soviet Union, is purchased by Angola. But Angola's Finance Minister, Augusto
Teixeira de Matos, said in an interview, ''The Cuban soldiers are not paid from
our budget.'' Said President dos Santos: ''The presence of Cuban troops doesn't
represent a significant expenditure - these forces are not paid.'' Echoing the
conversations of the Cubans in Angola, he continued: ''They are based on a
generous gift of internationalism.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of two Cuban soldiers at Cabinda camp (NYT/James Brooke)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: FEBRUARY 1, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1294 words


Fiction
          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List
1             1  THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King. (Viking, $18.95.)
                A fairy tale, complete with a castle, an aged king, two
                princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.
2       1    27  RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.) Without
                using nuclear weapons, the West staves off the Russians in
                World War III.
3       2    21  IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood horrors
                haunt six men and a woman who grew up in a small Maine
                town.
4       4     3  BANDITS, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $17.95.) A gang
                of three plots to heist millions being sent to the contras
                in Nicaragua.
5       8     3  NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon & Schuster,
                $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans from being
                discovered by the Germans.
6       3    13  WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.) Iran during
                the month following the Shah's departure.
7       5    18  THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton Mifflin,
                $19.95.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's
                low country and New York City.
8       7    14  FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over Vietnam.
9       6    14  A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $18.95.)
                Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal double
                murder.
10     15     2  DEATH QUEST, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge Publications,
                $18.95.) A hit man sets out to kill Countess Krak and seal
                the fate of the Earth; sixth volume in the ''Mission
                Earth'' series.
11      9    16  HOLLYWOOD HUSBANDS, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster,
                $18.95.) A top model encounters three of Los Angeles's most
                dynamic men.
12*    13     2  THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday, $17.95.) A
                financial wizard undertakes to defuse the crisis besetting
                Wall Street and the American economy.
13     12     2  THE COUNTERLIFE, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
                $18.95.) More about the ambitions and anxieties of Nathan
                Zuckerman, who resembles the author in some things,
                sometimes.
14           11  PERFUME, by Patrick Suskind. (Knopf, $16.95.) An olfactory
                vampire kills people to steal their scents.
15*          15  ROGER'S VERSION, by John Updike. (Knopf, $17.95.) A
                fiftyish professor wrestles with God, sex, science,
                technology, mathematics and computers.


Nonfiction
1     2   5 A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein. (Macmillan,
            $16.95.) A chronicle of one season spent with the coach Bob
            Knight and his Indiana University basketball team.
2     1  39 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday, $14.95.)
            Anecdotes and ruminations from the television star and
            father of five.
3     4  17 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.) From Hoboken
            to superstardom: an unauthorized biography of Frank
            Sinatra.
4     7  47 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $9.95.)
            A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme;
            the first Dr. Seuss book for adults.
5    12  17 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $19.95.) The
            crisis in the American automobile industry and Japan's role
            in it.
6     6  19 McMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi. (Warner, $16.95.)
            The autobiography of the quarterback for the Chicago Bears.
7     5   3 THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE,
            by Jane Wagner. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb observations
            on life today; script of the show starring Lily Tomlin.
8     9  37 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot. (St.
            Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire veterinarian
            about his favorite animal.
9    10  11 DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with Greg
            Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina recalls her
            checkered career.
10    8  11 WORD FOR WORD, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Putnam, $16.95.) A
            new collection of columns by the journalist and television
            personality.
11   11   5 ACROSS CHINA, by Peter Jenkins. (Morrow, $18.95.) The
            author of ''A Walk Across America'' takes his wanderlust to
            Asia.
12        1 THE MORNING AFTER, by George F. Will. (Free Press,
            $19.95.) Columns on matters political and personal, written
            by a conservative journalist between 1981 and 1986.
13*  14  18 ONE KNEE EQUALS TWO FEET, by John Madden with Dave
            Anderson. (Villard, $16.95.) Observations on football by
            the television commentator and former coach of the Oakland
            Raiders.
14   13   3 MARILYN, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, $24.95.) A biography of
            Marilyn Monroe, with many photographs by her friend George
            Barris.
15    3  12 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins Publishers,
            $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as recorded in pictures
            by 200 photojournalists.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1     3  17 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM, by Susan
            Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with
            overbearing men.
2     1  14 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.
            (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at moderate cost.
3*    2  33 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton, $15.95.) A
            regimen based on the Vanderbilt University Weight
            Management Program.
4     5  73 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.
            (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard reference work in a
            1983 revision.
5     4  51 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) A
            television chef's inexpensive dishes.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
  (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $24.95.) A full-blooded and
monumental treatment of the system of convict transportation that populated
Australia in the 18th and 19th centuries, and the marks it left on the
Australian soul.

REAGAN AND GORBACHEV, by Michael Mandelbaum and Strobe Talbott. (Vintage, Paper,
$5.95.) The complex issues involved in arms control and Star Wars are carefully
laid out in this insightful account of the two leaders and their interactions.

THE RIVER IN WINTER, by David Small. (Norton, $16.95.) Terse and densely
plotted, this novel about a teen-ager and his grandfather emphasizes courage and
other Hemingwayesque virtues without lapsing into sentimentality or bravado.

NOBEL DREAMS: Power, Deceit, and the Ultimate Experiment, by Gary Taubes.
(Random House, $19.95.) A lively, anecdotal journalistic presentation of the
work and concerns, personalities and machines, of nuclear scientists in a lab
near Geneva.

FAITH, SEX, MYSTERY: A Memoir, by Richard Gilman. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) In
a sort of rueful tranquillity, tinged with the pain of loss, the writer and
critic recollects and reflects on his conversion from Jewish atheist to Roman
Catholic nearly 35 years ago, and his lapse from the church eight years later.

SPHINX, by D. M. Thomas. (Viking, $17.95.) The third (so far) in a series that
began in 1983 with ''Ararat,'' Mr. Thomas's bravura novel of a Russia
reconstructed in the imagination is fed with the literature of the past and
charged with sex, poetry and politics.

KEEPING WARM, by Mary Gardner. (Atheneum, $17.95.) In this engaging, sometimes
ingenuous first novel, a girl's cowboy fantasies come true in adulthood, but in
unpredictable ways.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

O'ROURKE FILLS 3 POSTS, DETAILS STATE PACKAGE

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1965 words


COUNTY Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke filled three cabinet-level positions last
week, promoting each official from within the Westchester government, and issued
a ''wish list'' of 76 specific programs that he said he hoped the State
Legislature would approve.

Speaking at a press conference that ranged across the spectrum of Westchester
government and politics, Mr. O'Rourke said he was nominating his chief of staff,
Roger Biagi, to replace Edward M. Gibbs as deputy county executive, the county's
highest nonelective government post.

The 41-year-old Mr. Biagi, who has spent his 15 years of government service in
local and county positions, will serve as Mr. O'Rourke's principal adviser and
will be responsible for implementing the County Executive's policies. The job
pays $80,095 and, like the other posts filled last week, requires approval by
the Board of Legislators.

Named Commissioner of Corrections was Norwood E. Jackson, 52, who had been
Warden for the last 14 years and Acting Commissioner since last summer. Mr.
O'Rourke said Mr. Jackson, who becomes Westchester's first minority cabinet
officer, was selected from among 50 applicants in a dozen states who had sought
the $64,810 post.

The new County Personnel Officer, overseeing the hiring and advancement of 8,500
county employees, will be J. Emmet Casey, a former Yonkers City Manager who has
been Acting Personnel Officer since July. The 58-year-old Mr. Casey, who will
earn $74,010, was deputy commissioner of health for nine years.

Mr. O'Rourke, who had retained many of former County Executive Alfred B.
DelBello's commissioners and top aides, including Mr. Biagi, said he believed
county employees should be ''allowed to work their way up through the ranks''
and ''attain the highest rank possible within the system.''

His legislative package included requests that have appeared before, such as a
tax on Westchester hotel guests and an amendment to the State Constitution that
would lift a prohibition against county involvement in housing programs. He also
asked that the state budget support county programs previously financed on an
individual basis.

Some of the requested items were intended to reduce Westchester's expenditures,
such as a proposal that the state absorb the costs of programs it imposes on
counties. And even as Mr. O'Rourke was announcing his legislative program,
changes in a financing that could save Westchester large sums were being
announced in Albany.

Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, Democrat of Greenburgh, said that the State
Commissioner of Social Services, Cesar Perales, had recommended increases in
Westchester's shelter allowances, or the amount of money that the social-service
agency is allowed to pay for a welfare client's rent.

''Because the amount was so low,'' Mr. Brodsky said, ''people were becoming
homeless and going into hotels at a cost of $3,000 a month.'' The reason
allowances were so low for Westchester, he said, was that ''we were lumped in
with New York City, which pulled down the overall average.''

Governor Cuomo, he said, was proposing a 22 percent increase statewide, but the
increases for Westchester would be higher in most cases, ranging from 31 percent
for a family of four, where the allowance will jump to $399 a month from $301,
to 39 percent for a single person, where the allowance will rise to $271 a month
from $195.

Marc Moran, a spokesman for Mr. O'Rourke, said the county was seeking this year
to incorporate some legislative requests in the executive budget. Previously, he
said, ''we always had to depend on member items'' - or specific legislation on
individual programs introduced by Westchester's representatives in Albany -
''and now we're asking that they be permanently included in the Governor's
executive budget.''

They include $500,000 in financing for the county's Mental Retardation
Institute, which is part of the County Medical Center in Valhalla; $200,000 in
support for Metropool, which organizes car and van pooling; $312,000 in aid for
Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime, which provides alcohol and drug
treatment; and $85,000 for Datafax, a network of facsimile transmitters to
coordinate police information.

Mr. O'Rourke noted in his legislative message that Federal financing for the
Mental Retardation Institute had been cut to $330,000 from $1 million in the
last five years, while the state had appropriated $500,000 each year since 1984,
although refusing to include that assistance as a permanent-line program.

The county supports Metropool through a Federal program, Aid to Urban Systems,
and is seeking state support. Mr. O'Rourke said state funds were appropriated
last year for a similar program in Long Island, known as ''Island Rides.''

The Treatment Alternatives to Street Crime program received $312,000 from the
state last year. Datafax, on the other hand, is supported by the state in 61
counties, but not in Westchester. The county, Mr. O'Rourke said, is seeking
parity with other counties.

Mr. O'Rourke also asked the Legislature for help in securing $1.7 million in
matching grant funds for renovation of the Woodfield Cottage Detention Facility,
a youth-detention center on the Grasslands Reservation in Valhalla. The facility
serves 150 to 175 male youths a year.

The legislative package includes a request for permission to amend the County
Charter, giving the county first option to buy ''appropriate lands for open
space and parks and recreation purposes.'' Mr. O'Rourke said it would be
inappropriate for the county to condemn golf courses, farmlands and orchards to
preserve them for open space, but at the same time it wanted to avoid properties
being placed on the market without the county being informed.

Mr. O'Rourke repeated a call he has made before, asking for a change in state
law that would allow the county to pay for improvements to sewer or water
systems in order to encourage the construction of low- or middle-income housing.
Westchester also is asking again that the State Constitution be amended to
permit counties to develop housing.

The County Executive also asked that state legislators allow Westchester to levy
a 3 percent hotel-visitors occupancy tax, a request he has made before to no
avail. The tax would yield an estimated $3 million a year, reducing by that
amount the revenues raised by the county through property taxes.

But Westchester's Democratic Assemblymen have thwarted the requested
legislation, saying the county has not said how it would spend the hotel-tax
money. Mr. O'Rourke said: ''I don't believe it should be earmarked for special
purposes, but I'd be willing to talk about it.'' He said he thought it would be
passed this year in Albany.

Mr. O'Rourke called for the establishment by the state of a system of regional
landfills, for use by municipalities as emergency disposal sites when
resource-recovery facilities are not operating. Since 1984, he noted, more than
200 landfills have been closed by the state, leaving 294 in operation. There
will be 131 by the year 1990, and 48 by 2000.

The County Executive also made another bid for a uniform, countywide sales tax
of 7 1/4 percent, a portion of which would be distributed on a per capita basis
to the villages, towns and cities of the county. He said the Board of
Legislators has supported the idea.

That was true in 1984 and 1985, but last year the Board reversed itself, with
its Committee on Revenues specifically rejecting the idea. Because any Albany
action would be initiated only after a ''home rule'' message, or request, from
the Board of Legislators, chances for its passage now seem poor.

Mr. O'Rourke also supported a constitutional amendment that would limit state
mandates, or the cost to counties of services ordered by the state. The
amendment would force the state to provide the full cost of new mandates it
imposed on counties.

For example, last year the Westchester county government was required by state
law to pay $243 million for social services, $15 million for the education and
transportation of handicapped children, $15 million for Metropolitan
Tranpsortation Authority station maintenance and operating assistance and $10
million for court services and physical facilities.

A survey by the New York State Association of Counties found that mandated costs
accounted for 79 percent of county budgets. Mr. O'Rourke said that 12 states
have such a constitutional amendment.

Mr. Biagi, who will assume his new post in mid-April, will be monitoring the
status of much of the proposed legislation - as he did as Mr. O'Rourke's chief
of staff - with Marcia M. Lee, director of intergovernmental relations in the
County Executive's office. Mr. O'Rourke said he would not be naming a new chief
of staff, preferring to incorporate those tasks in the deputy county executive's
office.

Born in Yonkers, raised in the Bronx and educated at Iona College, Mr. Biagi
began his government career as a housing inspector and code enforcement officer
in Mount Kisco, where the Village Manager was Robert J. Dolan. Mr. Dolan was to
become Mr. DelBello's executive officer, later hiring Mr. Biagi as his
assistant. Mr. Biagi also is a former Treasurer and deputy manager of the
village of Briarcliff Manor.

Mr. Jackson, the new Corrections Commissioner, recently completed a military
career, serving 27 years of active and reserve duty with the Army Correctional
and Military Police Services. He served as commanding officer of the Eighth
United States Army Correctional Treatment Facility in Korea, the largest such
prison in that command, and saw service in Vietnam and Europe, retiring as a
Lieutenant Colonel.

The burly official, who played professional football briefly with the Cleveland
Browns, is a graduate of Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio. He will
be in charge of a complex of prisons - the County Jail, County Penitentiary and
Women's Correctional Unit - with an average daily inmate population of 1,100.

He said that solving an overcrowding problem was a major challenge, but that
''construction is going on'' and that in the meantime ''we have created
dormitories to enhance our space.'' The day he was named to the post, the jail
population was 1,083, compared with the ''legal'' limit of 1,023. Sixty modular
cells are being built at the jail to handle the overflow.

Mr. Jackson's appointment came after an investigation by county police into
debts and legal judgments aginst him, according to county officials. Mr.
O'Rourke said he had appointed Mr. Jackson after the inquiry showed no
outstanding financial or legal problems.

Mr. O'Rourke said he would recommend the establishment ''of a Board of Governors
or Overseers or Visitors,'' to ''come up with plans for the future. Overcrowding
''will be a continuing problem,'' the County Executive said, ''and I never want
to hear a judge say he won't send someone to jail because there are no cells.''

Mr. Casey, the new Personnel Officer, was named to a six-year term, which would
presumably end with his retirement. A former assistant superintendent of schools
in Yonkers and former city Budget Director as well as City Manager, Mr. Casey
also serves as an adjunct professor at Pace University's Graduate School of
Public Administration.

He indicated at Mr. O'Rourke's press conference, in response to questions, that
one of his major tasks would be to seek reduction in the relatively large number
of provisional employees used by the county. ''The state has criticized us for
the inordinate amount of provisionals we have; the result of tremendous growth
of the county in the last decade.'' He said he hoped to consolidate many of the
jobs - enabling the county to give fewer examinations to fill them - as one way
of reducing the number of provisionals hired.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Roger Biagi and Edward M. Gibbs (NYT/Alan Zale; Joyce
Dopkeen); Photo of Norweed E. Jackson (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUA IS AIDED BY SISTER CITY PROJECTS

BYLINE: By LYDIA CHAVEZ

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 929 words


IF someone could ask for more trees on East Ninth Street, Joanne Schultz and
some friends figured, they could also ask Community Board 3 in Manhattan to
support a negotiated peace in Nicaragua. It worked, and in 1985 the Lower East
Side, a neighborhood that encompasses the Bowery's skid row, the cutting edge of
avant-garde art and a large Puerto Rican and Asian population, became a sister
city to Barrio Nueva York, a community of 1,000 in Bluefields, Nicaragua.

Since then, residents of the Lower East Side have sent 2.4 tons of medical
supplies and clothing to Nicaragua. All told, since the 1979 revolution that
brought the Sandinistas to power, private groups and sister-city projects in
more than 30 cities have sent more than $20 million in aid to the government the
Reagan Administration is trying to topple.

Ms. Schultz and others involved in sister-city projects with Nicaragua are
straightforward about their political intentions. In 1985, when Congress was
about to approve more aid to the rebels battling the Sandinista Government, Ms.
Schultz said, she and some friends had just returned from visiting Nicaragua and
wanted to work against the Reagan Administration's policies.

She described their objective as ''anti-interventionist and pro-Nicaraguan,''
maintaining that ''Nicaraguan people are not harming the U.S. Government, and we
should leave them alone.''

Another member of the group put it this way: ''Generally those people who go to
war are the poor, and we don't want men from our neighborhood going to Central
America to fight. The only way to prevent that is to work against the United
States policy of intervention.''

They chose a sister-city project over other solidarity work, Ms. Schultz added,
because ''we just wanted to tell people in our community that people in
Nicaragua are just people - that there are people in some neighborhood there
that have the same concerns as we do.''

Miriam Thompson, who is involved in a project in Jamaica, Queens, where a group
just recently paired with a day-care center and church in Nicaragua, said it was
''clearly an effort to assist our sisters in Nicaragua, and a definite statement
against the Reagan Administration's policy in Nicaragua and its support of the
contras.''

Earlier Pairings Were Apolitical

The political tone of these sister-city projects is not exactly what President
Dwight D. Eisenhower had in mind when he began a people-to-people project in the
late 1950's. Then, as now, the American towns and cities paired with communities
abroad were expected to leave political issues up to the elected officials and
focus primarily on cultural and educational exchanges. Until the standoff
between the Reagan Administration and the Sandinistas, that was generally the
case. The few sister-city projects in South Vietnam ended as the war progressed,
according to officials.

''You can't be on one side, the other or in the middle in a sister-city project;
it doesn't work,'' said Richard Oakland, the director of member services with
Sister Cities International. The nonprofit Washington agency, supported in part
by Government grants, coordinates the program.

Despite this warning, Americans in New York and elsewhere are continuing to form
alliances with Nicaraguan cities. Mr. Oakland's organization recognizes about 20
such pairings. Most, he said, were established long before the 1979 revolution
that ended the Government of General Anastasio Samoza.

Other groups have started sister-city projects independently of the
international organization, working through the Nicaraguan Embassy in
Washington. The embassy said that 37 American cities are twinned and 12 more are
in the process of establishing ties.

The sister-city projects started before 1979 have increased their activities as
the Reagan Administration has continued its support of the rebels, or contras,
fighting Sandinista troops.

Wisconsin has had a state-to-state relationship with Nicaragua since 1965. ''I
think it's fair to say most Wisconsin citizens involved in this are outraged by
Reagan's policies,'' said Mirette Seireg, executive director of Wisconsin's
project, which is run through an independent, nonprofit organization. Ms. Seireg
said Wisconsin residents supply $1 million worth of medical supplies to
Nicaragua annually.

The benefits of these projects have not been lost on Nicaraguan diplomats.
During his last trip to New York, President Daniel Ortega Saavedra of Nicaragua
took time to speak to Brooklyn residents who had formed a sister-city project
with San Juan de Rio Coco. Nora Astorga, Nicaragua's chief delegate to the
United Nations, attended a memorial service held by the Brooklyn group for the
seven town residents killed in August clashes with the American-backed contras.
The Brooklynites have sent $2,500 to San Juan de Rio Coco for a water project
and are working to expand the town's health clinic.

Some groups have run into trouble at home. In Seattle, opponents backed an
initiative in November instructing municipal leaders to keep the sister-city
project out of politics. The initiative passed, also overturning a City Council
resolution approving Seattle as a sanctuary city.

And in New York, Nicole Fauteux, a resident of Brooklyn who helped organize the
project there, said Community Board 6 in Park Slope rejected the idea of
supporting a forum on the project.

''The board just felt it wasn't in their purview,'' Ms. Fauteux said, ''that it
was too international, and boards should be more concerned with things like
garbage, sewers and lights.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of members of Sister City Project on the Lower East Side packing
medical supplies for Nicaragua (NYT/John Sotomayor)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AUSTRALIA DEBATES TOUCHY IMMIGRATION ISSUE

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 830 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia


A WELL-KNOWN Sydney businessman recently stunned his colleagues by suggesting
that Australia quadruple its population by allowing more people to immigrate.
Jaws fell further when Kerry Packer, one of Australia's most successful media
magnates, added that more Asians, already settling here in record numbers,
should be encouraged to immigrate.

''It's time to realize we can't survive with just 16 million people on this
enormous island,'' he said.

In a country almost the size of the United States but with a population only
about as great as Texas's, immigration is one of the most sensitive political
issues. With two-thirds of its population concentrated in six coastal cities,
Australia has long been aware of its large and empty center. Historically, the
refrain ''populate or perish'' has been a staple of national rhetoric.

Recently the debate has taken on a new and, many believe, more rational tone.
Until the last 10 years, European immigration, the only kind that was officially
sanctioned, was popularly viewed as a defense against what national leaders
portrayed as an imminent land grab by crowded Asian countries to the north.

During the 1970's and early 1980's, in recognition of unemployment at home,
immigration was cut to a trickle, allowed only on humanitarian grounds, an
exception made largely for Vietnamese refugees.

Although there has been little improvement in the unemployment picture,
Immigration Minister Chris Hurford is advocating a rise in immigration as a way
of beefing up the skilled labor force. Last year, 95,000 immigrants landed on
Australian shores, most of them from England and Ireland, with Vietnam in third
place. This year, Australia expects 115,000 new arrivals, the largest number
since the heyday of European immigration in the 1950's and 1960's. These
immigrants will include entrepreneurs and businessmen from Hong Kong, who are
now being welcomed with open arms if they have more than $150,000 to invest in
Australia. Given Australia's declining birth rate and aging population, a
constant annual flow of 115,000 would result in a population of only 19.2
million by 2001, according to estimates by officials at the immigration
department.

Mr. Hurford has bought the argument of the Australian business community that
more immigration - although not on the scale envisioned by Mr. Packer -would
mean an increased demand for domestic goods, greater productivity and lower
prices. This thesis has been rendered more palatable by a report from the
Committee for Economic Development of Australia, finding that immigrants, by
opening new businesses, increased the job prospects of unemployed Australians.

To the business community, the need for more skilled workers is evident. The
work ethic, businessmen say, has never been strong in the Australian character;
indeed, diligent workers are often ridiculed as ''conchies,'' a diminutive for
''conscientious.'' Compounding the problem, they add, are the high wages paid to
unskilled workers.

''The economic incentive for a young person to acquire skills is very slight,''
said Ralph Evans, a partner in a management consultancy firm. ''Unskilled jobs
are relatively well paid, particularly for young people and compared to other
countries. And it's not part of the popular ethic to invest in the future.''

Increasing the population by immigration is not entirely popular with the
Australian public. ''The issue is politically untouchable because people think
immigrants will take jobs away from them,'' said the West Australian state
premier, Brian Burke.

But just as great as the economic fear is what a leading Sydney newspaper
columnist called ''the still-strong undercurrent of racism.'' The ''white
Australia'' policy that prevented Asians and blacks from settling here was
abandoned in 1973, but the sentiment lingers. The president of the Victorian
Returned Services League, the local equivalent of the Veterans of Foreign Wars,
called Archbishop Desmond M. Tutu of South Africa a ''witch doctor'' when he
visited here last month, and added that black and Asian immigration should be
stopped; radio talk shows and letters-to-the-editor columns were filled with
statements of approval. A Perth radio station received 13,000 calls on the
subject, 10,000 of them in favor of the old policy.

The environmentalists are not happy with Mr. Hurford either. Jon Nevill, a
member of the Australian Conservation Foundation, argues that as the world's
driest continent, Australia cannot sustain a larger population. ''We simply do
not have the agricultural capacity which many people imagine,'' Mr. Nevill wrote
in a paper for the foundation.

Like many scientists, and indeed many Australians, he advocates ''zero net
immigration,'' meaning that 20,000 to 30,000 newcomers could be admitted each
year on humanitarian grounds. ''The key question,'' he wrote, is ''Should we try
to plan our future or should we rely on 'gambler's luck,' when the dice are
loaded against us?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Immigrants from South Africa arriving in Australia (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
DULL 'ANNE FRANK' AT BECTON THEATER

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 24, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 922 words

DATELINE: TEANECK


FOR two years, six Jews have been hiding from the Nazis in the garret of a
factory. Now the dreaded, ominous pounding is heard on the door downstairs.

Is there anyone's heart who does not sink during the scene near the end of ''The
Diary of Anne Frank''?

Nothing can diminish the harrowing effect of such an inevitable moment. Not even
the American Stage Company's long and listless production of the Frances
Goodrich-Albert Hackett dramatization of the famous diary. It is playing at the
Becton Theater on the Fairleigh Dickinson University campus through next Sunday.

With, oddly, two directors at the helm: Paul Sorvino, the company's artistic
director, and Rick Lombardo, the production does not recover from what may be a
case of double jeopardy. Whether this was a collaboration or a takeover, the
result is almost unrelieved torpor.

Besides fallen climaxes, overall technical carelessness and a misinterpretation
of a work that is meant to uplift, not depress, consider a set of performances
so strangely assorted and scattered that no play could accomodate them.

Zohra Lampert's inner-directed Mrs. Frank is forever fussing and trying to keep
her accent under control. Finally, the actress makes mush of her big outburst,
when Mr. Van Daan is caught stealing bread in the middle of the night.

Linda Selman (Mrs. Van Daan) goes through a series of rather effective
hysterics,and Clement Fowler's Mr. Frank has the quiet dignity that the role
requires.

For the play's real glow, one must look to Anne. Now, no one is going to pretend
that it's easy to play a 13-year-old girl who announces, ''I am going to be
remarkable,'' and then goes on to be just that - and a royal nuisance as well.

Anne goes through dazzling shifts. She questions every little thing, answers
every big one, exudes composure and wisdom and then jumps about or cries, in
fear, in the night.

In the role, Amanda Sorvino (Mr. Sorvino's daughter) pouts a little, smiles a
lot and generally appears eager to please. In her scenes with young Peter, Miss
Sorvino has a responsive actor, Tony M. Gillan, to work with. Mr. Gillan's
inarticulate charm in the role is helpful.

Mostly, however, the other actors seem to be observing Miss Sorvino quizzically,
as though she wafted in from another place was left to her own inconsiderable
devices.

It is a disservice to thrust a role requiring an exhausting range, an
inexhaustible supply of radiance and vast reserves of energy upon a novice who
has yet to find a well-modulated voice and a comfortable place upon the stage.

PRINCETON

A young pianist wanders into an empty practice room, striking a few chords to
warm up for his Carnegie Hall debut. Suddenly, the sound of the chords turns
into a blast of gunfire.

A soldier from Vietnam creeps behind him, holding a bayonet to the musician's
throat. The pianist protests.

''This is not Cambodia or Vietnam,'' he says. ''It's Manhattan.''

The practice room is the McCarter Theatre's main stage, and the audience is
seated on its sides. The auditorium, with the theater's regular seats, is empty:
A striking image when the pianist is supposed to be on stage, facing rows of
seats.

And the stage, when it is not a stage or a practice room, is a battlefield
surrounded by wildflowers and a combat zone for family wars at home.

What is happening appears to exist in the pianist's mind, from which he must
exorcise the demons that distract him from giving himself wholly to music, the
ultimate salvation. All the psychic mess must be cleared up before the debut,
which represents a dream come true.

Bruce E. Rodgers's hallucinatory, surreal work, ''Debut . . .'', is being
presented under the McCarter's experimental banner, ''Stage Two.'' It will have
its last performance today at 2 P.M.

Mr. Rodgers's writing sometimes explodes and sometimes is just overburdened with
clashing symbols, metaphors and twists, like the perpetual turning of a mind in
disarray.

The soldier, whose name is Grunt, is supposed to meet his ''relief.'' When he
finally does, that relief represents the release of the mind of the pianist
(Jimmy). Music clearly sums up civilization, in contrast to war. and Carnegie
Hall is referred to as ''culturally consecrated ground.''

For art stands for mankind at its most celebratory, and war means man at his
most destructive. Contrasted, too, are the freedom of artistic expression with
the freedom, such as it is, or the survival (which comes first) one fights for.

The emotional weight that Jimmy has to bear includes the violence inflicted upon
him by the values of a father who forced him to kill a deer in much the same
gory manner as his father forced him to kill one.

It isn't long before Grunt and Jimmy's brother, Bobby, a war casualty, become
one. Jimmy's parents and his lover (Rachel) enter upon the stage/ battlefield.
And what began as an exercise in dramatic associations degenerates into a series
of family recriminations.

References to a wife's guilt over her husband's thwarted ambitions are
gratuitous and heavy-handed. So is the rivalry between Rachel and Jimmy's
mother.

Mr. Rodgers's passage about transitions from reality to memory to imagination
serves as an explanation of his own polyphonic playwriting form. Only his work
does not flow as seamlessly as intended.

Robert Lanchester has directed this intermissionless 90-minute work as though he
were mixing the complexities of the mind with the mechanics of theater.
Ultimately, though, Mr. Rodgers's experimentation invites exasperation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of cast members of ''The Diary of Anne Frank''; Photo of cast
members of ''Debut...''

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FICTION: IN SHORT

BYLINE: By Michael Bloom

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 304 words


FAIR AUGUSTO: And Other Stories. By Laura Kalpakian. (Graywolf, Paper, $8.) If
variety of setting were the sole criterion of a short story's excellence, Laura
Kalpakian's first collection would be superior. With substantial facility she
delineates locations ranging from a loch in Scotland to Venice to the Santa
Monica pier. These are leisurely, full-bodied, even old-fashioned stories with
fairly complete narratives - the antithesis of contemporary minimalism. Yet
despite this amplitude, a number of the stories seem bland, familiar,
uninspired. The lengthy title story barely avoids soap opera to arrive
eventually at a woman's genuine anger over the golden boy of her youth. Ms.
Kalpakian's favored protagonists are women without jobs or husbands or the
wherewithal to face the trials of daily existence. Though these characters
aren't without fictional potential, their plight is portrayed in an all too tidy
manner. Voice and point of view are relatively unimportant, with the result that
one becomes aware of a consistently colorless, constricting omniscience. What is
missing from a majority of the stories are quirks and loose ends that can't be
explained even by an all-knowing narrator. Only two stories are told in the
first person, and they are among the liveliest. In ''Veteran's Day'' a
hairdresser proudly relates the escapes from the police of her brother, a
Vietnam veteran whose mission in life is to warn America that its minds are
being poisoned by ''Killer Enzymes'' and ''Radio Carbons.'' This and several
other stories - including an Armenian couple's first brush with an American
Christmas and an atheistic doctor in the midst of a devoutly religious family -
exhibit a droll humor and a welcome sense of surprise. As a writer of short
fiction, Ms. Kalpakian's best efforts are her freest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FICTION: IN SHORT

BYLINE: By Sandy MacDonald

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 273 words


SHELTERED LIVES. By Frank Milburn. (Doubleday, $15.95.) Freshly transplanted
from the battlefields of Vietnam - where he came within a hair's breadth of
offing his fanatical commanding officer - David Winant balks at resuming the
self-deluding politesse of his proper Long Island family. ''Tell me about
Baghdad,'' prompts his mother, an alcohol-steeped invalid who, for as long as he
can remember, has had to be periodically ''put in storage . . . like a fur.''
David faults his father (a banker given to quoting Blake) for failing to show
emotions, but he himself appears the helpless inheritor of a ''mild demeanor and
good manners'' - predispositions that enable him, once reassimilated, to drift
through the heavily foreshadowed suicide of a family member as if draped in
cotton batting. His equanimity also, unfortunately, affords the author an
opportunity for gray prose; with David poised on the threshold of his lifelong
sweetheart's bedroom, Mr. Milburn actually pauses to describe the decor.

One might not complain if the author were not clearly capable of more.

Instead of closing chapters studded with chunks of synopsized conversation, one
longs for such salvos as this glimpse of bibulous bridge ladies breaking up a
game: ''Their arms were raised as if dangling from puppet strings, and they made
mincing dance steps, like a weird cha-cha-cha.'' In his second novel, Frank
Milburn has chosen to foxtrot across a dance floor already well polished by such
smoothies as John Cheever and Louis Auchincloss; like their footwork, his is
sometimes overly glib, yet it is possessed of great grace and, occasionally,
art.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Not Regicide, but a Commitment to Legality

BYLINE: By Lawrence H. Fuchs: Lawrence H. Fuchs is professor of American
civilization and politics at Brandeis University.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: WESTON, Mass.


Many Europeans, Israelis and other foreigners see Americans' reaction to the
Iran-contra affair as a self-damaging wound, much as they viewed the uproar over
Watergate. They shake their heads and wonder about our penchant for regicide.

But Americans cannot commit regicide, having gotten rid of our king long ago and
introduced a constitutional system to prevent the arbitrary abuse of power by
Government officials, including Presidents - even a popular one motivated, as he
sees it, by the highest strategic interest.

It is important to understand that the American insistence that Presidents and
their subordinates be held strictly accountable to the sovereign people under
their laws is absolutely essential to our identity as a nation. That this is a
country of laws, as Americans are fond of saying, undoubtedly comes across as a
cliche to the English, French, West Germans, Italians and Israelis, who are much
more forgiving than Americans when rulers appear to abuse power or condone or
minimize abuses by others. They, too, after all, are democracies governed by
laws.

Unlike our nation, theirs are nations not just of laws but of blood, whose
identities are fixed by some combination of race, religion or even language much
more than is true for Americans. Their dominant unifying culture is based not
nearly so much on shared political and civic values as is true in America, where
a third-grade refugee youngster from Vietnam who had been here only six months
spoke to me of George Washington as ''the Father of our country.''

Our nation cannot make light of a violation of its most prized and unifying
value, the accountability of the rulers to the sovereign people, not even by the
President or those who act in his name in support of a foreign policy that they
deem to be imperative. In the Iran-contra case, three or four laws may have been
violated, and it is an urgent national priority that Americans hold accountable
anyone who is found to have broken them. It is no orgy of self-incrimination to
have an independent counsel and two select Congressional committees trying to
get at the truth.

What makes the situation for Americans especially anguishing is that our
President is our chief of state as well as the chief executive officer sworn to
see that the laws are faithfully executed. In Europe, where those functions are
divided between people, the prime minister does not symbolize the nation as does
our President.

Ronald Reagan is almost universally admired as chief of state, a job he does as
well or better than any President in recent history. Just recall his sweeping
gently down the line of the relatives of the dead Challenger astronauts, pausing
to console them with a kind word, a kiss on the cheek or a pat on the hand in
obvious sincerity and dignified affection. It is precisely because our Chief
Executive is chief of state that he, as a symbol of the nation, must be
particularly careful to uphold the value of accountability that made us a nation
in the first place and continues to give a national identity to peoples who now
come from more than 50 other nations.

None of this is to deny to Presidents the authority to act in foreign affairs
with great urgency or even covertly, especially when there is broad consensus on
policy. As long as Presidents and their subordinates act within the law, the
public will easily forgive Presidents who make strategic or tactical mistakes as
they forgave John F. Kennedy who announced immediately after the debacle at the
Bay of Pigs that he had made a terrible one.

In pursuing foreign policy goals, Presidents have considerable latitude to act
on their own within the Constitution in the face of considerable Congressional
opposition - as when Franklin D. Roosevelt traded 50 destroyers to Britain for
long-term leases to British bases. But when there is so much opposition,
Presidents must take responsibility by acting in the open, as was done when Mr.
Roosevelt asked his 1940 Republican opponent for the Presidency, Wendell Wilkie,
to join in a public approval of the action before he took it. This Mr. Wilkie
refused to do, but the policy was enthusiastically endorsed by Mr. Roosevelt's
Republican Secretaries of War and Defense.

The anxiety the American people now show about their President stems not from
his having acted on his own against public opinion or from having made a mistake
but that he acted on his own so secretly that he did not even give timely notice
to a handful of Congressmen who routinely see highly classified information, as
provided for by law. It stems also from the evidence that somehow, under his
authority (although probably without his knowledge), White House subordinates
appear to have violated several laws by diverting money to the contras.

When Benjamin Franklin was asked by a Philadelphia woman what the Constitutional
Convention had wrought, he replied, ''A Republic, Madam, if you can keep it.''
The Republic can survive Presidential mistakes. It requires, too, courageous and
even unpopular Presidential decisions in foreign policy. But it cannot permit a
President to obfuscate accountability, for then it would no longer be the
Republic that gives this nation its identity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR NURSES, A FUTURE IN LAW

BYLINE: By CAROL LAWSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 805 words


When Mary E. Kelly mentions that her Los Angeles law office is on the Avenue of
the Stars, she chuckles.

It is not just a city, but a world away from the place where she used to work -
the psychiatric wing of a hospital on the South Side of Chicago. Ms. Kelly is
one of a growing number of nurses around the country who have gone to law school
and now call themselves nurse attorneys.

The American Association of Nurse Attorneys, which was established five years
ago, has 350 members. The association estimates that there are at least 350
additional nurses in the United States who are either lawyers or are in law
school.

Nurse attorneys are practicing lawyers who generally deal with health-care
issues. They represent clients in cases typically involving medical malpractice,
product liability and nurse licensing disputes. Others serve as instructors in
law or nursing schools or as consultants to hospitals and insurance companies.

'I Never Left Nursing'

Like others in her profession, Ms. Kelly considers herself a practicing lawyer
who is still a nurse. ''I never left nursing, I've just grown and added a new
dimension,'' said Ms. Kelly, 34 years old, who has a large number of nurses
among her clients.

She had been a psychiatric nurse for three years when she decided to apply to De
Paul University Law School in Chicago. She was prompted, she said, by a feeling
of powerlessness in the hospital system.

''I saw a lot of abuse - unnecessary hysterectomies and tubal ligations on
Medicaid patients,'' Ms. Kelly said. ''A nurse is trained to be a patient
advocate, but I found it very difficult to advocate what was in the patient's
best interest. It's much easier if you have the law behind you. It gives you a
power base.'' For Sandy Berkowitz, a nurse attorney who works as a
risk-management consultant for a Philadelphia insurance brokerage, it was a
desire for ''power and money'' that led to the decision to go to law school.
''It's frustrating not to get paid for what you think your contribution to
society is as a nurse,'' said Ms. Berkowitz, 40, who graduated from Temple
University Law School in Philadelphia.

D. M. Boulay, a nurse attorney in Minneapolis, went to law school after she
served for two years in an intensive-care unit in Vietnam. ''I saw my profession
increasingly regulated by the government, and I felt I needed more education,''
she said.

Ms. Boulay, 44, received her law degree from Hamline University in St. Paul in
1978. Her clients include nurses, hospitals and nursing homes. ''It's about as
close to perfection as you could get,'' she said.

Her nursing experience, she said, has been an asset in her legal career. ''I
have education and experience far beyond that of most lawyers, especially in the
area of understanding people,'' Ms. Boulay said. ''Also, the approach to problem
solving that you use as a nurse is the same as in law.''

Cynthia Northrop, the founder of the American Association of Nurse Attorneys,
decided to go to law school after working as a public health nurse in Laurel,
Md.

''There were a lot of child abuse and substance abuse cases, and I was called
into court as a lay witness for the County Department of Social Services,'' said
Ms. Northrop, 36. ''I saw a real void in the nursing profession in terms of our
knowledge of the law.''

Ms. Northrop, who practiced law in Maryland before moving to New York City
recently, has written a book with Ms. Kelly, ''Legal Issues in Nursing,'' to be
published in April by the C. V. Mosby Company.

''There are practical things that a nurse needs to know,'' she said. ''A lot of
nurses think that if they follow a doctor's orders, they won't be sued. They are
not taught that they have a legal responsibility to challenge a doctor's order
if they know it is wrong. There have been cases where the nurse, not the doctor,
was held liable.''

Role in National Issues Sought

The president of the American Association of Nurse Attorneys, Katherine Pohlman,
has been a nurse since 1977 and received a law degree from Boston University two
years ago. She works in a small Boston law firm that has a nurse attorney as one
of the partners. One of her goals for the association is to involve nurses in
national health-care issues.

''Nursing is underlooked and underrepresented in policy making in health care,''
she said. ''We are starting to formulate positions and to get more involved.''

Ms. Kelly observed that the climate for nurses who want to become lawyers has
improved since she applied to law school in 1975.

''I had a terrible time convincing law schools,'' she said, ''and a nursing
director in Chicago told me: 'You have to be either a nurse or a lawyer. Make up
your mind.' She didn't think I could make a commitment to either. But I really
felt I could do a lot with both careers.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'PLATOON' WINS 2 AWARDS AT GOLDEN GLOBE CEREMONY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 376 words

DATELINE: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif., Feb. 1


''Platoon,'' an intense film about the Vietnam War, won Golden Globe awards
Saturday night for the best dramatic movie of 1986 and the best director.

The Hollywood Foreign Press Association also presented awards to Marlee Matlin
of ''Children of a Lesser God'' and Bob Hoskins of ''Mona Lisa,'' for the best
dramatic performances in a motion picture.

At the association's 44th annual awards ceremony, which took place at the
Beverly Hilton Hotel, Woody Allen's ''Hannah and Her Sisters'' was chosen as
best comedy or musical motion picture. Acting honors in the comedy or musical
category went to the Australian Paul Hogan for ''Crocodile Dundee'' and Sissy
Spacek for ''Crimes of the Heart.''

''L.A. Law'' took top television honors with the Golden Globe for best drama
series.

Anthony Quinn Honored

The Cecil B. DeMille award for career achievement went to Anthony Quinn for his
50-year career.

Olivia de Havilland was honored for the best supporting performance in a
television movie, for ''Anastasia: The Mystery of Anna''; Edward Woodward as
lead actor in a television series, for ''The Equalizer''; Angela Lansbury as
lead actress in a dramatic series, for ''Murder, She Wrote,'' and Loretta Young
for best performance by an actress in a television movie, for ''Christmas Eve.''

Miss de Havilland, noting that she won a Golden Globe in 1949 for ''The
Heiress,'' said, ''I've had a Golden Globe waiting 37 years for a mate.''

A Standing Ovation

Miss Young received a standing ovation as she received her Golden Globe after a
23-year absence from acting.

James Woods won a Golden Globe for the best performance by an actor in a
television movie, for his role as a schizophrenic in the CBS film ''Promise,''
which also won as the best mini-series or movie made for television.

''Golden Girls'' was named the best television musical or comedy series, and the
''Moonlighting'' stars Bruce Willis and Cybill Shepherd were chosen as the best
actor and actress in that category.

The Golden Globes ceremonies were once carried on network television but fell
into disrepute on charges of rigged voting. Foreign press members have since
tightened the voting regulations. About 80 members of the association are
eligible to cast ballots.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HUGE ILLEGAL DEAL ON ARMS FOR IRAN WAS KNOWN TO U.S.

BYLINE: By STUART DIAMOND with RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4495 words


High Pentagon intelligence officials learned more than a year ago that private
arms dealers were trying illegally to ship 39 American fighter planes and vast
amounts of other weapons to Iran, but the officials did not stop the sales,
according to confidential documents and participants who informed the
Government.

The illegal efforts were allowed to continue because the military officials
hoped to gain intelligence information, including data on Iran and access to
advanced Soviet tanks captured from Iraq by Iran, the sources said.

The Pentagon confirmed that it was told as early as December 1985 of the private
efforts, which began in 1983. But various arms dealers contended in interviews
that some high Government officials knew of the project by early 1984.

150 People Interviewed

The private efforts continued as the Reagan Administration was arranging the
official sales of arms to Iran that are now the subject of inquiries by two
Congressional committees and a Federal special prosecutor.

Information about the private efforts -named the Demavand project, for Iran's
highest mountain - was obtained by The New York Times from more than 4,000 pages
of confidential telexes, contracts, correspondence and other documents and
interviews with 150 Government officials, arms dealers, intelligence sources and
others over the last eight weeks.

No one interviewed was sure that fighter planes were delivered to Iran in the
Demavand project, but Iraqi military sources have said that a greater number of
F-4's have been flying for Iran since last fall. The total value of the arms
contracted for in the project was more than $1 billion.

Wide-Ranging Disclosures

These disclosures emerged from the sources and documents:

* Government officials were aware of wider efforts to ship American arms to
Iran, and far larger amounts of American weapons were involved than have been
previously reported. The Administration has acknowledged Government sales of
arms to Iran of $12 million to $42 million.

* Egypt, which has criticized the United States for selling arms to Iran, in
1985 guaranteed money and offered planes to private dealers trying to ship the
F-4's to Iran through Turkey. Egyptian military officials said they did not know
the planes were destined for Iran.

* Major European financial institutions had extensive contacts with the arms
dealers, providing bank accounts and money and in one case co-signing a sales
contract for the planes.

* John K. Singlaub, a retired Army major general who helped the Administration
supply the Nicaraguan rebels, also served on the board of a Manhattan arms
company that became involved in the Demavand project and whose owner pleaded
guilty to smuggling arms to Iran. General Singlaub says he knew of no illegal
dealings by the company.

* One intelligence consultant complained that 48 hours after he gave
confidential information about the Demavand project to the head of Marine Corps
counterintelligence in Washington, high Iranian military officials had details
of the private discussion.

Evidence collected by The Times suggests a measure of overlap between the
private and official efforts. The line between what was official and unofficial
became blurred, and arms dealers now assert that they were acting under the
umbrella of official approval.

The United States had declared an embargo on arms sales to Iran after Iran
seized American hostages in 1979. The Reagan Administration continued to support
that ban publicly although it sent its first shipment of arms to Iran in August
1985 and although President Reagan signed an order in January 1986 authorizing
further official arms shipments to Teheran.

The investigation by The Times gives further indications that senior military
officials in Washington, including aides at the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Marine
Corps counterintelligence, were aware of illegal private arms sales to Iran, in
addition to the officially arranged sales that are now known as part of the
Iran-contra arms case.

The Times reported last month that two United States Army colonels had been
implicated by Army investigators in illegal efforts to sell arms to Iran for
private gain while they were on active duty in sensitive European assignments.
Pentagon authorities were informed of the efforts but did not prosecute. Both
men denied any wrongdoing.

In the complex and often cloudy world of international arms traffic, it can be
difficult to differentiate among various deals and intrigues. But the colonels'
activities appear to have been separate from the Demavand project. They also
seem to be separate from a $2 billion arms sales effort that was at the center
of a Government sting operation in Manhattan, in which undercover Customs agents
gained 17 indictments in April 1986 by infiltrating what they have described as
an illegal arms deal in progress.

THE DEMAVAND PROJECT: A START IN EARLY 80's

The Demavand project, dating to 1983, started earlier than either the sting
operation or the Administration's secret sales to Iran. The project was
originally to include sales of Harpoon and Sidewinder missiles, 39 F-4 fighter
planes, 50 M-48 tanks and at least 25 attack helicopters.

Although accounts differ on how many weapons were actually delivered to Iran,
the sources and documents show that contracts were signed, that millions of
dollars in guarantees were deposited in bank accounts by the sellers and the
Iranian buyers and that American military officials were discussing parts of the
transaction as late as last August.

Several arms dealers asserted that the Demavand operation was eventually
overtaken by the Administration's official efforts, which were disclosed in
November.

Sources familiar with sales of American arms to Iran said the total ddeliveries
to the Teheran Government went far beyond the 2,008 antitank missiles and parts
for 235 Hawk missiles that the Administration has acknowledged selling to Iran.

Until the Administration started to sell Iran limited amounts of arms from
American stocks, American arms bound for Iran had to be found in third
countries, which were legally bound by their Pentagon contracts to supply
certificates to the United States about the ultimate destination of the arms
they were selling. Since sales to Iran were barred, sellers had to arrange for
false certification of the ultimate destination or circumvent this requirement.

But arms dealers say these these legal distinctions were treated as formalities.
They maintain that the total of American arms delivered to Iran from the
Demavand sales, the limited sales the Administration says it authorized
beginning in mid-1985 and other efforts included 12,000 antitank missiles as
well as $150 million in military spare parts and 200 highly advanced Phoenix
air-to-air missiles, at more than $1 million each.

AN ELUSIVE BUSINESSMAN AND A C.I.A. OPERATIVE

Among those who provided substantial information about the Demavand operation
was Richard J. Brenneke, who drew wide attention in late November by asserting
that he had told Vice President Bush's office in February 1986 of secret details
about Demavand and other arms sales to Iran and the diversion of Government
proceeds to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras.

Mr. Brenneke has been publicly identified as an Oregon real estate executive,
but in recent interviews he showed The Times evidence that he was employed for
13 years by the Central Intelligence Agency. He also said he had been a
freelance consultant for more than 15 years for such organizations as Mossad,
the Israeli security agency, as well as French intelligence.

Also giving details in interviews was John H. Delaroque, an elusive French
businessman who has been indicted but not apprehended in the New York Customs
sting operation on arms sales. He said the Demavand project was widely known in
the Government and military.

''Everybody knew about it,'' he said last week by telephone from southern
France. ''But the U.S. Government never said to us, 'Stop.' They said, 'Just
keep the information flowing.' ''

Business executives and arms dealers admitted that they had an interest in
saying their dealings had been Government-sanctioned. Individually, their
assertions might be dismissed as self-serving, but many of the sources
independently provided precise details and documents that coincided on key
points.

Defense lawyers in the $2 billion Customs Government sting operation argued that
their clients thought their activities were sanctioned by the Administration.
The lawyers argued that Customs Service officials, in setting up the sting
operation, were unaware of the new drift in American policy.

The military officials named by participants, when contacted by The Times,
referred queries about the Demavand case to Government spokesmen. The spokesmen
confirmed that certain key meetings were held and documents received, but they
declined to respond in detail, citing the Congressional and grand jury
investigations of the Iran-contra affair.

A SOURCE'S SOURCES: IRANIANS AND SYRIANS

The Times first learned of Pentagon awareness of the Demavand project in
November from Mr. Brenneke, who owns a real estate management firm, G.P.I.
Management Inc., in Lake Oswego, Ore. Initially it was unclear how a real estate
executive would know such details. In recent interviews, Mr. Brenneke said he
had extensive intelligence connections, including contacts with Iranians and
Syrians, that gave him access to sensitive arms information.

He provided a letter of reference under a C.I.A. letterhead, dated June 20,
1979, confirming that he had been employed by the agency for 13 years and
saying, ''We found him to be thorough, competent and very trustworthy.''

The letter said in part that Mr. Brenneke, who described his C.I.A. work as
reconnaissance flights in Vietnam and South America and other tasks he could not
discuss, left at his own request and was eligible to be rehired. The C.I.A. said
it does not comment on employees.

Mr. Brenneke acknowledged that he was trying at the time to capitalize on his
work as an intelligence consultant by dealing in arms himself.

While some of his assertions at first hearing appeared implausible, he provided
hundreds of pages of handwritten notes and typed memos dating to 1985 and
referring in detail to arms shipments that were then secret and have since been
substantially corroborated by recent official disclosures and by the
investigation by The Times.

Mr. Brenneke's notes referred to involvement in arms sales to Iran by Israel, by
Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, then the President's national security adviser,
and by others whose roles became public only months later.

His notes, some of which have been filed as court documents by lawyers defending
people in the $2 billion sting operation, contained references to efforts to
trade weapons for hostages. He listed dozens of names and telephone numbers of
intelligence agents, arms dealers, Government officials and accounts of his
conversations with them about arms sales to Iran.

The Defense Department and intelligence agencies, he said, have been aware for
several years that private dealers, including some Americans, have been shipping
arms to Iran. He said many of the efforts were permitted as a way of improving
relations with Iran.

Mr. Brenneke said he first informed American military officials about the
Demavand project in December 1985, partly out of concern that he might have
information about illegal actions. His lawyer, Richard H. Muller, took Mr.
Brenneke's memos to senior military officials in Washington.

Mr. Brenneke said he had discussions with Lieut. Col. George Alvarez of Marine
Corps counterintelligence and with others over the next few months. He said he
had been told that he should not to get involved in the project, but that his
information would be welcomed. Mr. Brenneke said he had also spoken to J.
William Middendorf 2d, a retired Under Secretary of the Navy who is now the
American representative to the European Community in Brussels, and to Ralph
Johnson, then director of the State Department's European bureau, who was an
acquaintance of Mr. Brenneke.

Mr. Middendorf, reached in Brussels, said he did not recall ever talking to Mr.
Brenneke. Mr. Johnson did not return repeated telephone calls.

Mr. Muller said ''the highest possible levels'' of the military command knew of
the project, but he declined to elaborate. Mr. Delaroque, the French
businessman, said the same thing.

In January 1986, Mr. Brenneke said, a top Iranian Air Force official, Col.
Kiamars Salahshoor, repeated to him the gist of Mr. Brenneke's phone
conversations with Colonel Alvarez. ''There was a major intelligence leak to the
Iranians from Mr. Alvarez's office,'' Mr. Brenneke said.

A PENTAGON SUGGESTION: IRAN TAPPED THE PHONES

On Friday, a military spokesman denied that there had been any leak through
Colonel Alvarez's office and said Mr. Brenneke's call had been made on an
unsecured telephone. He suggested that the line might have been monitored by the
Iranians.

Colonel Alvarez declined to discuss the matter. A Marine Corps spokesman, Lieut.
Col. John Shotwell, said Colonel Alvarez did not recall any phone conversations
with Mr. Brenneke.

On May 28, 1986, Mr. Brenneke said, he and two associates whom he brought along
as witnesses met with representatives of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to discuss
the Demavand case for two and a half hours in Room 2B-869 at the Pentagon.

Mr. Brenneke said the three Pentagon officials were Franklin D. Lomax, Col.
Byron R. Hooten of the Air Force and Maj. C. L. Stewart of the Army, who is now
a lieutenant colonel. They were attached to the Joint Special Operations Agency,
a counter-terrorism unit formed in 1984 in response to the failed attempt to
rescue American hostages in Iran in 1980.

Mr. Brenneke said he had requested the meeting because his contacts in Iran had
three Soviet T-80 tanks and other materiel that had been captured from Iraq.

The Times reported yesterday that Iran had also promised to give Israel a
Soviet-made T-72 tank captured from Iraq as part of an arms deal in early 1985.
The T-80 is more advanced than the T-72.

Mr. Brenneke said the Iranians were willing to turn the Soviet equipment over to
the United States to open diplomatic discussions and to help their efforts to
get American planes. The return of American hostages held in Lebanon might also
have been part of the deal, he said.

He said the C.I.A. had been interested in the tanks as early as Dec. 18, 1985,
when he was called by an agent from the agency's Los Angeles office. He said the
Joint Chiefs office later took over the C.I.A.'s efforts on the tanks. He said
he had talks with officials in various Government agencies between December and
May, when the Pentagon meeting took place.

Mr. Brenneke said the three Pentagon officers at the May meeting were eager to
get the Soviet equipment and knew about the Demavand project. At the session, he
said, one of the aides pulled a file folder labeled ''Demavand'' from the drawer
of a file cabinet in the office.

THE MILITARY'S QUERY: U.S. HOSTAGES' FATE

''They wanted to know whether Demavand was a viable project and how much further
can we go as far as military intelligence goes,'' he said. ''They wanted
intelligence out of Iran on terrorism and on Iran in general. They also wanted
to know if the fate of the hostages could be influenced, and under what
circumstances.''

The next day, he said, an Army intelligence official, Lieut. Col. Larry Caylor,
visited his hotel room to discuss the matter further. Mr. Brenneke's two
companions were also there.

Calls to Colonel Caylor were not returned. A Pentagon spokesman said no Pentagon
official would comment on any Iran arms dealings.

Mr. Brenneke said discussions on the matter with American military officials
continued until August 1986, when the officials said they had to stop the
discussions because of an official project, which they did not describe. The
next month the American Government opened a new official channel for arms
shipments to Iran. It followed a trip in May to Teheran by Robert C. McFarlane,
the former national security adviser, with a planeload of arms that failed to
win the release of the hostages.

Mr. Brenneke said one reason he decided to disclose his information now is that
he was annoyed that Lieut. Col. E. Douglas Menarchik, a military aide in the
Vice President's office, said publicly he did not recall any conversations with
Mr. Brenneke. Mr. Brenneke said he had spoken with Colonel Menarchik three times
by telephone.

The Pentagon declined to make the three military officials available for
interviews. Instead, a spokesman read a prepared statement to The Times saying
the three Pentagon officials from the Joint Special Operations Agency took part
in a ''normal contractor meeting'' on May 28 but did not recall that Mr.
Brenneke was there.

The statement said that at the session ''an unsolicited proposal'' to supply
Soviet bloc equipment was made that was later referred to other intelligence
officials and then rejected. The statement made no reference to Demavand.

Mr. Brenneke's witnesses, who are involved in an arms manufacturing company in
the South and who declined to be publicly identified, corroborated statements
made by Mr. Brenneke, who said he brought the witnesses because ''I didn't want
the Government officials to forget the meeting sometime later.''

The three said the session was not a normal contractor's meeting but had been
arranged for specific discussions of Demavand and the Soviet equipment. The
witnesses said they were surprised by the officials' failure to recall Mr.
Brenneke since he conducted virtually all of the discussion with them.

The Demavand project had its origins in 1980, when Bernard Veillot, a former
French Navy pilot and later an arms dealer, made his first contacts with Iranian
officials while flying insecticides from Belgium to Iran, according to an
unpublished manuscript, ''Fanning the Flames,'' by Kenneth R. Timmerman. The
book by Mr. Timmerman, a Paris-based freelance journalist, is about arms sales
to Iran and Iraq and has been purchased by The New York Times Syndicate.

By 1983 Iran, at war with Iraq, was desperate for American military equipment,
which represented 95 percent of its weapons. Only a few of the 250 F-4's
obtained before the Shah was overthrown in 1979 were still flyable.

Mr. Veillot and Claude Lang, a French arms dealer who associates said had C.I.A.
contacts, set up a Panamanian company, Daloa Finance, that handled arms sales to
Iran, interviews and records show. Mr. Delaroque, who said he was an associate
of Mr. Veillot, asserted that he had high connections in the Iranian military
and Government and with American officials.

In February 1983, Mr. Lang said he met in Washington with a retired Air Force
general, Swede Svendsen, to discuss the tanks that were to be part of the
Demavand deal. General Svendsen was a consultant to the Washington lobbying
concern of Alcalde, Henderson, O'Bannon & Rousselot, which had on its staff many
former high Government and military officials.

General Svendsen, who now runs a military consulting company in San Antonio,
said in an interview that he was a friend of retired Richard V. Secord, a
retired Air Force major general who has emerged as a major figure in the
Iran-contra arms case, but that the two did not have any business dealings.

He also said he never consummated the tank deal. ''I found out it was an Iranian
thing, and I left,'' he said. He said he met in Washington with Mr. Lang and in
France with Mr. Lang and Mr. Veillot in early 1984.

General Svendsen also said he had introduced Mr. Lang and Mr. Veillot to James
Fees, the head of a Geneva consulting company, Tradeco. Mr. Fees, a former State
Department official, said the dealers had wanted F-4 planes from Egypt,
ostensibly for Paraguay. He said he had become suspicious and had broken off
further contacts.

A MYSTERIOUS OFFICIAL: WHO WAS MR. BOYLE?

Mr. Delaroque, Mr. Brenneke, Mr. Lang and other sources said key support for the
Demavand project was provided in early 1984 by a Government official they
identified only as ''Mr. Boyle,'' at the National Security Agency, the
top-secret agency that conducts electronic eavesdropping and monitoring of
communications around the world. No first name was provided, and those
interviewed said Boyle may have been a code name.

Also associated with the Demavand project was Paul S. Cutter, also known as Paul
Sjeklocha, a former C.I.A. analyst and translator who is serving a prison
sentence in Arizona for trying to smuggle arms to Iran. He is appealing his
sentence on the ground that his activities were Government-sanctioned.

To help get the Demavand project planes, another American, Michael Austin,
joined the deal, documents show. Mr. Austin headed Manhattan concerns called
Austin Aerospace and Universal Aerospace. The Austin Aerospace board of advisers
was composed of several retired military officers listed on a company letterhead
obtained by Customs intelligence officials, who investigated the company.

The advisers included General Singlaub; Brig. Gen. Heine Aderholt, who is
retired from the Air Force and was commander of the military assistance command
in Thailand, and Col. W. J. Knight, also retired from the Air Force, a former
astronaut. The board members said they had no knowledge of any arms dealings
with Iran.

ADVISED NOT TO TALK: 'HE HAS NOTHING TO GAIN'

Mr. Austin did not return a dozen phone calls and letters to his Manhattan
office and New Jersey home. He pleaded guilty in January 1986 to trying to
smuggle arms to Iran and counterfeiting, and served what Customs officials
called a light sentence: 20 weekends in prison. The advisers have not been
linked to the charges. Mr. Austin's lawyer, William Aronwald, a former Federal
prosecutor, said he had advised Mr. Austin ''not to talk,'' adding, ''He has
nothing to gain.''

Mr. Austin, associates said, had contacts in Egypt, which was said to be trying
to sell F-4's to get the money to buy more advanced F-15's.

A document dated May 22, 1985, and signed by Col. A. A. Saleh, a high Egyptian
Defense Ministry official, authorized Austin Aerospace to sell F4-E aircraft,
spare parts and associated equipment to an unidentified buyer. A copy of the
document, obtained by The Times, bears the official Egyptian seal. The Egyptian
Defense Ministry said it was authentic.

On June 13, 1985, the Central Bank of Egypt agreed to put up a $5 million
performance bond to guarantee the delivery of the planes, another document
shows. Both Mr. Brenneke and Mr. Cutter contended separately that the money had
actually been guaranteed by the United States.

Egyptian military officials said in an interview that they thought the planes
were going to Turkey or Greece and that the deal fell through. In telexes and
other documents between Mr. Austin and other arms dealers and banks, Iran is
described as the final destination for the planes, after a stop in Turkey.

The documents name as buyers Colonel Salahshoor, a high procurement official in
the Iranian Air Force and Shokrolahe Reyazi, a member of Iran's 21-member
Supreme Defense Council. Hojatolislam Hashemi Rafsanjani, the Speaker of Iran's
Parliament and a key figure in the secret diplomacy that paved the way for the
Administration's arms sales to Iran, also sits on that council.

THE DEMAVAND PROJECT: FROM THE U.S. TO IRAN

Lieut. Col. George Alvarez: Chief of Marine Corps counterintelligence. Said to
have received information from Mr. Brenneke on illegal arms sales to Iran.

Michael Austin: Headed a Manhattan company called Austin Aerospace with retired
military officers on its board. Had contacts in Egypt and became involved in
arms sales. Pleaded guilty to arms trafficking and counterfeiting.

Richard J. Brenneke: Intelligence consultant and C.I.A. employee for more than
13 years. Owns a real estate management compnay, G.P.I. Management Inc., in Lake
Oswego, Ore.

Lieut. Col. Larry Caylor: An Army intelligence official. Is reported to have met
with Mr. Brenneke to discuss sale of arms to Iran and possible procurement of
advanced Soviet tanks.

Paul S. Cutter: A former C.I.A. analyst and translator. Is serving a prison
sentence in Arizona for trying to smuggle arms to Iran.

John H. Delaroque: French arms dealer. Indicted but not apprehended in a Federal
arms sting operation in New York. Said by other dealers to have detailed
knowledge of many major Iran arms sales.

Byron R. Hooten: An Air Force officer and Pentagon aide for Joint Chiefs of
Staff. Is said to have met with Mr. Brenneke on May 28, 1986, to discuss arms
deals.

Claude Lang: A French arms dealer who associates said had C.I.A. contacts. Set
up a Panamanian company, Daloa Finance, with Mr. Veillot to trade arms.

Franklin D. Lomax: A Pentagon official. Is said to have accompanied Colonel
Hooten to May 28, 1986, meeting with Mr. Brenneke on arms deals.

Robert C. McFarlane: Former national security adviser. Made a trip to Teheran in
May 1986 with a planeload of arms.

Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter: Former national security adviser. Resigned after
the Governntnt disclosed it had sold arms to Iran.

Shokrolahe Reyazi: A member of Iran's 21-member Supreme Defense Council. Named
by dealers as a buyer of arms for Iran.

Col. A. A. Saleh: A high official in the Egyptian Ministry of Defense. Signed a
document authorizing Austin Aerospace to sell F-4E aircraft, spare parts and
associated equipment.

Col. Kiamars Salahshoor: A top Iranian Air Force official. Signed a contract to
buy 39 F-4 American fighter planes from arms dealers, with aid from financial
institutions in Europe.

Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord: Retired from Air Force. A major figure in arranging
the secret arms shipments to Iran and military supplies to Nicaraguan rebels.

Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub: Retired from Army. Is said to have helped the
Administration supply weapons to the Nicaraguan rebels. Also a board member of a
Manhattan arms company whose owner pled guilty of weapons smuggling to Iran.
Says he did not know of any illegal dealings by the company.

Maj. C. L. Stewart: A Pentagon official. Is also said to have attended May 28,
1986, meeting on arms deals with Mr. Brenneke.

Gen. Swede Svendsen: Retired from Air Force. A consultant to the Washington
lobbying company of Alcalde, Henderson, O'Bannon & Rousselot. Arranged early
meetings of arms dealers who became engaged in sales of weapons to Iran but says
he dropped out of the negotiations early.

Bernard Veillot: A former French Navy pilot and later an arms dealer. Made
contacts with Iranian Air Force officials while flying insecticides from Belgium
to Iran in 1980.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Richard J. Brenneke, Paul S. Cutter, Claude Lang, Robert C.
McFarlane, Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord and Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub (page A12)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECRECY ON CONTRA TRAINING DENOUNCED

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: EGLIN AIR FORCE BASE, Fla.


As far back as World War II, when the United States has needed a place to train
men for a top secret mission, it has turned to this huge tract of pine trees and
swamp on the edge of the Gulf of Mexico.

The air crews that firebombed Tokyo and dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima
practiced here.

So did the commandos who stormed the Son Tay prison in North Vietnam a day after
the American prisoners there had been moved elsewhere. And so did the Delta
Force team that was involved in the disastrous attempt to free the American
hostages in Iran in 1980.

So when the Reagan Administration announced it was training Nicaraguan rebels
somewhere in the United States, but would not say exactly where, a lot of people
believed this was the place.

Two Demonstrators Jailed

Some critics of Mr. Reagan's Central America policies were so certain the
rebels, or contras as they are commonly called, were being trained here in the
Florida panhandle that they staged two protest demonstrations in December.
Twelve protesters were arrested and a Maryknoll priest and another man were
jailed for 30 days.

Some demonstrators say they were told since by servicemen that the contras had
indeed been here, but that the training has now shifted to an army base in
Georgia, which they believe to be either Fort Benning or Fort Stewart. In
Washington, some Congressional aides say they believe the training may be
conducted in segments at several bases.

Some present and former military officers here and elsewhere as well as some
members of Congress say they see no grounds of national security, strategy or
safety for not disclosing where the training is taking place.

''The American people are paying for this training, and they have a right to
know where their money is going,'' said Representative Robert J. Mrazek, a Long
Island Democrat on the Foreign Operations subcommittee on appropriations.

''I don't think the Administration fears subversion,'' he said through an aide.
''I think they fear civilian demonstrations.''

A Letter to Shultz

In a letter to Secretary of State George P. Shultz asking that the location of
the contra training be made public, Representative John Conyers Jr., the
chairman of the House Judiciary subcommittee on criminal justice, said the
secrecy ''appears to be intended to prevent or stifle legitimate democratic
debate.''

Several contra officials say they were flown by twin-prop passenger plane in
late November and December to a training site that many of them assumed was in
Florida. The contra leaders say the windows of the small plane were curtained,
as were the windows of a bus that carried them around the training area.

''I don't know where the place is and I don't care where it is,'' said Adolfo
Calero, one of the executives of the rebel United Nicaraguan Opposition who were
taken to the training site. ''The important thing to me is that the training is
going on and that the quality is good.''

Mr. Calero said the contras had been training in groups of about 120. He said he
watched about 65 men being given classes in leadership. Another group of 25 to
30, he said, are being trained as instructors. Still another group of about 25
are being trained as paramedics, Mr. Calero said.

Uniforms Without Insignia

Mr. Calero said the training also included instruction in demolitions, field
radios and codes. The instructors seemed to be Americans, Mr. Calero said, but
they spoke Spanish and wore military uniforms without any insignia.

He said he could not explain the secrecy, but added, ''If our allies want things
this way, we have to respect their wishes.''

Representative Conyers expressed concern that the contra training might violate
United States laws. In his letter to Mr. Shultz, Mr. Conyers asked for an
''assessment of the legal questions.''

''The neutrality laws would appear to prohibit the training of any foreign
military or naval expedition or enterprise inside the United States,'' he wrote.
''The mere fact that Congress authorized aid to the contras in no way implies an
intention to suspend this most important criminal law.''

'A Great Facility'

Eglin sprawls over 724 square miles, two-thirds the size of Rhode Island. It is
geographically the biggest American air base, with nine separate airfields, a
camp where the army conducts part of its rugged Ranger training, and a minimum
security Federal prison where E. Howard Hunt and some others convicted in the
Watergate scandal served time.

It is also the area's largest local employer, with an annual payroll of nearly
$500 million. About half of the 100,000 people who live on the fringes of the
base work there or have other personal connections.

No one in the nearby town of Fort Walton Beach seems to know whether the contras
have been here or not but they would not object.

''It's a great facility, a good facility,'' said Mayor John L. Shortall Jr., a
66-year-old retired Army lieutenant colonel and former defense contractor
engineer. ''I think the preponderance would be, if they're there and if the
training is going to contribute to the free world, we're for it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: WORKING PROFILE;
New Foreign Relations Chief Is Not a Cream Puff: Senator Claiborne Pell

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1180 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2


Senator Claiborne Pell chuckled. ''People think I'm namby-pamby, that's the
impression people have,'' he said, murmuring. ''People say I'm out-of-touch,
remote. Well, I do think time will prove them wrong.''

Seated in a carpeted hideaway office in the Capitol crammed with photos and
portraits of his ancestors, the Rhode Island Democrat and new chairman of the
Foreign Relations Committee acknowledged with a gentle laugh that his
diffidence, his patrician upper-class background, his faintly aloof style were
uncommon in the age of television and unusual among Congressional leaders.

''I have this unfortunate facility, perhaps, of making the most exciting subject
gray,'' observed the 66-year-old Senator.

Aware of Certain Concerns

It is clear that Mr. Pell, who took over the Foreign Relations Committee in the
wake of the Republicans' loss of a Senate majority in elections last fall, is
aware of the concerns, expressed privately among Congressional staff aides, that
he has neither the stamina nor the intensity to keep the committee from slipping
into secondary status.

One of his problems, the Senator concedes, is a personal manner that seems to
reflect - inaccurately, he says - an elite world that mirrors, perhaps, F. Scott
Fitzgerald, if not Henry James.

''I'm not going to change my style, I am me,'' Senator Pell said. ''I remember
my first campaign. My opponent called me a cream puff. That's what he said. Well
I rushed out and got the baker's union to endorse me. Frankly, I think a little
bit of humor is sorely lacking now.''

'Yes, I Have Priorities'

As chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, a panel that has often helped
set the national security agenda, Mr. Pell replaced Richard G. Lugar of Indiana.
In his tenure Mr. Lugar emerged as a forceful chairman after years in which the
committee had lost clout and suffered a decline in prestige. Mr. Lugar, for
example, was a powerful advocate of reform in the Philippines, and of support
for Corazon C. Aquino, in the waning months of the regime of Ferdinand E.
Marcos.

''Yes, I have some basic priorities,'' said Mr. Pell, who has served in the
Senate since 1961. ''I want to see an improvement in our relationship with our
principal adversary, the Soviet Union, and some movement toward arms control. I
want to put an emphasis on unraveling the mess, partly stimulated by the
Administration, of bashing the United Nations. Now they're reaping some of the
fruits of that bashing. Congress has joined in the bashing. Well, if there
wasn't a U.N. we'd have to invent one.''

''And I'd like to see a normalization in our relations with Cuba,'' he said.
''It's very disagreeable and against our interests to have right on our doorstep
a hostile power. I'm not saying we have to be palsy-walsy with them. But why
can't we have the same kind of relations with them that we have with, say,
Rumania or Bulgaria?''

Mr. Pell grew up in a socially prestigious family from Newport, R.I., whose
prominence owed much to a distinguished career in public service. Five of his
ancestors had been members of either the Senate or House, and his father's jobs
included serving as Representative from Manhattan's ''Silk Stocking'' district
from 1918 to 1920.

Senator Pell himself is one of the more liberal figures in Congress, but even
his friends say he seems incapable of dropping certain social distinctions.

Asked, for example, about Secretary of State George P. Shultz's role in foreign
policy, Mr. Pell said the other day: ''My impression of Shultz is very high. I
didn't know him at college. He was two years behind me. Princeton.'' Perhaps the
most humorous, and almost legendary, anecdote in this vein about Senator Pell
involves a pair of galoshes that an aide brought to him during a storm while he
was campaigning in Rhode Island years ago.

''To whom am I indebted for these?'' asked Mr. Pell, who often speaks in a
formal manner.

''I got them at Thom McAn's,'' the aide replied.

''Well do tell Mr. McAn that I'm much obliged to him,'' Mr. Pell replied.

The Senator acknowledges that the story is true. ''Actually, I used to do all my
shopping by mail,'' he said. ''L. L. Bean's. The fact that someone said I'm not
aware of Tom McAn being a good shoe store. . . '' He shrugged and laughed. ''I'm
certainly aware of it now.''

The Problem With Helms

Mr. Pell is also aware that a central problem facing him as chairman of the
Foreign Relations Committee is the selection of Senator Jesse Helms, Republican
of North Carolina, as the panel's minority leader.

In a recent vote by Republican Senators that centered on seniority and to some
degree ideology, Senator Helms defeated Senator Lugar as ranking Republican on
the panel. Mr. Lugar was viewed as a moderate who sought compromise on the
committee, while Mr. Helms is a strong conservative voice.

''Senator Helms and I share a respect for the institution of the Senate, the
rules of the Senate and I would think we can agreeably agree to disagree,'' Mr.
Pell said. ''My relations with Senator Helms are correct, perfectly agreeable.''

Nonetheless, Mr. Helms made it plain over the weekend that he had his own agenda
on the Foreign Relations Committee, an agenda that could place him on a
collision course with Mr. Pell.

Mr. Helms, in a television appearance with the columnists Rowland Evans and
Robert Novak, said he wanted to embark on ''a new course to stop this business
of kicking our friends around the world in the teeth while we're cozying up to
those who are absolutely the adversaries of not only the United States but
freedom.'' He cited as an example ''the difference between the way we treat the
Soviet Union, we bow and scrape,'' and the condemnation of South Africa. ''There
ought to be some equity,'' Senator Helms said.

'Let Everyone Have a Bite'

Asked if he expected Senator Helms to press his own agenda, Mr. Pell said,
''Sure, I'd be surprised if he didn't.''

He paused and reflected on the way to deal with senators who differ with him.
''Let everyone have a bite of the action,'' Senator Pell said, smiling. ''Also,
the secret is to always let the other man have your way.''

For his part, Senator Pell said he saw the role of the Foreign Relations
Committee as ''an education function.''

'They Were Dirty Words'

''Look at what happened during the Vietnam War,'' he said. ''We used words like
'negotiate' and 'peace.' They were dirty words. A Christmas card with a Picasso
dove on it was a dirty thing to send out. That's all changed. People saw that a
great bolt from the God Jehovah did not knock you down for saying it might be
possible to negotiate a way out.''

The new chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee indicated that the one
Senator he missed intensely was his colleague, the late Jacob K. Javits of New
York.

''He had such a wonderful mind, a creative mind,'' Senator Pell said. ''We used
to go out to dinner when we stayed late here. He was ranking minority member of
the committee. A close friend. It was a joy to listen to him. I miss him very,
very much.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Sen. Claiborne Pell (NYT/Jose R. Lopez)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMRY: WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 1987

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 950 words




International    A2-A9

Brezhnev's son-in-law is being held in Moscow after his arrest on corruption
charges, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said. The son-in-law was a top Interior
Ministry official until 1984. Page A1

In a deal for Awacs radar planes in 1981, King Fahd and other Saudi Arabian
officials agreed to aid anti-Communist guerrilla groups, U.S. officials said. A1


Western journalists in Iran recently observed a regime that has subdued
virtually all opposition outside its ranks but that suffers increasingly
volatile internal rivalries. A1

Iraq is unlikely to reverse damage -military, political and psychological - that
Iran has wrought in its latest offensive despite Baghdad's superior air and
firepower, experts say. A6

Attempts to win the release of an American journalist detained in Iran are being
undertaken by governments friendly to both the United States and Iran, American
officials and diplomatic sources said. A3

Hearings to confirm Robert Gates, the newly nominated Director of Central
Intelligence, will not be an occasion for a full-scale public review of the
agency's role in the Iran-contra affair, a Senator said. A7

Military analysis: Seizures in Beirut of hostages have prompted a refining of
contingency plans for retaliatory air strikes against terrorist camps in the
Middle East, Pentagon sources said. A3

Mr. Reagan weighed Pentagon plans for the early deployment of a partial ''Star
Wars'' system in a meeting with senior members of his Administration, and
reportedly no decision was made. A2

Salvador's soul is in small towns that cover the countryside. The long civil war
in which more than 60,000 people have been killed has ground the peasants in
these dust-filled hamlets very small. A4

A party shake-up in Vietnam was the result of pressure from grass-roots
Communist organizations, according to a Western diplomat based in Hanoi whose
impressions were supported by American scholars. A8

NATIONAL    A12-21, D24

Wider use of an AIDS test is being considered by Federal health officials, they
said. The plan would include testing all applicants for marriage licenses and
patients who enter hospitals. A1

The House overrode a veto of a bill aimed at cleaning up the nation's water at a
cost of $20 billion. The Senate is expected to take up the measure today, and
Democratic leaders predicted a similar override. A1

180 U.S. farms disappear each day, victims of consolidation, changing economics,
poor management, bad luck, high interest rates, low crop prices, emotional and
financial despair or some of each. A1

U.S. trade figures may be deceiving because it will take more than currency
adjustments to close the record $169.8 billion gap between what America bought
from abroad in 1986 and what it was able to sell. A1

The House deferred a vote on raises for lawmakers and other Federal officials
until after the raises were to take effect, at 12:01 this morning. The vote will
thus be either meaningless or the first step in a legal battle to rescind the
raises. A13

An amendment on speed limits that would allows states to raise the limit on
rural interstate highways to 65 miles an hour was approved by the Senate, 65 to
33. A12

Patrick J. Buchanan will resign from his post as White House communications
director effective March 1, he announced. He is the latest hard-line
conservative to depart as President Reagan begins his final two years in office.
A19

Acid rain poses a serious threat to human health that is too significant to
defer protective action, according to representatives of major public health
groups who addressed a Congressional panel. A12

Fort Worth is an 'In' place, according to W, the international fashion and
society publication that publishes an annual list of such things. But its
residents are not overly impressed by the honor. A12

The hallmarks of a great palate, creating a splendid new dish, spicing a
familiar one to perfection or savoring another's cooking, are within reach of
all who dare, leading chefs and researchers say. C1

WASHINGTON TALK  A20

Cooperation on Iran inquiries
In the halls, artists come and go

REGIONAL    B1-6, B24

Payoffs to 20 government officials were reported to Federal investigators by the
men who paid them, former top executives of the Wedtech Corporation, a South
Bronx military contractor. A1

New evidence from Howard Beach indicates that white youths chased Michael
Griffith onto the Belt Parkway, where he was killed by a car on the night of
Dec. 19-20, law-enforcement sources say. A1

765 police officers were promoted to the rank of sergeant, more than three and a
half years after they were tested for eligibility and after months of litigation
over the exam. B1

Promotions end frustration B6

G.M. will stay in North Tarrytown, N.Y., to assemble a new fiberglass-body
mini-van at its plant there, the company announced, insuring production and
thousands of jobs well into the 1990's. B2

Fewer public school dropouts were reported in New York City in the 1985-86
school year. The city's dropout rate now stands at 30.7 percent, down from 35.3
percent, the Board of Education said. B1

A cost-saving plan for theaters that aims to lower the cost of producing shows
will be put to the test tomorrow night when the musical revue ''Stardust''
begins performances at the Biltmore. C21

Dr. Stern testifies on Baby M B2
State U. approves sports plan B2
Jersey mayors seek aid B3
Gotti witness admits lying B4
New dispute on M.T.A. plan B5

Neediest Cases B6

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GRASS-ROOTS POLITICS FORCED HANOI SHAKE-UP

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 949 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 3


Pressure from grass-roots party organizations forced the sweeping changes in the
Vietnamese Communist Party leadership in December, according to a Western
diplomat based in Hanoi.

His impressions were supported by a group of American scholars who traveled
extensively in Vietnam for two weeks last month. The Americans, taking part in a
tour sponsored by the private United States-Indochina Reconciliation Project,
heard frequent demands for economic reform and experienced firsthand the
bitterness apparently felt by provincial people over Soviet influence in Hanoi.

Village children, shouting ''Russian! Russian!'' in Vietnamese, stoned the
Americans on several occasions, according to a member of the group, Mary Byrne
McDonnell, Indochina program associate of the Social Science Research Council,
an organization based in New York.

The attacks stopped, Ms. McDonnell said, when group members identified
themselves as Americans.

An Economic Crisis

Vietnam is facing a severe economic crisis, according to reports in its own
Government-controlled press organizations. The Hanoi-based diplomat, who briefed
reporters Monday on condition that he not be quoted by name, said projections by
international organizations indicate that on an average day, about 60 Vietnamese
die of starvation in a country where malnutrition is widespread.

Hanoi, which has been unable to produce or import birth control supplies, faces
the prospect that the population, now 60 million, will rise to 100 million by
the end of the century, the diplomat said. Without improved agricultural
technology, he added, Vietnam will not be able to feed itself.

He said Soviet aid, now between $1 billion and $2 billion a year, mostly in
large energy projects, is not addressing Vietnam's most urgent daily needs.

At the same time, Vietnam is expected to provide tropical produce to
cold-weather areas of the Soviet Union. A Vietnamese-language broadcast from
Moscow on Jan. 15, monitored and translated by the BBC, described the production
of green vegetables for the Soviet Far East as ''central'' to Vietnam's
agricultural research program.

'Classic Imperialism'

The diplomat characterized the Soviet Union's activities in Vietnam as ''classic
imperialism of the kind that Lenin railed about.''

Several diplomats based in Hanoi have said the United States, and the West in
general, should be finding ways to assist Vietnam at a time when Western
expertise could offer an alternative to complete reliance on the Soviet Union.

The group of American scholars, led by John McAuliff, who is head of the
Quaker-supported, Philadelphia-based Reconciliation Project organization, heard
repeated requests for American assistance and training, Ms. McDonnell said.
Officials cited bans on United States visas for Vietnamese scholars as a major
worry. Virtually all Vietnamese technological training takes place in the Soviet
bloc.

The United States, which does not have diplomatic relations with Hanoi, has said
it will not improve ties until the issue of 2,426 Americans missing in Indochina
since the 1970's is resolved. In addition, Washington insists that Vietnam
withdraw its 140,000 troops from Cambodia, a demand made also by all other major
would-be donor nations, including China.

Links Are Limited

Links between Washington and Hanoi are limited almost entirely to discussions on
the missing Americans, and these talks have been sporadic and inconclusive.

The talks have slowed over the last year as Vietnam, according to diplomats, has
been preoccupied with carrying out economic and political changes over the
objections of ideological hard-liners in the party. The diplomats say the policy
is conducted with an eye on China's example, but with care to use the language
of Moscow. Most Western reporters have been denied access to the country since
last spring.

The Hanoi-based Western diplomat who briefed reporters Monday, and other
foreigners living in Vietnam who are familiar with the events leading up to the
Vietnamese party congress in December, say a struggle within the leadership over
how to respond to an outpouring of public criticism last fall was still going on
two days before the congress opened Dec. 14.

Retirements at the Top

On the third day of the congress, it was suddenly announced that three top
Communist leaders were retiring from the party Politburo. These were Pham Van
Dong, who is also the country's Prime Minister; Truong Chinh, the party General
Secretary and President of Vietnam, and Le Duc Tho, the powerful political
figure who was Hanoi's negotiator in the Paris peace talks with the United
States. Only Mr. Dong, who is 80 years old and very frail, had been expected to
withdraw.

In addition, the country's Defense Minister, Gen. Van Tien Dong, and a former
Deputy Prime Minister, To Huu, also lost their Politburo seats.

Nguyen Van Linh, a party official with long experience in southern Vietnam and a
man thought to be a supporter of economic change and liberalization, was named
to replace Mr. Chinh as party leader.

But in a National Assembly session that followed the party congress, the
retiring Politburo members retained their Government positions, to the surprise
of the Hanoi diplomatic corps. The retiring leaders are now expected to
relinquish their Government titles at the next session of the Assembly, next
June.

Some diplomats interpret the delay as an acknowledgment of continuing divisions
in the party over the next generation of leadership. Other diplomats disagree,
saying that this is no more than a graceful way to ease out a generation of
heroes who could win wars but had trouble developing a country in peacetime.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Pentagon Official to Resign

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 36 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 3


James H. Webb, the highly decorated Vietnam veteran and novelist who became the
Pentagon's first Assistant Secretary for Reserve Affairs three years ago, said
today that he would step down at the end of the month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ANOTHER SIDE'S VIEWS OF WORLD WAR II

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 777 words


Ever since the beginning of World War II, Americans have grown up on war movies
depicting the heroic exploits of Allied forces against the Axis enemies.

The Japanese counterparts to those movies, however, have never been seen here.
Starting today, an unusual insight into the other side's point of view will be
offered by the Japan Society in a film series called ''Japan at War: Rare Films
From World War II.'' A retrospective of 27 films made in Japan during and
immediately following the war, the series runs through April 17.

Many of the films trace the sufferings wrought by World War II and the
sacrifices of its participants: the hardships and exhaustion endured by the
Japanese soldiers at the front, the grief of families who sent their sons off to
battle, the valiant contributions of those at home to the war effort.

Other movies depict the terrible aftermath of the war in occupied Japan. In one,
a soldier presumed dead when his troop ship is sunk is actually rescued by a
Chinese fishing boat and survives as a prisoner of war. In the meantime his wife
marries a family friend disabled in the war, only to see him suffer a relapse
and go mad during the bombing of Tokyo. When the war ends, the first husband
returns to find his wife dedicated to caring for his friend; he himself must
find a new career and a new life amidst the chaos of the occupation.

Some films transpose periods to present an allegorical tale guaranteed to
inspire patriotic fervor, like the story of the Mongols' attempted invasion of
Japan in the 13th century, when Genghis Khan's invasions were repulsed by the
tremendous typhoons that blew up off Japan's western shore to destroy the Mongol
fleet.

Contrasts in Film Styles

Whatever their approach, however, all of the films in the retrospective offer an
unprecedented insight into the Japanese war experience.

''This body of films was confiscated right after the war and has been sitting in
the Library of Congress for the last 40 years,'' explains Peter Grilli, the
project director for the series. ''It has just been declassified in the last
three years. It's a magnificent body of film material, so we decided to go ahead
and do a series.''

Mr. Grilli sees post-Vietnam America as providing a particularly receptive
climate. ''After Vietnam, I think Americans have been re-evaluating our own
political role in the world and our feelings about war and militarism,'' he
says. ''In a sense, we're going through what Japan went through 40 years ago.''

The retrospective provides a distinct contrast with American movies of the
period, many of which caricatured or vilified the Japanese.

''There were great levels of hostility built up against Americans in Japan, but
you don't see that in these films,'' Mr. Grilli reports. ''They're very unlike
American films, which depicted this villainous enemy. In Japanese films, you
almost never see the enemy, in part because there weren't any Westerners in
Japan to cast as the enemy. There are also very few battlefield scenes. You'll
see an airplane flying in the sky, but it's not personalized; the enemy becomes
a kind of abstract concept.

''The propaganda purpose of the Japanese films was to build up home-front morale
rather than to depict the exploits on the battlefield,'' Mr. Grilli says. ''Many
of these films were about heroic self-sacrifice for the war effort. War is a
crisis event in any society, and it tends to bring into highlight the idealistic
values of that culture. Certainly in the case of Japan it highlights values like
the individual sacrificing himself for the group, whereas our films tended to be
much more about individual heroic exploits - the one soldier who goes out and
slays 400 of the enemy.''

The propaganda effect of the Japanese films was later attested to by such
Western observers as Frank Capra, the American director. After reviewing
captured Japanese films for the United States War Department's Office of
Strategic Services, Mr. Capra was particularly struck by one of those included
in the current retrospective, ''Chocolate and Soldiers,'' a 1938 film about a
soldier on the Chinese front who sends chocolate wrappers home to his children,
and his wife's stoic acceptance of his death in battle.

''We can't beat this kind of thing,'' Mr. Capra wrote in his report to the
agency. ''We make a film like that maybe once in a decade.''

All the films in the series are subtitled, and after its run in New York the
exhibition will be circulated to several colleges, museums and other
institutions around the country. ''Anyone who sees them will learn a lot about
how Japanese people think and feel,'' says Mr. Grilli.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from 'Night in China' (Japan Society)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 4, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: STEVE TESICH'S 'DIVISION STREET'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 989 words


IN the opening gag of Steve Tesich's ''Division Street,'' a former 1960's
radical named Chris drops a tablet of Alka-Seltzer in a glass of water and waits
impatiently for it to go to work. ''Fizz!'' Chris orders the recalcitrant
tablet. ''You're supposed to fizz!'' But the pill just sits there, inert, and so
it goes with what follows. Although substantially revised by its author and
affectionately produced by the Second Stage, the second coming of ''Division
Street'' is as lacking in effervescence as the short-lived Broadway original of
1980.

Even so, this production performs a valuable service - for the connoisseur of
cultural ironies, if not the general theatergoer. While the Second Stage hasn't
fulfilled its mission of restoring a neglected play to stageworthiness, its
''Division Street'' does tellingly illuminate the wild fluctuations of political
fashions over the current decade. Seen now, Mr. Tesich's play can be understood
more clearly for what it is - a cheery expression of Reaganism that had the ill
luck to open and promptly close on Broadway only weeks before the 1980 election
swept Ronald Reagan into office. And as the first version was a season ahead of
its time, so this resuscitation, arriving on the heels of the White House's
travails over Iran, pops up a season too late.

If ''Division Street'' speaks to us of the 1980's, its ostensible subject is the
60's. The characters are mainly aging Vietnam-era leftovers - onetime ''world
savers'' who don't even want to save the whales anymore. ''There are no radicals
left,'' says Chris (Saul Rubinek), a once notorious firebrand who now would
rather underwrite insurance. But the past rears up when his scruffy Chicago
apartment is invaded by rambunctious comic eccentrics - among them, a
bomb-and-gun-toting Yugoslav restaurateur (Olek Krupa), a black-Polish-Jewish
landlady (Novella Nelson) and an old leftist comrade (John Spencer) driven
bonkers by his wife's enlistment in the women's movement.

Unlike ''The Big Chill'' or ''Fifth of July,'' which tried to examine the
idealism and hypocrisies of its variously lapsed and disingenuous radicals,
''Division Street'' treats 60's activists as faddists. Mr. Tesich tirelessly
provides joking references to ''We Shall Overcome,'' ''Days of Rage,''
''Rennie'' and ''Abbie,'' but never indicates the issues that were connected to
such slogans and names. The playwright seems to be saying that since his
characters didn't believe in anything concrete 20 years ago, it doesn't much
matter if they sell out now. What does concern Mr. Tesich is that these
residents of his ecumenical Division Street (a metaphor borrowed from Studs
Terkel, by the way) join hands in ''a big family'' and ''a new coalition'' to
revitalize ''the American dream.'' This uncontroversial, apolitical call to
patriotism was the Reagan campaign message and, minus the flag-waving pageantry
of the initial staging, it still gives ''Division Street'' its upbeat, tacked-on
finale.

Not even the accompaniment of the Beatles' evocative ''Carry That Weight'' can
make Mr. Tesich's thematic payoff seem other than weightless, but the
anticlimactic conclusion wouldn't matter if it arrived after two hours of
laughter. In his revision, the author has jettisoned two characters but has
still failed to do the hard work needed to build his raw comic ingredients
(long-lost orphans, mistaken identities, slamming windows and doors) into
genuine farce. The play's action is arbitrary, while the principal jokes milk
feminist and homosexual stereotypes. In 1987, ''Division Street'' seems less a
falling off from the preceding Tesich accomplishments (the play ''Baba Goya,''
the film ''Breaking Away'') than an anticipation of such subsequent Hollywood
projects as ''Four Friends'' and ''The World According to Garp.''

The director, Risa Bramon, tries to camouflage the text's farcical failings by
providing a more realistic staging than Tom Moore's frantically paced Broadway
production. But the play merely seems longer as a result, and one misses such
high-powered original-cast members as John Lithgow, Theresa Merritt, Christine
Lahti and Keene Curtis. Ms. Bramon, usually an expert at casting, has not found
inspired players this time, though she has brought back a too-long-absent
familiar face, Cecilia Hart, and unveiled a promising new one, Kathleen
Wilhoite. In both her frisky comic style and role (a sentimentalized
prostitute), Ms. Wilhoite recalls Shirley MacLaine in that star's earliest
show-biz incarnation.

As the omnipresent yet vaguely characterized Chris, Mr. Rubinek is most
agreeable. The cute ethnics, Ms. Nelson and Mr. Krupa, are much harder to take,
but the problem is in the writing as well as in the acting. Mr. Tesich has an
immigrant's strong faith in only-in-America-ism, and, while that's a powerful
conviction when expressed honestly, here the minority characters are too often
patronized or exploited for sentimental effect. When Ms. Nelson and Mr. Krupa
deliver a gratuitous rendition of ''Roll Out the Vote'' - without ever having
referred to a pressing issue they might actually be voting about - one begins to
wonder if the cautious author himself is running for office. Only in America,
perhaps, can a playwright create a political comedy that takes a stand on
nothing and leaves its every promised debate unengaged.

COMMON DENOMINATOR

 DIVISION STREET, by Steve Tesich; directed by Risa Bramon; stage design, Bill
Stabile; lighting design, Greg MacPherson; costume design, Deborah Shaw; sound
design, Gary Harris; hair design, Antonio Soddu; production stage manager,
Denise Laffer; stage manager, Craig Butler. Presented by the Second Stage, Robyn
Goodman and Carole Rothman, artistic directors. At 2162 Broadway, at 76th
Street.

Chris...Saul Rubinek; Mrs. Bruchinski...Novella Nelson; Yovan...Olek Krupa;
Nadja...Kathleen Wilhoite; Roger...John Spencer; Dianah...Cecilia Hart;

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kathleen Wilhoite (Swope Associates/Susan Cook)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Energy Efficiency Was Lesson of 70's Oil Shocks;
Get on With It

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 204 words


To the Editor:

I would like to go one step farther than Charles K. Ebinger did in his call for
a renewed interest in an energy policy based on nonreliance on foreign energy
sources.

While many of us wring our hands over the possible health effects of more
fossil-fuel combustion or increased construction of nuclear power plants, the
numbers are minuscule compared with those associated with war.

Given our heavy dependence on foreign oil, isn't it logical that the United
States would have to weigh in heavily in any military conflict that would cause
major disruptions in foreign oil supply? And after the Vietnam experience, how
would we feel sending another generation off to die on a battlefield in
someplace like the Middle East because we failed as a nation to develop and
implement a coherent energy policy in the years since the 1973 oil embargo?

Damn foolish, I would say, and rightfully so. We must make all domestic
alternative-energy technologies as environmentally benign and safe as humanly
posible, but let's get on with it.

WILLIAM A. EDWARDS
  Annapolis, Md., Jan. 10, 1987

The writer is director of energy legislative affairs at a trade association for
regulated electric utilities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCIENTISTS VERIFY FOSSILS OF GIANT APE

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


Two American anthropologists say they have verified the existence of a
potentially rich trove of fossil relics in the mountains of northern Vietnam,
some of which may shed light on the origins of man and his close relatives.

The scientists, Dr. John W. Olsen and Dr. Russell L. Ciochan of the University
of Arizona, returned to the United States Jan. 19 after a three-week stay in
Vietnam where they examined teeth that they determined came from a
nine-foot-tall ape known as Gigantopithecus.

The Institute of Archeology of Vietnam's Committee on Social Sciences arranged
the trip so that the Americans could examine evidence that Gigantopithecus, a
creature thought to have died out long before the dawn of man, was actually a
contemporary of Homo erectus, an extinct species of man.

Skeletal Scraps Examined

''We had hoped to visit the sites themselves, which are in Lang Son Province
near the Chinese border,'' Dr. Olsen said, ''but because of current military
tension between Vietnam and neighboring China, we were not permitted in.''

But the two scientists were shown several teeth and some skeletal scraps that
the Vietnamese had excavated from the same stratum of naturally cemented stone.

''We were able to confirm unequivocally that the teeth came from Gigantopithecus
and Homo erectus,'' Dr. Olsen said. ''They were clearly from the same rock
formation, so I think the hypothesis that the two species were contemporary has
been greatly strengthened.''

Dr. Olsen and Dr. Ciochon were permitted to travel to the coastal mountains of
Thanh Hoa Province to explore rock formations of similar type and age to those
in which the fossils were found.

Deposits Remain Untouched

''We saw hundreds of caves,'' Dr. Olsen said, adding that many were filled with
bone-bearing rock formations. ''The Vietnamese anthropologists had been doing
the best they could with explosives,'' he said. But that work dislodged only the
softer rock material. ''Two thirds of the rest of the deposits remain untouched,
awaiting better excavation equipment.''

Dr. Olsen said he had been particularly encouraged by the fact that the
Vietnamese had recovered a nearly intact gibbon skull from Pleistocene-epoch
stone in the region. The epoch dates from 1.8 million to 10,000 years ago.

''The gibbon was a relatively small animal with fragile bones,'' he said. ''The
fact that such a good skull has survived suggests that we have an excellent
chance of finally finding a more or less complete skull of Gigantopithecus. Up
to this time, no one has ever discovered anything other than teeth that could be
positively identified as belonging to this species. The best chance for finding
one anywhere now seems to be in northern Vietnam.''

Existence First Known in 1935

Dr. Olsen has hypothesized that if Gigantopithecus and man were contemporaries,
it is possible that early human hunters played a role in the extinction of the
huge ape. The existence of Gigantopithecus first became known in 1935 when a
Dutch paleontologist stumbled upon fossil teeth of the animal in a Hong Kong
pharmacy. Since then many more teeth have been found, but lacking sufficient
skeletal parts, scientists have been unable to reconstruct of the animal.

Dr. Olsen said that he and Dr. Ciochon have been invited to return later this
year to use more advanced excavating equipment on the rock formations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'THE ASSAULT,' A TALE OF WAR

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 697 words


IT is an ordinary day in the Netherlands during January 1945, or a day as
ordinary as an occupied nation can know. The Steenwijk family, having pulled
down its blackout shades and had its paltry dinner, is at the end of a
reasonably peaceful evening. Then shots are heard. A well-known and hated
collaborator has been assassinated in front of the house next door, and his body
has been moved to the Steenwijk's, who will now be held responsible for the
crime. Seconds later, Nazi troopers are heard. Father Steenwijk remains seated
at the table, his head bowed, as they break down the door.

''The Assault,'' which opens today at Cinema 1, follows the subsequent life of
Anton Steenwijk, who as a boy of about 12 years old witnessed this horror. His
mother, father and brother were executed, and their house burnt to the ground.
Anton himself was treated with unaccountable kindness, relatively speaking. He
was given hot chocolate and a warm uniform by his captors, and eventually placed
with relatives in Amsterdam. And on the night of the killings he was detained
overnight in a dark cell with a woman saboteur who makes a lasting impression.
She warns him never to forget what happened to his parents, or why.

The rest of Fons Rademakers's 2 1/2-hour film constitutes an earnest postmortem,
sketched by a slow and heavy hand. As a grown man, Anton (Derek de Lint) returns
to the scene of the crime and talks to his former neighbors. He has a heated
confrontation with the collaborator's son. He marries twice, once to a woman who
greatly resembles the jailed Resistance fighter (and is in fact played by the
same actress, Monique van de Ven). He talks to every remaining participant in
the events of that terrible night, and does what he can to make sense of the
crime.

Mr. Rademakers, who also directed ''Max Havelaar,'' attempts to integrate
Anton's experience with the world events of his lifetime. So Anton's encounter
with the collaborator's son is set against the backdrop of a 1956 anti-Communist
rally, and a 1966 episode in his life is introduced by newsreel footage of
Vietnam. When Anton finally reaches a moment of acceptance and understanding, it
happens to him at an antinuclear rally, at which both his children
coincidentally happen to be present. But these scenes give the film a symmetry
that is largely unearned, since it is otherwise somewhat choppy and narrow. Not
even the personal drama of Anton's hardship has much real impact.

Mr. de Lint is a handsome actor with a pained, serious expression that never
changes. He isn't able to make the film's later sections as compelling as the
outrage with which it opens, and neither is Mr. Rademakers. Crammed as it is
with detail, and fixed as it is on Anton's history, ''The Assault'' still
remains unfocused. Mr. Rademakers seems unwilling to come to a strong
conclusion, or even a distinct one, and that vagueness is reflected throughout
the film.

And the voice-over narrator who keeps the audience apprised of Anton's deductive
process is no help. He also announces, with much the same solemnity and in the
same newsy you-are-there style, that ''in Lucca, Tuscany, he buys a summer
house'' and that ''like an autumn leaf, despair flutters inside him.''

''The Assault'' is rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''). It contains some
violent episodes.

JANET MASLIN

War's Postmortem

 THE ASSAULT, directed and produced by Fons Rademakers; screenplay (Dutch with
English subtitles) by Gerard Soeteman, based on the novel by Harry Mulisch;
director of photography, Theo van de Sande; edited by Kees Linthorst; music by
Jurriaan Andriessen; released by the Cannon Group Inc. At Cinema 1, Third Avenue
at 60th Street. Running time: 149 minutes. This film is rated PG. Anton
Steenwijk...Derek de Lint; Anton, as a boy...Marc van Uchelen; Truus
Coster/Saskia de Graaff...Monique van de Ven; Cor Takes...John Kraaykamp; Fake
Ploeg...Huub van der Lubbe; Mrs. Beumer...Elly Weller; Karin Korteweg...Ina van
der Molen; Father Steenwijk...Frans Vorstman; Mother Steenwijk...Edda Barends;
Peter Steenwijk...Caspar de Boer; Mr. Korteweg...Wim de Haas; Karin, as a young
girl...Hiske van der Linden.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 7, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING;
Fighting Over a Fighter

BYLINE: By Wayne King and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 330 words


Representative Tony P. Hall, Democrat of Ohio, is locked in a battle with the
Air Force Academy over who will put on display what is probably the best-known
combat airplane of the Vietnam War, an F-4D Phantom that came to be known as
''the MIG Killer.''

The plane has almost mystical significance inasmuch as the craft itself, with
different pilots, was credited with six kills of enemy aircraft. Two of them
were at the hands of the only Vietnam pilot to become an ace, with five
confirmed kills, Capt. Steve Ritchie of the Air Force, who downed his first and
his fifth MIG's with the F-4D Phantom.

According to Richard L. Upstrom, director of the United States Air Force Museum
at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base at Dayton, Ohio, the plane is ''the most
significant fighter aircraft of the war, if not the most significant aircraft of
any type in the conflict.''

The plane, which was decommissioned last November, is scheduled to be put on
display not at the museum but at the Air Force Academy at Colorado Springs,
Colo. The Air Force Academy wanted the plane largely for its inspirational value
for cadets, not alone because Captain Ritchie is a graduate of the academy.

But the decision to put the plane there miffed Mr. Hall. The Congressman says he
feels it should be put on the display at the Ohio museum, which, not
incidentally, is in his Congressional district.

Mr. Hall argues that the plane belongs to all Americans and, more im-portant,
that the plan to display it outside at the academy is an invitation to the
plane's ultimate deterioration through corrosion.

That, he says, is precisely the reason that Congress appropriated $5.4 million
to the museum in 1984 to expand its indoor display facilities for aircraft.

The fighter plane is now at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado, a few miles
from the Air Force Academy. It is supposed to be moved Monday to the academy for
permanent display, unless Mr. Hall can head off the transfer over the weekend.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIDION & DUNNE: THE REWARDS OF A LITERARY MARRIAGE

BYLINE: By Leslie Garis; Leslie Garis, whose profiles of Georges Simenon and
Rebecca West have appeared in this magazine, is currently working on a novel.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6107 words


SHE'S SO THIN THAT IF YOU touch her back you can feel the ribs, like ridges on a
roll-top desk. He has a paunch. She likes to sit on a stool, her back ramrod
straight; he drapes his body across a couch, assuming a languid, informal pose.
She moves slowly, gently; talks softly. He moves quickly, his eyes alert to
danger or intrigue, his voice booming with good humor, spiked by the energy of a
hair-trigger temper. She is California pioneer Protestant; he's from New
England, grandson of an Irish immigrant.

Joan Didion and John Gregory Dunne are an unlikely but inseparable couple, who,
over a 23-year marriage have helped each other become two of the most successful
writers in this country. Between them they have had seven books on The New York
Times best-seller list, and have collaborated on four feature films. Sidney
Lumet hopes to direct a fifth, based on Norman Mailer's novel ''The Deer Park.''

Although there are other writing couples -Raymond Carver and Tess Gallagher,
Francis Steegmuller and Shirley Hazzard - Didion and Dunne are the best known,
possibly because they have succeeded in three disciplines, journalism, novels
and movies. But also because, in the tradition of Graham Greene and V.S.
Naipaul, they are fueled as artists by their investigations into current events.
Famed as an original and insightful reporter of the American scene during the
1960's and early 70's, Didion then began to write about Latin America and the
Far East in both fiction and nonfiction. Dunne, whose work is less overtly
political, has spent the last four years writing a novel about a man's inability
to remain on the sidelines during 20 years of turbulent American politics.

Early next month, his novel ''The Red White and Blue'' is to be published, and
it is a kind of casebook of the extraordinary itinerary followed by this
restless couple. Self-described ''habitual workers'' whose idea of a vacation is
a ''block of time'' to outline a project, they constantly take notes as they
travel and, like thrifty French cooks, waste nothing - it all appears in their
books.

Both Didion and Dunne consider ''The Red White and Blue'' Dunne's most important
work. His purpose was to ''use all the journalism I've done since we moved to
California in 1964,'' and the territory traversed by the hero - a rich Catholic
writer named Jack Broderick - is vast: the criminal justice system; Vietnam;
journalism; Hollywood; Mexican farmers; California grape growers; politics
within the Roman Catholic church, the Presidency and the radical movement; Las
Vegas hustlers; prison life; decadent Europeans, and more. The scope of
Broderick's odyssey mirrors the couple's own wide, and often eccentric,
interests.

Didion's books describe a world in disintegration. Her vision is dark, even
apocalyptic. Her seven books include ''Play It As It Lays,'' a novel about drugs
and despair in Hollywood; ''A Book of Common Prayer,'' another novel, in which
the mother of an underground American terrorist stumbles, with tragic
consequences, into a Central American revolution; two books of essays,
''Slouching Towards Bethlehem'' and ''The White Album,'' and ''Salvador,'' a
harrowing description of that country in 1982.

Dunne, whose reputation has grown more slowly than Didion's but appears to be
equal now, first caught the public's attention with ''The Studio,'' a hilarious
expose of Hollywood, then wrote ''Vegas,'' a semi-autobiographical book about a
sojourn in that city and the sleazy types who live there. That was the beginning
of his interest in his own Catholic background and his obsession with the pimps
and psychopaths who were to people both ''True Confessions,'' a murder story
about a cop and a priest who are brothers, and ''Dutch Shea, Jr.,'' a gritty
account of a lawyer on the skids.

AT THEIR HOME IN Brentwood, a subdued, expensive section of Los Angeles, their
offices are cater-cornered off the upstairs hallway. Hers is white, small and
neat; his is wood paneled, slightly larger and neat. Both rooms are cheerful and
deeply organized, which is surprising, considering that their fictional
characters are depressed and out of control.

In fact, entering the Dunnes' house after reading their work is like finding an
opposite universe. There is, primarily, a rooted, secure sense of family.
Everywhere are photographs of their daughter, Quintana Roo, a 20-year-old junior
at Barnard.

This is a settled, peaceful home, furnished with a developed eye and family
heirlooms, such as the Chickering piano that has been in Didion's family for
generations. On tables are groupings of cut-glass bowls, vases, little china
cups and a particularly striking collection of hurricane lamps, scattered about
the gleaming surfaces as if anticipating disaster.

Disaster is, in fact, one of the major themes in both their work. But of the
two, it is Didion who has written most personally about her pervasive fear of
catastrophe. As she smiles, standing by a child's chair piled high with jaunty
sun hats, I find it hard to reconcile the image of this reserved, refined woman
with the writer who has revealed so much personal anguish to the world. From
reading her I know she has migraine headaches and multiple sclerosis (now in
remission). I know that she's afraid to get up in the morning.

''You've written some very intimate personal pieces,'' I say to her. ''Meeting
people, don't you feel exposed?' ''No.'' ''Why not?''

''Well, because I think of myself as Invisible Scarlet O'Neil.'' She laughs,
high and lilting like a child. It's a disconcertingly innocent sound for a woman
of 52 years. Invisible Scarlet O'Neil? ''There used to be a comic strip when I
was little,'' she explains, ''called Invisible Scarlet O'Neil. Invisible Scarlet
O'Neil was a reporter. She would press a band on her wrist, become invisible and
cover the story invisibly. And everybody would be amazed that she had gotten the
story. Well, that is how ideally I would like to be - Invisible Scarlet
O'Neil.''

''I do remember that time,'' Dunne says, entering the room without missing a
beat, ''when you wrote, 'We are here on this island in the middle of the Pacific
in lieu of filing for divorce.' And we flew from Hawaii to New York. The piece
appeared the day before we arrived. We went to a party at Esquire and people
were surprised that we walked in together.''

''I kept saying to everybody 'In lieu of divorce! In lieu of!''' They laugh
uproariously. As the critic Digby Diehl said about them, ''For depressed people
they certainly laugh a lot.''

We settle down for a meal at a small wooden table by the piano, above which,
dominating the space, is a massive aerial photograph of the vineyards in Delano,
Calif., the subject of Dunne's first book.

''I feel,'' says John Dunne, returning to the issue of exposure, ''we live very
private lives.''

''Yeah. Part of it is we live out here, where we are not public figures,'' she
says.

Not public figures? I'm surprised, but their friend Josh Greenfeld - admittedly
not as well-known as the Dunnes but an experienced California writer - tells me
a few days later, ''When you're only a writer out here, that's all you are. It's
hard for an Eastern sensibility to understand where writers are in the pecking
order.''

WE ARE AT THE debut of an art gallery in West Hollywood, owned by Earl McGrath,
one of the Dunnes' best friends. The guests, gathered on a terrace beneath
hibiscus trees, are more interested in each other than the show of works by Doug
Edge. The women are thin and tanned and wear very high heels. Edge, young and
open-faced, stands at the periphery. ''Doesn't Earl's garden look nice,'' he
says.

Didion sits at a table quietly. She is peaceful. An endless stream of people
comes to her, bending down to kiss her. She asks after their children,
remembering personal details about everyone. Anjelica Huston, all legs in a
little black dress, Teri Garr, George Stevens Jr., Tony Richardson, Michelle
Phillips, Jean Vanderbilt and George Segal come to pay respects to the tiny
woman with a gardenia in her hair.

His eyes darting about, Dunne is happy and projects prodigious energy. Everyone
knows him and has a story they can't wait to tell him. He speaks to Richard
Roth, who has just produced ''Manhunter'' and ''Blue Velvet.'' Both Roth's
three-piece suit and his tan look expensive. Dunne congratulates him on
''Manhunter.'' ''You have a hit,'' says Dunne genially.  Roth tries to persuade
Dunne, who is rolling back on his heels evasively, to see a screening of ''Blue
Velvet.'' ''It won't be a hit,'' says the producer, ''but it will be talked
about for 15 months.'' I marvel at the precision of this projection. ''It's
inaccessible to a general audience,'' (a key phrase), ''but Dennis Hopper gives
the performance of his life.'' Someone says reverentially, ''Dennis Hopper is a
great, great artist.''

As I walk through the crowd, I hear one beautiful young man say to another
beautiful young man, ''Profumo lives in Ireland now, you know, in a wonderful
house.'' Back at the table, Didion lights up a cigarette, and tells me that she
gave up smoking in 1979, but recently took it up again because of Aldo Moro.
Aldo Moro? When he was kidnapped, she explains, it was said about him that he
had moderate habits, and one of these was that he smoked only five cigarettes a
day. Since it wasn't the cigarettes that killed Aldo Moro, she thought she could
possibly smoke five cigarettes a day, too. She laughs her childlike laugh, and
the cigarette burns between her pale elfin fingers.

''WHERE DID YOU LEARN THE TECHNIQUE of writing screenplays?'' I ask. We are in
their living room. Glass doors are open to a junglelike garden with gravel paths
through the overgrown flowers, trees and herbs. Through the window, their pool
shimmers in the hazy California sunlight.

''Well,'' Didion says softly, ''when we first came out we . . .'' she looks at
her husband.

''We came out here in 1964,'' he remembers. ''Essentially to . . .'' He
hesitates. ''We thought we would make some money writing scripts. Ha. Ha. Ha.
What the world does not need is another script or television writer. We went to
Long Beach one day and we sat through - twice - Johnny Frankenheimer's . . .''
''It was the 'Seven Days . . .'' she says. '' 'Seven Days in May.' We had no
idea how many scenes were in a movie. We had not clue one. We had never read a
movie script. And we sat with pads in Long Beach . . .'' He looks at her. ''And
diagrammed . . .'' she says. ''And diagrammed the movie. To see how many - not
scenes, so much, as sequences. Then the first script we actually . . .'' ''We
stole the script,'' she says, smiling.

''Remember the guy . . .?'' he asks her, smiling too. ''We went to a disco.''
''Yeah.'' ''There used to be a place called the Daisy in Beverly Hills,'' he
says. ''We were coming out of there one night about 2 o'clock in the morning,
and some drunk actor was having a fight with his girlfriend, and he threw a
script at her. And I picked up the script.'' They are laughing together. ''It
was a television script. It was the first script I'd ever read. And . . . so we
learned . . . but basically the terminology is easy.''

''Yeah,'' says Didion. ''It's only about three different things.''

''Three different things,'' he says. ''Fade in. Cut to. Another angle.''

''Is this before you'd written 'Play It As It Lays?' '' I ask Didion.

''You mean when we were picking up television scripts out of the gutter?''

''She had written 'Run River,' '' Dunne answers, referring to her first novel,
''but not yet 'Play It As It Lays.' ''

Their first produced screenplay was ''The Panic in Needle Park'' in 1971, which
starred Al Pacino in his screen debut. In 1972 they wrote the script for ''Play
It As It Lays,'' which did not do well at the box office. But the novel was a
best seller, the movie was daring, and they were hot.

The next year, driving in Honolulu, Dunne remembers, ''One of us said to the
other, James Taylor, Carly Simon, a remake of 'A Star Is Born.' '' Financially,
those were momentous words.

Many months, drafts and stars later, Barbra Streisand entered the scene.

''Our daughter played with Barbra's son.'' Dunne wrote in ''Quintana &
Friends,'' his 1978 collection of essays. ''I wasn't crazy about their playing
in the cage with the pet lion cub, but I figured what the hell, this was
Hollywood.''

''A Star Is Born'' was made for $6.2 million and grossed $66 million worldwide,
and the Dunnes had a piece of the profits.

They were living in Trancas then, the northern end of Malibu. There was a
considerable lag before the checks started rolling in, and Didion remembers, ''I
was making graphs. If we only spent X dollars for the next nine months we could
survive, but it didn't seem likely that we could only spend X dollars because
we'd spent twice X dollars every month for the past year.'' She laughs.

''So,'' Dunne says, ''you got a large advance to do 'A Book of Common Prayer,'
and we had enough money to last us then for a couple of years. And in that
couple of years you wrote 'Common Prayer' and I wrote 'True Confessions.' And
when we finished, we literally ran out of money.''

Both their novels made the best-seller list, and they began to see profits from
''A Star Is Born,'' all in the same year.

That year, 1977, marked another turning point. It was when John Gregory Dunne,
thanks to ''True Confessions,'' ceased being known as Mr. Joan Didion. Until
that point, Dunne would accompany his famous wife to speaking engagements and
award ceremonies; would shield her from abrasive situations, more or less
managing her career. He was, as Josh Greenfeld recalls, the ideal writer's wife.
He has been, in fact, such a booster of her writing that a story circulated
among their friends. It seems the Dunnes are walking along the beach one day
when they meet Jesus. Later on that day, Dunne describes their miraculous
encounter. ''Ran into Jesus today.'' ''Oh, really? What'd He say?''

''He loves Joan's work!'' BEING A PROFESSIONAL screenwriter is perhaps the
hardest occupation,'' says Dunne. ''Because nothing is ever yours and, by the
nature of the medium, you are never ultimately responsible for your work. It can
be interesting, if you have another outlet.''

''You know, it's odd,'' Didion says. ''A writer's life is keyed to certain
things which are produced. Periodically you have . . . something you can pick up
in your hand. A piece, a book. There never is in a movie, even when no other
writers have been involved.''

The Dunnes are something of an anomaly in Hollywood. They write screenplays, but
consider themselves primarily novelists. They have a wide circle of friends but,
as the director Tony Richardson says, ''They don't play any kind of game.'' They
aren't members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, and therefore
neither vote nor attend the awards ceremonies. FROM ''TINSEL,'' A 1974 essay by
John Gregory Dunne:

'' 'Tender Is the Night' was available . . . We would, as the agents say, 'take
a meeting.'

''The vice-president in charge of production met us in his office. He had not,
he said, read the 'basic material' but the story department had pulled out a
synopsis made in 1945. He showed us the synopsis: five pages, single-spaced. A
few lines caught my eye: 'On their way to Paris, Dick and Nicole and Abe and
Rosemary visit the trenches of a World War I battlefield. Later, waiting for a
train, an orchestra breaks into ''Yes, We Have No Bananas.'' '

''I handed the synopsis back to the vice-president . . .

'' 'I would gather,' he said carefully, 'that what interests you about this
property is the glamour and glitter of the Edwardian age.' ''*

PERHAPS THE MOST paradoxical aspect of the Dunnes in Hollywood is that despite
the fact that they have both written scathingly about the movie industry, their
price as screenwriters has soared. For ''True Confessions'' they received, aside
from the purchase price, a guaranteed $150,000 plus a production bonus of
$100,000. Now, a few deals later, they get a guaranteed $300,000, with an
additional $150,000 if there is no shared credit, plus profit participation.

There are probably a dozen writers who command higher figures - Alvin Sargent,
Mario Puzo, Jay Presson Allen - but most receive less, and considering that the
Dunnes haven't had a commercial success since ''A Star Is Born'' (''True
Confessions'' did not break even), their fees are puzzling.

Rob Cohen, vice chairman of Taft Entertainment Motion Pictures, says the Dunnes'
price is perfectly logical. ''The pieces they have written about Hollywood,
which tell the truth, have earned them stature and significance.'' Also, ''their
scripts are always honest and provocative.'' He calls Hollywood schizophrenic,
split between money and art. The Dunnes are perceived, along with Martin
Scorsese and Paul Schrader, among others, as the ones ''who hold out that
implied promise of quality,'' Cohen says. ''At the pearly gates, when I'm asked,
'Oh Rob, what did you do?' I wish I could say I'd made 'True Confessions.' '' AS
A COLLABORATIVE team, they have a technique that is strictly, in Dunne's words,
''ad hoc.'' If one is busy, the other begins the script. Sidney Lumet has the
impression that ''Joan goes into the ground and John finds the quick stroke that
captures the essence.'' But he's not sure. ''Sometimes I think Joan does
structure and John does language, but I'll bet that changes.'' According to
them, it does. ''Movies are essentially talking it out,'' Dunne explains.
Division of labor in the writing depends on the circumstances of the moment.

Although they never collaborate on books or articles, they travel together as
journalists and have developed an amazing symbiosis. They are, in Didion's
words, ''terrifically, terribly dependent on one another.''

In El Salvador, for instance (which shows up in ''The Red White and Blue''),
they both took voluminous notes. Yet, Dunne says, ''There was no overlap.''
Sometimes Dunne wrote the dialogue and Didion covered the background; sometimes
they did the opposite - always without conscious planning. Also, they work
quickly.

''Joan got a big rap,'' Dunne says forcefully, ''because she was only in El
Salvador for two weeks. Two weeks is plenty of time if you know what you're
looking for.''

''It sounds as if you have a hidden agenda,'' I say.

''I could have stayed in Salvador longer, and it wouldn't have done any good,''
Didion answers. ''Why?'' ''I wouldn't have written the book. Beyond a point,
something happens. If you have a fix and you go beyond it, you lose it.''

''It's almost better to have a little less than a little more,'' Dunne explains.

''With a little less you need to make a few inductive leaps, and it forces you
to think about it.''

''El Salvador,'' I say, ''sounds like one of the scariest trips I could ever
envision.''

''I've never been so scared in my whole life,'' Didion whispers.

''What made you go in the first place?''

Dunne answers instantly. ''Oh, we were desperate to go.''

''Desperate to go,'' Didion echoes.

''We had dinner with Tom Brokaw one night,'' Dunne continues. ''He said when he
went down to Salvador to cover the election, he woke up in the middle of the
night and the fear came over him. He took his mattress off his bed and put it in
the window.'' Dunne gives a loud, sharp laugh.

''Yeah . . . right.'' Didion is laughing, too.

''I said, 'They weren't going to shoot you!' He told us he'd been in Beirut, but
El Salvador was the only place where he'd ever been scared.'' Dunne takes a
breath. ''And then during the earthquake I thought we were going to die. When
you're on the eighth floor of a building and there's a volcano out the window,
and the volcano disappears from sight - really scary. Seven point two on the
Richter scale.''

I ask once more, ''But why did you go there?''

Dunne answers. ''That's what you do!''

''It was after 'A Book of Common Prayer,' '' Didion explains. ''I had passed
through Central America, but I'd never actually spent time there.''

''It began when we went to the Cartagena Film Festival in Colombia in '73. Joan
got typhoid.''

''When we came back up, the whole thing had a heightened, surreal sense in my
mind,'' she says. ''It was the first time I had been in South America. And I was
just really fascinated.''

They look at each other. Dunne continues the story while their gazes lock, as if
he's speaking from her memory as well. ''I remember we had dinner with
Christopher Isherwood when we got back. There was a wonderful line in one of
Chris's books, 'The Condor and the Cow,' where he says that when you're living
in North America you don't realize that South America is down there every
minute. Down there.''

''My interest wasn't in Salvador . . .'' Didion starts to say, but then stops.

''As a political idea . . .'' continues Dunne, looking at her once more.

''I was interested in what the United States was doing in Salvador,'' she says.

Dunne has a thought that makes him smile. He remembers wanting to rent a car.

''I was just panicked about driving for some reason,'' Didion says. ''There were
a lot of roadblocks, and if it got difficult, if it got beyond the range of my
rather limited Spanish, it could have been really unpleasant.''

''But it's the only way you can really see a country,'' Dunne says. ''It was
probably the best thing we did. The first day we went out to the body dump.''

''I thought that was so mean, John. It was like throwing a child in a swimming
pool. The idea of getting over my fear by going to a body dump! I mean, what a
thought!''

''How does one react to seeing actual dead bodies?''

''There's a cumulative impact,'' Didion answers. ''It is so much a given once
you're there. It's like, you know -have you ever been to a morgue? You just
switch into another gear. Automatically it happens.''

''It becomes a professional thing,'' Dunne agrees. ''You're there as a
reporter.'' ''Yeah. You don't remain yourself, quite. You . . .'' she stops and
thinks. ''. . . perform.''

BEYOND TECHNIQUE, their interests have also evolved together over the years.

''Joan and I hardly ever go to a town without going to the courthouse,'' Dunne
says. ''We've gone to the courthouse in Jakarta, in Kuala Lumpur . . .''
''Mystifyingly,'' she says. I ask them, why courthouses?

''You hear people's dramas,'' Didion says. ''Remember that rainy day in Honolulu
when we took Quintana and a friend to court? They were only 10 years old. We
couldn't think what else to do with them.''

As I look at these two writers, sitting in their living room, surrounded by
their hurricane lamps, Didion's pale forehead furrowed, Dunne, high-strung,
nervous, his 54 years belied by his childlike pink cheeks and round blue eyes,
there is a sense of the precipice about them. I think of the opening of ''Dutch
Shea, Jr.'' The protagonist's adopted daughter is killed. It's the event that
triggers his suicidal depression. Quintana is adopted. I think about the
brain-damaged child in ''Play It As It Lays'' and the lost daughter in ''A Book
of Common Prayer'' and ask them about living out their fears in fiction.

''It's about having only one child,'' Dunne says hesitantly. ''Which is the
parent's nightmare - especially if it's an adopted child, like Quintana. You
don't have another shot. If something happens . . .'' For Dunne, the
correspondence between fiction and fact has been frightening. Midway through
''Dutch Shea, Jr.,'' his brother Stephen, the youngest of the five Dunne
siblings, committed suicide.

''It was spooky,'' he says, his eyes downcast. ''Spooky. We were very, very
close. I was about 100 pages in. I knew that Dutch Shea was going to commit
suicide, but it was merely a plot point. And then when Stephen died . . .''
Dunne looks out the window. ''His suicide suffused the book.''

''The Red White and Blue'' presaged another tragedy. The first line, written in
June 1982, is, ''When the trial began, we left the country.'' It's a murder
trial. The narrator's ex-wife and brother have been shot. In October 1982,
Dominique Dunne, a young actress, the daughter of Dominick Dunne, John's
brother, was murdered. And in July 1983, the trial of her murderer began, and
John and Joan left the country.

They had urged Dominick not to go to trial, but to accept a plea-bargain
settlement of manslaughter in which John Sweeney, the murderer, would serve no
less than seven and a half years. ''Murder trials are ugly,'' says Dunne. ''They
are terrible even if you do not have someone involved. The victim always goes on
trial. It's not nice; it's not right.'' But Dominique's parents had emotional
and legal reasons for pursuing the case.

Twice, Dunne's words have come true. ''It was . . .'' he hesitates, and
continues in a soft voice, ''it was creepy. It was that . . . that shiver.''

He sighs. ''I'm not sure I'd ever write again about anything happening to
someone's daughter. I would feel a certain . . . restraint.''

AT FIRST GLANCE Didion and Dunne's novels would seem to be altogether different.

Broadly speaking, his are ''men's'' books. ''Tougher than anything by Hammett,''
wrote Michael Wood in The Times's Book Review. Hers are, obliquely, love
stories. Tony Richardson says of her work, ''Although the surface is cool and
ironic, there is such feeling underneath.''

Peter S. Prescott's evaluation in Newsweek of Didion's characters as ''emotional
invalids, all terminal victims of their own violence, corruption or
helplessness'' is true for the characters of both writers. But beyond the
despair is hope, implied by the very expression of its opposite. Didion says her
characters ''are searching for some kind of salvation,'' and Dunne says his are
''just trying to hang on.'' These two writers describe a world at risk and wish
it were otherwise.

IT'S A HUMID SATURDAY morning. The smog is thick and heavy, but there's a nice
breeze and the temperature is in the low 70's. The Dunnes are showing me L.A.

From Brentwood, we drive west on Sunset Boulevard to the ocean, south down the
Pacific Coast Highway, and then east on the Santa Monica Freeway.

On the move, excited, they enter a state of contentment. I'm reminded of Maria
in ''Play It As It Lays,'' driving the freeways to regain control of her life.
Then I think of the novelist Brian Moore's statement to me a few nights ago:
''It's a mistake to confuse an author with her characters. People call Joan the
Queen of Angst, which is not the feeling I have about her. She's a practical,
sensible, well-organized person. Not at all the disorganized waif she writes
about.'' But she's happy on the freeway.

''This is the newest freeway, with the best access,'' she says with simple civic
pride. ''We can get to east Los Angeles in 20 minutes now.''

We exit on Vermont Avenue, travel north through Koreatown to Wilshire Boulevard,
drive east on Wilshire and come into downtown L.A. Skyscrapers, banks. The
streets are deserted.

Then suddenly everything becomes honky-tonk. ''It's starting to seed up,'' says
Dunne happily. ''This is the Los Angeles no visitor ever sees.''

''Where are we stopping?'' I ask.

''We're just kind of moving around.''

We travel south on Grand Avenue to the Olympic Auditorium, a quaint red brick
building with a marquee advertising Mercado vs. Montes. ''Joan and I used to go
to the fights every week,'' says Dunne.

Back on the Santa Monica Freeway. Going east. Dunne is driving. Didion has a
brush by her side and occasionally runs it through her glistening chestnut hair.

Now we take the San Bernardino Freeway to Boyle Avenue and enter the largest
Mexican city outside Mexico.

They are visibly thrilled to be in such foreign territory. The men wear large
straw hats with deep creases in the top, like the Mexicans in ''The Magnificent
Seven.''

It's a horizontal slum with green houses and steep, dirt alleys blocked by car
wrecks at the top. It's 20 degrees hotter here than in Brentwood, which gets a
sea breeze. The poor have poorer weather.

We park and walk into El Mercado de Los Angeles, a huge market. Didion tells me
it attracts the newly arrived. ''Undocumented people.'' On the second floor, a
balcony runs along three sides. Men sit up there in white undershirts, arms
flung lazily over the backs of their booths, drinking beer, laughing, looking
depressed in a stunned way, as if something were confusing them.

''There are always raids,'' says Dunne.

''The I.N.S. sweeps down,'' Didion adds, ''and arrests them.'' There is a tremor
in their voices.

Outside, we walk by a tumbledown house with a long front porch. A man in a
stained white undershirt swings a silver disk, suspended by a string, back and
forth, and grins lovingly at a child. The child laughs, and the sound is
swallowed by the dusty heat and the brass music that floats out from windows all
around.

''It looks a great deal like San Salvador,'' Didion says. ''Except there aren't
the pockets of abject poverty or of . . .'' She breaks off and looks at her
husband.

''The pockets of affluence you see there cheek-by-jowl,'' he finishes for her.
''Yes.'' They decide that she will walk ahead to see if La Parilla, a restaurant
on Brooklyn Avenue, the main street, is open for lunch. I lose track of her for
a moment, and then I see her walking back toward us; a 95-pound woman in a silk
skirt, her hazel eyes wide with curiosity, a delighted smile on her face. She
floats through the teeming crowd of teen-agers twice her size, and wizened old
men who jostle up against her. Oblivious. Happy. Invisible Scarlet O'Neil.

Inside the restaurant, she mentions her new book, ''Miami,'' which is to be
published in September. It's a reflection on that city and its Cuban population.

''Joan has believed for years,'' says Dunne, ''that the most fertile territory
for United States skulduggery in Central America runs from Brownsville, Texas,
around the Gulf Coast, around Florida, up to Miami.''

Didion nods and says, ''But there is nothing that happens between the United
States and Latin America that does not go through Miami. When I was in El
Salvador I began to focus specifically on Miami, because when you're in Central
America you read The Miami Herald. That's the paper that appeals to you.''

''What was your method of investigation?''

''I just went down. Somebody gives you a name. You follow a lead. I work in an
undirected way. I'm not an investigative reporter. That is one thing I am not.''

''Yet,'' says Dunne, ''Joan and I were taking our three-mile morning walk a few
days after the November elections. It must have been November 8, '86 and the
Iran arms sale story had just broken, and Joan said, 'You watch, this caper's
going to end up in Managua.' I thought she was crazy! And then, two weeks later,
Meese had his press conference and announced the diversion of funds.'' ''How did
she know?'' '' 'It's all the same players,' she said to me. 'And this
Administration is obsessed with Nicaragua, not arms control, not the Middle
East.' She knew about Oliver North and that whole bunch from the Miami book. She
made the inductive leap.''

The waitress, wearing what looks like a tutu, has skin as dark as garden earth.
My guides, relaxed and expansive, address her in Spanish. I ask how much they
travel. Since 1973 they have gone to South America, Europe (many times), Hong
Kong (twice), Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur and El Salvador.
Taking notes all the way.

''We never travel with anything except what's under the seat,'' says Dunne. ''In
'82 we went from Los Angeles to El Salvador to New York to Paris. We were gone
five weeks with one carry-on bag each. Not bad.''

''Of course we never had quite the right clothes,'' Didion says, laughing.

Back on the road, we head for the county jail. This is a special-interest tour.
Soon I see a brown shack that says Bert Potter's Central Jail Bail Bonds.

''Look!'' says Didion gaily. ''Court buses. They take the prisoners to court.''
Then she pauses and says, ''I never know if this part of town interests anyone
besides John and me.''

Next we wind back and forth across Sunset to Echo Park - Raymond Chandler
territory; this is borderline poverty with illusions.

Suddenly Dunne exclaims, ''Look at the cops! What are they doing there?'' He
slows the car and cranes his neck to see. Two policemen are leaning against
someone's front gate. One of them speaks into a walkie-talkie. ''What are they
looking for?'' He's mesmerized by the scene.

When Dunne was writing for Time magazine in the late 50's and early 60's in New
York City, he used to snoop in mailboxes. He didn't read the mail. He just
wanted to see who lived in the brownstones. It would seem an occupation more
suited to a vagrant than a Princeton graduate, son of a prominent West Hartford
surgeon. But there has always been about Dunne, and also Didion, a hint of the
stranger whose nose is pressed up against the window of life.

Calvin Trillin describes Dunne fondly as ''a creative gossip.'' At Time, where
the two men met 25 years ago, Trillin remembers that Dunne ''was always coming
across people in compromising situations. It was uncanny. And then he would walk
into my office and say, 'Calvin, this you will not believe!' ''

When Didion was a child in Sacramento, she furtively followed grown-ups and
scribbled down their dialogue into a notebook. It's easy to picture a miniature
Joan Didion, hiding behind a tree, practicing social espionage. It's also easy
to imagine her as a student at Berkeley and a young writer at Vogue magazine,
lurking, spying, writing. Trying to figure it out.

From the time she and Dunne became friends in '58 (they married in '64), they
were naturals for each other. ''We still wander into brownstones and look at
names,'' Didion says shyly.

''We do it on Sunday mornings,'' Dunne adds. Sunday mornings in New York. A
month after our tour of Los Angeles, the Dunnes have moved into their midtown
Manhattan apartment where they spend fall and spring. It is not large, but, like
their California house, has a sense of space and hominess. The family
photographs one saw on tables in California have made the journey east. The
walls are white, the shelves are crammed with books, and several photographs
taken by Quintana, purposely overexposed so that they look like watercolors, are
framed and mounted, along with lithographs by Rauschenberg and Richard Serra.

Didion's faint voice is just audible above the sounds of traffic below the
window. ''You're living in a smaller space here and you go out.''

Dunne nods. ''Life is much more available in New York - there are a dozen movie
theaters within walking distance. Living in California is easier, but you get
sedentary. I would never leave California. But we want to . . .'' ''Float around
a little bit more.'' ''Yes. Basically you reach a point where you have to get on
the move.''

''Is that why you're still doing journalism?'' (He's presently writing a column
for Esquire.) ''Yes,'' Dunne says animatedly, curling his feet under him on the
couch. ''We get a lot out of journalism. I got 'The Red White and Blue' out of
journalism. It puts you in touch with the world.''

''But there's a level beyond that that's interesting,'' Didion adds. She is
sitting in a straight chair, very ladylike, her legs crossed at the knees. ''I
find it useful to get out, check into hotels and rent a car and go through all
those things that living a hermitic life . . .''

She runs a finger up and down the arm of her chair, as if tracing a journey, and
says, ''I think writers to some extent consider themselves people who walk
through life picking up vibrations of what's going on around them. I've thought
of myself that way since I was a little girl.''

''We want to go out into the world,'' Dunne says, looking at her. ''Yeah.
Sometimes your sense of the signals you're getting gets blunted. You've got to
sharpen up.'' She laughs.

''And time becomes terribly important to you,'' says Dunne. ''It's one of the
reasons we are less prone to do as many movies as we used to do. You reach a
certain age and you know how long it takes you to write a book. I mean, how many
more books am I going to write?''

''We have both looked ahead to being old,'' Didion says. ''And we don't want to
be old and cut off. I don't want to die in Los Angeles. Live and die in L.A. I
want to . . .''

''You want to keep moving,'' he says.

''If I have to die, I'd rather die up against a wall someplace.'' ''On the
case,'' says Dunne. ''On the case, yes.''

*From ''QUINTANA & FRIENDS,'' E.P. Dutton, Copyright c 1978 By John Gregory
Dunne.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Joan Didion and John Gregory Dunne at the Los Angeles home
(Blake Litte/Visages); photo of John Gregory Dunne walking in Central Park, New
York (Jose Azel/Contact) (page 20); photos of scenes from movies by Didion and
Dunne, ''The Panic in Needle Park,'' ''A Star Is Born,'' ''Play It As It Lays,''
and ''True Confessions'' (Kobal Collection) (page 21); photo of Didion and Dunne
at hom

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHERE IS EMERSON NOW THAT WE NEED HIM? OR, WHY LITERATURE CAN'T SAVE US

BYLINE:  By Richard Poirier; Richard Poirier, who teaches English at Rutgers
University, is the editor of Raritan and a director of the Library of America.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2992 words


Writing may be either the record of a deed or a deed. It is nobler when it is a
deed. . . .

          - Thoreau, ''Journal,'' Jan. 7, 1844

OF all the arts, literature has been put, I think, in the most unenviable
position. It is the designated place where everyone in every sort of need or
trouble is advised to go looking for something, told he can find something or
recover it, that he or she ought ''to reclaim a legacy,'' as is suggested by the
title of a recent study from the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Something literature promises to restore has been adulterated, it is said, by
popular culture or diminished by history or neglected by society or besmirched
by ideologues - our aspirations, our civility, our self-esteem, some knowledge
that will redeem the horrors of recent history and remind us of how really good
and creative we can be. Literature is supposed to hold all of this in trust, in
a relatively uncontaminated form.

I find reclamation projects of this kind quite fruitless. They are the
expression, usually, of some disguised cultural or social agenda which none of
the great writers summoned from the past could possibly endorse. Still more
perplexing is that the whole venture fails to take account of how literature is
troubled within itself, how much, in fact, it shows the futility of any
perfervid quest for truth, values and exaltations.

From its beginnings literature has expressed needs all its own to find something
that seems always to be missing, call it ''nature'' or ''reality.'' So that the
nostalgia of literary-cultural zealots is already going begging, so to speak, on
the very spot where they look to have it satisfied. The illusion of literature's
resourcefulness will not abate, however, despite what literature itself has to
say about it, and any diminution of its popularity is the immediate occasion for
pronouncements, by those who use it as a cultural and political resource, that a
savage torpor is upon us. No one has ever, I think, made similar protestations
about a decline of interest in musical recitals or dance recitals or gallery
shows, since these involve forms of art neither commonly shared with the general
populace nor obliged to use a material - language - which belongs more or less
to everyone. Especially when alleged disaffections from literature can be
blamed, quite egregiously, on enthusiasms for other entertainment media, the
complaints are accompanied by a proportionate insistence that the schools ought
to take a hand, that reading is a cure, that cultural salvation itself may be
advanced by more assiduous attention to certain revered texts.

Whatever might turn out to be the relation of literature to life or to culture
it is impossible to measure just how important or effective the relation is.
Relatively few of the vast proliferations of people in the last 500 years were
readers of literature even when they could read at all. Furthermore, from George
Chapman, the translator of Homer and author in 1594 of the aptly titled poem
''The Shadow of Night,'' to Wordsworth in the 19th on to Eliot in the 20th
century, writers have warned that it was exactly the cultural necessity and
virtue of their work that made it ''difficult'' to read. ''Away, then,'' wrote
Wordsworth in 1815, ''with the senseless iteration of the word, popular, applied
to new works in poetry, as if there were no test of excellence in this first of
the fine arts but that all men should run after its productions, as if urged by
an appetite, or constrained by a spell!'' Poetry can imagine itself like the
goblet, hidden in Frost's poem ''Directive,'' and ''Under a spell so the wrong
ones can't find it, / So can't get saved, as Saint Mark says they mustn't.''
Literature is a very restricted passage into life, if it is one at all. English
literature, including the ''best'' of the most sacrosanct authors, changes shape
every 20 years or so, and American literature as the canon is now conceived was
until quite recently kept in hiding or repressed.

Literature is so variable a factor in any situation that it is absurd to suppose
that it is some sort of thing waiting neutrally to arbitrate real or imagined
cultural crises. More likely it creates crises that do not exist for the people
who are supposed to feel them most but who somehow refuse to do so. Writers like
to endow their own practices with historical inevitability and large
consequence. This in turn promotes the notion that in their work the rest of us
can recover meanings that would otherwise yield to chaos or to the blandishments
of meaningless pleasure. Wordsworth is again a compelling illustration because
he issues one of the most effective arguments ever made against treating
litera-ture as a source of adaptable knowledge even while he manages, in the
1800 Preface to ''Lyrical Ballads,'' to sound superficially as if he were
writing for one of the innumerable panels that meet every so often to recommend
a solution to the plight of the humanities in the age of video:

''For a multitude of causes, unknown to former times, are now acting with a
combined force to blunt the discriminating powers of the mind, and, unfitting it
for all voluntary exertion, to reduce it to a state of almost savage torpor. The
most effective of these causes are the great national events which are daily
taking place, and the increasing accumulation of men in cities, where the
uniformity of their occupations produces a craving for extraordinary incident,
which the rapid communication of intelligence hourly gratifies. . . . The
invaluable works of our elder writers, I had almost said the works of
Shakespeare and Milton, are driven into neglect by . . . this degrading thirst
after outrageous stimulation.''

Wordsworth suits my argument because he does not mean what he appears to mean at
the end of this passage. He could not show - no one ever has been able to show -
any connection between the neglect of ''the invaluable works of our elder
writers'' and the ''savage torpor'' of the population, or that the latter would
be lessened by more attention to the former. The difference between Wordsworth
and those who in our own time like to think that such connections do exist is
that he suspects, and they are anxious not to, that the source of degeneration
lies in economic, demographic and cultural factors that have little to do with
literature or the taste for it. The argument nowadays that ''we'' are in trouble
because there is trouble in the centers of the culture, like the universities or
literary criticism or the humanities, is merely one more journalistic-political
maneuver designed to obscure the fail-ures in contemporary
political-economic-social arrangements.

Wordsworth might not have looked favorably over the past few decades on popular
entertainment or urban life, but I suspect he would most likely have located the
trauma of the 60's, for example, in the war in Vietnam and the fight for racial
equality. He would not have mistaken the disasters of the period for what were
in fact clumsy responses to them on college campuses or at rock concerts, whose
violence was in any case negligible compared to what happens regularly at adult
festivals of patriotic masculinity like hockey and soccer games. And in the 70's
and 80's he might object to feminist ideological protests without blaming them
for a decline in those literary standards of civilization which, as it turns
out, had never over the centuries managed to create a more civilized sense of
the equality of women. Debates on all these issues are so flat minded by now
that it is necessary to add that I am not in favor of making universities the
center of political protest and that I am convinced that the practice, as
against the theory, of feminist criticism of literature has in many cases
weakened the critical enterprise. But the causes of what is importantly
troubling the Western world lie elsewhere. IT would be nice indeed if cultural
and social crises could be solved or ameliorated by more and closer readings of
the ''elder writers.'' Most writers, most readers even more so, want to believe
in such magnifications of literary method and literary meaning. The belief is
essential to the notion that the writing and reading of literature have a
culturally redemptive power. I am arguing that this belief cannot be sustained
by the actual operations of language in literary texts. Writing that can be
called literature tends to be discernibly on edge about its own rhetorical
status, especially when the rhetoric is conspicuously indebted to any of the
great, historically rooted institutions, as in the
theological-mythological-literary saturations of idiom in ''Paradise Lost'' and
''Ulysses.'' Part of the excitement of such works derives from the way they
resist as well as absorb the meanings which their adopted language makes
available to them, and to us.

Literature generates its substance, its excitements, its rhetoric and its plots
often with the implicit intention, paradoxically, to get free of them and to
restore itself to some preferred state of naturalness, authenticity and
simplicity. The implication is that if any of these actually did or could exist
in an uncorrupted state, then literature itself would be unnecessary. Another
way to put it is to say that literature implicitly idealizes that condition of
bareness, that thinness of social and cultural circumstances, which, according
to Henry James and other observers, was supposed to be the special plight of
American writers. For Emerson, William James and Wallace Stevens, however,
''bareness'' is very often salutary, something to be sought after, no matter how
much Emerson complained that Concord could be a dreary place for any man of
talent.

What is the supposed virtue of bareness? That with nothing to depend on, nothing
to lean or rely on, the naked and true self, if such there be, can and will
emerge, compelled into expression, or that ''something'' will emerge. To quote
one from Stevens's poem ''The Rock'':

As if nothingness contained a metier,
A vital assumption, an impermanence
In its permanent cold, an illusion so desired

That the green leaves came and covered the high
   rock,
That the lilacs came and bloomed, like a blindness
   cleaned. . . .

Consider the first invention of that creature who eventually would conceive of
the word ''man.'' I ask you to suppose that its first invention was its own
muteness. Muteness is not something attributable to a rock or a stone, a tree or
a beast. For anything to imagine its own muteness it would have to desire not to
be mute, to desire already to be other than what it is, to become different and
to make a difference. Suppose that the next invention was the sound that erased
the muteness. BUT here, in this possible scenario, we encounter a mystery, a
missing element.

And it is at this point that most people want to fill the gap with the word
''soul'' or the word ''God.'' And why not? The human desire to make its presence
known to itself and to the world, to make a difference to and in the world -
must it not, even in its original muteness, have expected that there really was
something waiting to be discovered, something ''inside'' that no other creature
possessed? Exactly at this point pragmatism reveals its tough-mindedness as
against the tender-minded who want to bring into the story a necessary God and a
necessary soul. A pragmatist, by which I mean some later version of Emerson,
might have to use the words ''God'' or ''soul'' but would go on to suppose, as I
do, that there was in fact really nothing outside to depend on and nothing
inside either, except the desire that there should be more than nothing.

That, if I may say so, is why works of art are not required to exist. There is
nothing outside of them that requires their existence. If Shakespeare had never
existed we would not miss his works, for there would be nothing missing. This is
perhaps the most obvious, important and repressed fact about artistic
production. Critics and artists now and again do boast of being compelled by
historical necessity or admit to working on assignment, but all that compels
Shakespeare or Mozart or Rembrandt or Balanchine is that same desire which
brought muteness into the act of sound or motion. The difference is that
artistic acts have precedents, while that first act did not. An artistic act can
take advantage of the vocabularies of prior works of art, but if the result is
merely an imitation then it might as well have remained mute; what it
accomplishes will offer no testimony within itself of its need to exist. And
that, I suspect, is why most inferior artists need and like to explain their
works as having been historically necessitated.

The desire which produces works of art is variously associated in Emerson with
God or Divinity or the soul in each of us. His religious vocabulary is in itself
part of the problem he sets for himself, or that is set for him by the
historical condition of the language of his time. Words like ''soul'' or ''God''
or ''Divinity'' designate for him the very limitations which human desire must
always want to transcend. That is, even to imagine that any word or text could
sufficiently locate the source of life or truth would mean that the desire to
create could come to an end in some object sufficient to itself.

Emersonian tradition was itself reticent about becoming powerfully a part of
general literary culture and, among those who propose to speak on behalf of that
culture, there is still much resistance to it, mostly in the form of casualness
and neglect. Let me use as an example the report on the humanities I have
already mentioned, written by William J. Bennett, former head of the National
Endowment for the Humanities and now Secretary of Education in the second Reagan
Administration. ''To Reclaim a Legacy,'' as the report is called, is in large
part a diatribe about the deterioration since the 60's of American culture and
education and about ''a failure of nerve and faith'' in higher education; it is
also a platitudinous call for ''a clear vision'' of what constitutes an educated
person. Obviously, the person is to be ''educated'' to a purpose, which is to
restore to him or her those values we have lost and which are to be found, so it
is imagined, by a close study of the humanities, of which literature is a
central part. ''The humanities tell us how men and women of our and other
civilizations have grappled with life's enduring, fundamental questions: What is
justice? What should be loved? . . . Why do civilizations flourish? Why do they
decline?''

A tall order, but who would not study, and study hard, if we really could learn
to ''grapple'' with these things? Naturally you want a reading list as soon as
possible, and if some of your favorite authors are on it then you are that much
ahead of the game. I of course looked for Emerson and his fellows. I did not
find them. But this is not surprising nor, really, a just cause for complaint.
Within the tough requirements of cultural power, it cannot be said that Mr.
Bennett and his study group of some 30 distinguished scholars and educational
administrators were under any particular obligation to ''reclaim'' a legacy
which had not been directly claimed even by the writers responsible for creating
it.

And yet someone conceivably more patriotic than Mr. Bennett might still have
wondered why, in the initial section of the report (''Why Study the
Humanities?''), the first reference to anyone writing in English is not to
Emerson, known as a great American patriarch even to those who have not read him
(he is nowhere mentioned in the report, nor are any of his literary successors),
but to the great Victorian man of letters who is inevitably called out of
permanent semiretirement whenever, which is always, the humanities are in
crisis. It is he who tells us, to use his word, what should be ''propagated'' by
criticism. ''Expanding on a phrase from Matthew Arnold,'' Mr. Bennett writes,
''I would describe the humanities as the best that has been said, thought,
written and otherwise expressed about the human experience.'' This is the prose
equivalent of a life-support system, and no doubt it will keep the humanities
alive in ways already familiar to them. IN citing Arnold at the outset, the
report merely confirms how entirely predictable will be its assumptions about
literature. Had I been a member of Mr. Bennett's study group it would have taken
an entire book to argue, with little hope of success, that Emerson should be
substituted for Arnold. It would have meant that the report, with whose
diagnoses - that the humanities are in bad shape - anyone may have good reasons
to agree, would have had to find remedies diametrically opposed to any it is
prepared even to imagine. Could I have suggested, for example, that for the
paraphrase of Arnold should be substituted this passage from Emerson's
''Journals''? ''Criticism must be transcendental, that is, must consider
literature ephemeral & easily entertain the supposition of its entire
disappearance.''

While curricular reform proceeding from that ''supposition'' is not impossible,
it is also not at all likely. What kind of legacy could be reclaimed if the
texts, so to speak, were asked to disappear? Under such an exhortation, could
the literary past be looked to for what Mr. Bennett calls ''the landscape of
human thought,'' and could we expect, as he says, that ''the highest purpose of
reading is to be in the company of great souls''? Surely not. Meantime, I would
rather ponder the question asked by Wallace Stevens in ''Adagia'': ''How has the
human spirit ever survived the terrific literature with which it has had to
contend?''

 Excerpted from ''The Renewal of Literature: Emersonian Reflections,'' by
Richard Poirier, to be published this month by Random House.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

JUST A TOASTER WITH PICTURES

BYLINE: By Brent Staples; Brent Staples, a former editor of The Book Review, is
first assistant metropolitan editor of The Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1766 words


WATCHING TELEVISION A Pantheon Guide to Popular Culture. Edited by Todd Gitlin.
248 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $19.95.

SOME of the seven essayists who contributed to ''Watching Television'' have
obviously spent time in the future - particularly the future foreseen in the
novels of Philip K. Dick. In the Dickian year 2050, commercials no longer
emanate solely from the tube but are free-flying mechanical pests that invade
every venue to inspire the irresistible urge to consume. Partly because the
televisual river has swept over its banks, the simulated and authentic have
begun to mesh, and ''the real thing'' is no longer a clearly discernible
commodity. In Dick's ''Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep'' - the novel from
which the cult film ''Blade Runner'' was adapted - worshipers merge souls with a
Jesus-like figure through a telly that lets them feel his pain and bleed under
his equivalent of the crown of thorns. In the clearest sense, Dick envisioned a
culture in which television had, once and for all, escaped from its box.

Todd Gitlin, the author of ''Inside Prime Time,'' has edited a volume that, even
though it is shrill and paranoid in places, should be regarded as a prolegomenon
to any further television criticism - an important step into the post-wasteland
era of writing about the tube. Whether they venture into the wilds of Saturday
morning cartoons, the soaps, the evening news, wrestling, MTV, ''The Cosby
Show'' or ''Miami Vice,'' most of these raucous, thoroughly interesting essays
get round to the Dickian theme - that television is supplanting the authentic
with the artificial wherever possible and turning these phantasms into realities
for the culture as a whole. Thus, a yearly television roundup, which takes on
the guise of news, features some events that only happened to fictional
television characters. Krystle and Blake Carrington, two residents of the
nighttime soap ''Dynasty,'' have inspired real-life colognes, and the program
has spawned a line of formal wear, wallpaper, chandeliers, letter-openers and,
of course, lingerie. What once was generated from the flesh-and-blood side of
life now, with greater and greater frequency, emerges from the electronic side -
a development that can be startling, depending on how optimistic you are about
human critical faculties.

If you have questioned the seemingly irresistible appeal of the soaps - and why
some people ''see'' soap opera characters more often than they see their friends
- slip into the soap world through Ruth Rosen's seductive essay, ''Search for
Yesterday.'' Ms. Rosen, an associate professor of history at the University of
California, Davis, writes that soaps are so magnetic because they are structured
with an ''eternal middle,'' that is, they recapitulate themselves every day and
are always open to you, the guest. The conversation is slow, she writes, so slow
that it is sometimes referred to as ''radio with pictures.'' There are more
doctors than patients in the hospitals. Racism and sexism are not problems in
the soap world; one never knows that the nation has been at war; and this
''mythic community, turned in on itself, is obsessed solely with its private
agonies, drawing unity only from its individual pains.'' In a word, Ms. Rosen
writes, soaps are so engrossing because they are friendlier and simpler than
people or the world.

Mark Crispin Miller assays the sitcom scriptwriter's view of the TV Dad from the
days of ''Leave It to Beaver'' to the present wildly successful ''Cosby Show.''
Mr. Miller, a contributing editor of The New Republic and, among the essayists
here, easily the most guilty of psychoanalytic overkill, finds in early sitcoms
an anxiety about a Dad who was ''the apparent ruler of the world'' and, ''pushed
around by no one, somehow deflated all of his inferiors - and all were his
inferiors.'' ''Mrs. Dad,'' he writes correctly, was ''trim, erect, and loyal,
like a well-bred whippet,'' and Dad's daughter was always ''princess'' or
''kitten.'' Mr. Miller's essay, ''Deride and Conquer,'' unearths some startling
subtleties that most of us might not have seen in the relationships between
characters. But as he traces the decline of the TV Dad, questionable ideas creep
into his analysis. Where some might see Archie Bunker of ''All in the Family''
as a metaphor for bigotry and sexism - and a sometimes lovable and even educable
buffoon - Mr. Miller sees the subversion of the family head as the result of an
''assault on individual capacity'' by multinational corporations. Oddly, he
seems to prefer the obedient ''well-bred whippet'' Mom, to see her as more
''feminine'' than the ''defeminized'' corporate women of today's tube.

If not long ago you heard your 6- to 9-year-old singing a cliche-ridden tune
into the telephone, she was not alone. (And don't worry; she dialed an 800
number.) More than 700,000 of the nation's little girls responded to a contest
by a major toy company seeking to test the kiddies' appetite for a new doll that
got its own television show in 1986. This is the latest installment in what Tom
Engelhardt here calls ''The Shortcake Strategy.'' Responding to the Federal
Communications Commission's relaxations on the amount of commercial content in
children's programming - and to the fact that the tube has become the glass teat
that nurses our young -marketers now visit kindergartens to sample if not
cultivate the next wave of consumers. Children, they now tell us, make household
brand-name choices around the age of 4.

The essay by Mr. Engelhardt, an editor at Pantheon and the author of a book on
America in the 70's, examines the peculiar history of television marketing to
children. The landmark year, he writes, was 1980, when, at the American
International Toy Fair in New York, Strawberry Shortcake, a doll, was introduced
and quickly became America's ''number-one baby doll, starring in special after
special [and selling] more than $1 billion worth of herself before, as one of
her ads put it, 'other four year olds learn to count.' '' Ms. Shortcake's
developers had, Mr. Engelhardt writes, lifted the final veil: ''They had shown
that a salable image could be created out of relatively thin air and that the
product could precede the show. . . . In this strategy, your corporate research
completed and your ersatz character in existence, every licensed or produced
element from doll to lunchbox to mall appearance to TV show will reinforce the
others, creating for that tiny being a sense of ubiquitous stardom and
desirability.'' Ms. Shortcake was followed by a bushel of other products that
drew the kiddie consumer into their costly, many-armed embrace. If Saturday
morning television seems more vacuous to you, it is partly because, unlike when
you grew up, there are fewer book-based or even comic-book-based characters
behind it anymore, no personalities or backgrounds or human agendas, simply
glittering, racing, grinning little toys for sale.

Mr. Engelhardt's thorough history of the selling of children's television should
be read by those who let their young watch television unsupervised - and even by
marketers who want to know how post-deregulation television works. But although
his is the most empirical of the essays and prompts the most real-world
questions, it also falls short on answers. That the children's market can mean a
billion dollars in licensing fees for some doll is a testament to a successful
marketing strategy, nothing more, nothing less. The wider issue is not whether
an entity whose job it is to sell should stop selling, but whether or not
parents should offer children some other focus for their interests: something
more substantial, with fewer toy store tie-ins, something that comes from the
parents. Perhaps a book now and then. As Mark S. Fowler, the outgoing chairman
of the F.C.C., has said, television is only a ''toaster with pictures.''
''Sesame Street'' notwithstanding, toasters should not educate children. THESE
essays have got beyond the Newton N. Minow school of television criticism - that
school having emerged with a 1961 speech in which the then chairman of the
F.C.C. told a convention of the National Association of Broadcasters that
television was ''a vast wasteland.'' But in fact, ''Watching Television''
reflects a few common misconceptions. This book's relentless Reagan bashing is
misplaced. The President did not create the television age; television, with its
ever-expanding channel space, has sought a personality with which to fill itself
for decades now. (This President and television were a marriage made in video
heaven, and more charming suitors will follow this one.) There is also here an
unsettling pessimism about the ability of human beings to confront the rapacious
box and survive. I like to think that a brain that came of age in Olduvai Gorge
competing with bloodthirsty predators can switch off a television when
necessary. As is shown by recent corporate anxiety over the commercial-zapping
features of remote-control devices and video cassette recorders, the siren's
song can be silenced. As Daniel C. Hallin, the author of ''The 'Uncensored War':
The Media and Vietnam,'' suggests in his essay, television news is often happy
talk rather than information, but the occasional image there - as in Watergate,
as almost in Irangate - can bring down Presidents or nearly do so.

I prefer the brutal optimism of Philip K. Dick's novels. In them the televisual
comes nearly to dominate the world and confuses us about the real and the
unreal. But take note. In ''The Simulacra,'' a defiant citizen, when confronted
by a roving mechanical commercial, simply crushes it before it can utter a word.


VIDEO POLITICS

As media image-making comes to dominate electoral politics, music video has
invaded that domain too. Consultants to both the Democratic and Republican
parties have used music video to explore the mind-set of younger generations. .
. . The collision of music video with traditional political mobilizing brings
one world - that of the consumer, concerned with individual choice - smack up
against another - that of the citizen, charged with responsibility for public
decisions. . . . The enormous popularity and rapid evolution of music videos
give the lie to conspiracy theorists who think commodity culture is force-fed
into the gullets of unwilling spec-tators being fattened for the cultural kill.
But it should also chasten free-market apologists who trust that whatever sells
is . . . an instrument of democracy.     (Pat Aufderheide) From ''Watching
Television.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A review Feb. 8 of ''Watching Television: A Pantheon Guide to Popular Culture,''
edited by Todd Gitlin and published by Pantheon Books, contained incomplete
price information. The book is available in hard cover at $19.95 and in
paperback at $9.95.

GRAPHIC: Photo of RCA TVS

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOOKING FOR LINCOLN IN THE 1980'S

BYLINE: By Gabor S. Boritt; Gabor S. Boritt is the first Robert C. Fluhrer
Distinguished Professor of Civil War Studies at Gettysburg College.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3157 words


AT the Gettysburg cemetery, the Abraham Lincoln of Gore Vidal's novel barely
gets through his first sentence - about the events in America ''four score and
seven years ago'' - when the young Presidential secretary, John Hay, cynically
observes that such rhetoric ''will please the radicals.'' Though the national
commitment to the noble notion that ''all men are created equal,'' particularly
in its Civil War, black-white context, is thereby dismissed, the Gettysburg
Ad-dress itself is not. In Mr. Vidal's ''Lincoln,'' it is ''a rifle salute to
the dead.'' Each word is fired across the battlefield. The aim -that the
''nation might live.'' Mr. Vidal thus pledges himself to one side of the debate
among historians concerning the meaning of Lincoln for our times.

Scholarly debate in the historical profession, however gentlemanly and ladylike
most of the time, is endemic, as it should be. History, after all, attempts to
imitate life. In the field of Lincoln studies during the past decade, life has
been full and the arguments lively. Yet the work goes on. Lincoln is the central
fig-ure of American mythology and - so far as historians can admit to such - of
American history. The mythology is fed by best-selling novels, plays, cartoons,
films, television mini-series, videos, talk shows, advertisements, the shrines
visited each year by millions, the humble penny, postage stamps (three since
1984), an oral tradition and much more. The historian's work in turn spills over
into the culture at large - though the relationship of the two is symbiotic -
and affects the myth through which Americans see Lincoln. And since Americans
for a century and more have seen themselves at their best in Lincoln, what they
see affects their future.

For scholars one of the most fundamental issues has been whether Lincoln's
ultimate commitment was to union or liberty. In the first view, Lincoln becomes
the great nationalist whose devotion to the union of the states reached the
level of religious mysticism - someone rather in the mold of Italy's Cavour,
Germany's Bismarck or, to point to Edmund Wilson's farfetched choice, Russia's
Lenin. Lincoln's words from his 1862 letter to the New York Tribune editor
Horace Greeley can be seen as carved in marble: ''My paramount object in this
struggle is to save the Union, and is not either to save or to destroy slavery.
If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it, and if I
could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it; and if I could save it by
freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that.'' Though even during
the Civil War questions of liberty encompassed much more than slavery, that
institution provided the litmus test. Not surprisingly, it also provided the
most heatedly fought-over subject of Lincoln studies during the past generation.

Those who see Lincoln's commitment to liberty as paramount point out that, by
the time of the Greeley letter, he had decided in favor of emancipation. They
see in that letter, and much similar evidence, less an oath of allegiance to the
Union than a political stratagem addressed to that antiblack majority of
Northerners without whose support slavery could not be abolished. Lincoln did
greatly prize the Union. Yet as he explained in New York in 1861, the Union was
a ship that carried ''the prosperity and the liberties of the people.'' He
continued, ''I understand a ship to be made for the carrying and preservation of
the cargo, and so long as the ship can be saved, with the cargo, it should never
be abandoned.''

Quibbling about the supremacy of union or liberty may seem intellectually
arcane; after all, it is obvious that Lincoln fought America's bloodiest war for
both. Yet the distinction between union and liberty held fateful meaning for the
world. The idea of one is essentially national, that of the other is universal.
We dare not gainsay the achievements of Cavour or Bismarck, nor do we dare
forget that their degenerate 20th-century descendants in the worship of the
nation as an end in itself were Mussolini and Hitler. Could America have
followed a road more like theirs if its unification came about under the
leadership of a man who did not rank liberty first among his values? Asking the
question thus places me on one side of the debate. Warning the reader is well
enough. It must also be said that the issues can be conceived in other ways as
well. THE need for a unified, believable portrait of Lincoln raised a second
fundamental problem for historians. Ever since the moment of martyrdom in 1865,
there have been two Lincolns: the man and the god. One was the crafty, backwoods
lawyer, ''the crude small-time politician,'' to cite Stephen Vincent Benet; the
other was the immortal statesman, ''the Great Emancipator'' who partook of
divinity. The two have coexisted with each other, battled each other, and still
do. Whatever the public thought, the compromise whereby the common man captured
the Illinois years and the divine one the Presidency could not be satisfactory
for scholars, since it suggested an inexplicable transfiguration. Accordingly,
they have labored through much of this century to bridge the gap.

Perhaps their best success during this past decade came with the
psychohistorians and psychoanalytic theory, which stresses intricate connections
among the child, the youth and the adult. This success is especially visible in
the work of Charles B. Strozier, co-editor of an essay collection, ''The Public
and Private Lincoln'' (1979), and author of ''Lincoln's Quest for Union''
(1982). The latter book sheds new light on Lincoln's relations with his mother,
father, wife, eldest son, stepmother, best friend and longtime law partner,
creating an image historians must reckon with. It suggests ways in which private
experiences shaped the public figure. When Lincoln's search for inner unity is
turned into a search for the union of Americans, Mr. Strozier makes the case
that the notion of the Union was central to Lincoln's very being.

George B. Forgie, a quite able historian, disagrees. In ''Patricide in the House
Divided: A Psychological Interpretation of Lincoln and His Age'' (1979), he
finds liberty more important than union in understanding Lincoln. But Mr.
Forgie's book is less a study of a man than of a society whose most ambitious
sons are oppressed by the fame of the Revolutionary Fathers. The sons therefore
find their path to glory through war.

Mr. Forgie respects Lincoln. Not so Dwight G. Anderson. Mr. Anderson, in
''Abraham Lincoln: The Quest for Immortality'' (1982), labels Lincoln a
''tyrant,'' a ''demon'' who would destroy the United States created by the
Constitution ''to gratify his own ambition.'' Neither liberty nor union was
sacred to him. Well-written and well-argued myth making like this brings to mind
the grumbling of the novelist John Gardner's crusty old professor Sven Agaard in
''Freddy's Book.'' '' 'Pseudo-history,' he said, with a scornful little
headshake. I blinked, not sure whether it was a joke or a slip of the tongue,
and tentatively corrected him, my tone ironic: 'Psycho-history.' ''

Mr. Anderson holds the Civil War President, as the founder of modern America,
partly responsible for his successors' attempts to save the world in places like
Vietnam, and considering that most of the new Lincoln scholars were trained in
the 1960's and cut their professional teeth in the 70's, it is surprising that
not more of them are anti-Lincoln. A significant part of their generation has
replaced a sense of virtue and pride in the nation's history with a sense of
guilt - ''the Fall of the American Adam,'' as the great elder statesman C. Vann
Woodward speaks of it. That generation's views are changing now. Yet during the
civil rights era, so ironically, even scholars wondered whether to lean toward
the portrait of Lincoln as emancipator or as honky. For a time, the Pulitzer
Prize-winning historian Don E. Fehrenbacher has noted, Lincoln's disavowal of
social and political equality for whites and blacks in his debates with Stephen
Douglas in 1858 seemed to become ''the most quoted of Lincoln's writings,
outstripping even the Gettysburg Address and the Second Inaugural.'' Without
such a disavowal, Lincoln would have disappeared into a footnote to history.
INSTEAD, he went to the White House. A masterly study of what he called ''the
most difficult question'' of those years is LaWanda Cox's ''Lincoln and Black
Freedom'' (1981). The book suggests that at last it is possible to look at the
subject without stressing its relevance to the contemporary world. Her complex,
minutely researched study can be summed up simply: Lincoln was the most
effective friend of black freedom during the Civil War. This much of the Lincoln
legend is true. So it lives. Mrs. Cox's answer to what she calls ''the nagging
questions'' seems all the more trustworthy because she was a leader of the past
generation's radical revision of Reconstruction historiography, which, for
scholars at least, went a long way toward turning a misguided, tragic era into
one of great promise and some achievement. If thus Mrs. Cox struck a most sturdy
blow for Lincoln and liberty, her work would have been even better had it dealt
thoroughly with the Illinois years and so also struck a blow for continuity in
the Lincoln image.

Peyton McCrary's ''Abraham Lincoln and Reconstruction'' (1978) covers similar
ground but focuses more on an experiment in liberty in Louisiana than on the
President. Differing interpretations of detail notwithstanding, the book reaches
a conclusion essentially identical with Mrs. Cox's, presaging her work. In
contrast, David A. Nichols in ''Lincoln and the Indians'' (1978) portrays a
President consumed with saving the Union and largely ignoring not only the
chaotic, corrupt and brutal system for dealing with Indians but also his own
humanitarian instincts. Mr. Nichols might concede that by saving the Union
Lincoln tried to save liberty, but that was small comfort for the 38 Indians
executed in Minnesota just after Christmas, 1862, following an uprising, or for
Indian people as a whole.

Yet the tragedy of the Indian is dwarfed among Lincoln scholars by the vaster
tragedy of the nation swallowed up in civil war. Religion provided solace for
the suffering. Glen E. Thurow's ''Abraham Lincoln and American Political
Religion'' (1976) is a demanding philosophical analysis of major Lincoln texts,
principally of the recently much studied 1838 Lyceum Address, the Gettysburg
Address and the second inaugural. Mr. Thurow's President unites American
political and religious traditions and stresses both continuity and liberty. So
does David Hein's fine essay ''Lincoln's Theology and Political Ethics'' (1983).

Continuity and liberty are also highlighted in my book ''Lincoln and the
Economics of the American Dream'' (1978), which examines, often in dreadfully
dull detail, the development of the Illinoisan's growth-oriented economic ideas.
The work also argues that Lincoln defined liberty above all as the right to rise
- a commitment that was central to his public, and private, life.

The most enticing Lincoln story has always been his murder. But until the
current generation, professional historians have turned up their noses at the
assassination, and the subject fell mostly into the hands of speculators,
historical or financial, or honest paranoids, producing a vast array of
conspiracy theories purveyed by cheap paperbacks, cinema, television, video and
so on. William Hanchett's ''Lincoln Murder Conspiracies'' (1983), complemented
by Thomas Reed Turner's study of public opinion about the assassination,
''Beware the People Weeping'' (1982), sets the record straight. Unlike in most
detective novels, but as in all historical research, untied knots remain. But it
is also reasonably clear that Lincoln's assassination was the work of a small
group of conspirators spawned by a society deeply disturbed and divided by war.
Lincoln's last speech, pointing to black suffrage, appears to have been the
final straw for John Wilkes Booth. ''That means nigger citizenship,'' he
declared upon hearing the President. ''Now, by God, I'll put him through.'' And
so he did.

The most popular historical interpreter of the man today is Stephen B. Oates,
and the most popular public lecturer in the field -for there is a steady Lincoln
public - is Mark E. Neely Jr. Mr. Oates's ''With Malice Toward None'' (1977) is
the standard biography today. Its very likable Lincoln stands for liberty, and
his story has continuity from the log cabin to Ford's Theater. The book has many
strengths, but how long it will endure depends on when, or whether, a historian
with talents equal to those of Mr. Oates - no mean requirement - will come forth
with a new biography. The literature discussed here began to date Mr. Oates
almost immediately. That he, too, sensed this can be gathered from ''Abraham
Lincoln: The Man Behind the Myths'' (1984), in part a summary of what Mr. Oates
had learned since his earlier book, interpreting for the general public the work
of the specialists.

Mr. Neely, perhaps the most knowledgeable expert in the field, is the author of
the masterly ''Abraham Lincoln Encyclopedia'' (1982). He is also co-author of a
number of works, including (with R. Gerald McMurtry) ''The Insanity File''
(1986), a fascinating study based on a newly discovered cache of materials about
Mary Todd Lincoln, who in 1875 was committed to an asylum by her son. Mr. Neely
has written important articles as well; Lincoln studies are also nurtured by
scholarly fare less imposing than books. Shorter pieces are sometimes collected,
and the best of the recent crop of such volumes is Richard N. Current's
''Speaking of Abraham Lincoln'' (1983). With rare common sense, it suggests
answers to the perennial question so uncomfortable to historians: ''What would
Lincoln do today?'' But perhaps the most remarkable fact about Lincoln studies
is the number of prominent nonspecialists who wish to have their say about him -
see, for example, John P. Diggins's ''Lost Soul of American Politics'' (1984) or
''Abraham Lincoln and the American Political Tradition'' (1986), edited by John
L. Thomas.

The work of the nonspecialist is at times thought-provoking; at others, merely
provoking. An example of the latter is Oscar Handlin and Lilian Handlin's
''Abraham Lincoln and the Union'' (1980), in the popular ''Library of American
Biography'' series, edited by Mr. Handlin. In the late 19th and early 20th
centuries, Boston's John T. Morse Jr., editor of the influential ''American
Statesmen'' series, made the mistake of reserving the Civil War President for
himself. Mr. Handlin did the same, and the book adds little to the field, though
the disfavor with which young Lincoln scholars greeted it, one suspects, stemmed
partly from their chagrin at not gaffing the assignment for themselves.

For historians, however, the most troubling recent Lincoln book is Mr. Vidal's
1984 novel, which may become a television mini-series. To the general public,
Mr. Vidal's is the most influential Lincoln image of our time. It is also the
most insidiously ahistorical. The book's many factual errors are a minor problem
in a novel, and its seeming participation in scholarly debates matters not at
all. But the cynical, amoral world it creates with a comfortable Lincoln at the
center is surely the worst literary blow against Lincoln's reputation on record
and, to a Watergate-tempered generation, all too acceptable. By comparison, M.
E. Bradford, who may have been denied the chairmanship of the National Endowment
for the Humanities in part because of his articles on Lincoln (he saw fit to
compare him to Hitler), seems harmless. One only hopes that in the sphere of
fiction William Safire's forthcoming novel will redress somewhat the balance on
the best-seller list.

There is also promising work under way among historians. Don Fehrenbacher is
bringing out a new set of essays on Lincoln and also a new selection of
Lincoln's writings for the Library of America. Harry V. Jaffa is working on a
sequel to his philosophically grounded study of the Lincoln-Douglas debates. I
am working on a comparative study of Lincoln with Jacques Portes of the Sorbonne
and also on the computerization of the entire corpus of Lincoln writings, which
may lead both to a concordance and to authorship studies - and so to a new
definition of the Lincoln canon. Lincoln's legal papers are being assembled at
last for print. A massive update of the standard two-volume bibliography of
writings about him is in the planning stage. Important work is proceeding on
Lincoln, civil liberties and the Constitution. There are always rumblings about
new biographies, and Mary Todd will soon have one. The scholar's work will
continue and will keep changing how Americans see Lincoln and so how they see
themselves.

THE 80 FACES OF ABE Photographs helped make Abraham Lincoln the common man's
chief magistrate, but it took a most uncommon amount of money, and much work, to
hunt down the finest surviving negatives and prints and coax from them, through
modern technology, ''The Face of Lincoln'' (1978). The stunning, detailed new
likenesses of James Mellon's album make even veteran scholars feel as if they
had seen Lincoln for the first time. Humble Abe Lincoln had nearly 80
photographs taken during his Presidency - in contrast to proud Jefferson Davis's
one. But only one daguerreotype was taken before the slavery dispute broke, and
only two other pictures before the year he debated Stephen Douglas; one wonders
to what extent photographs have contributed to the historian's fractured image
of the Civil War President.

That popular prints did aid deification, and therefore also the fracturing, is
shown in ''The Lincoln Image'' (1984), which employs the term narrowly to refer
to engravings and lithographs. This book - by Harold Holzer, Mark E. Neely Jr.
and myself - takes readers back to a time when visual images were rare and
precious, rather than pervasive and frequently cheap as today, and when pictures
of political heroes were given honored places.

There is an identical pair of Currier and Ives lithographs in the book - but
whiskers have been added to one to transform Lincoln into the bearded statesman.
The viewer realizes quickly that the beard is not quite right; Lincoln never
wore anything so thick and bushy. And so we have a metaphor for the work of
Lincoln scholars. If most of them labor with infinitely greater care than the
Currier and Ives artist did, and if the work of some historians is substantially
better than that of others, the collective result is no better than that bearded
Lincoln. One knows it is Lincoln, no doubt about it, and one also knows it is
not quite right. Of course, some scholars with youthful spirit would quickly
add, ''At least not yet.''    G.S.B.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lincoln in his 30's; photo of Lincoln and his son Tad (page
34)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN A NOD BECOMES A DIPLOMATIC ACT

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHEN Bashkim Pitarka, Albania's new chief delegate to the United Nations,
arrived for lunch recently at the French chief delegate's apartment, he seemed
upset to see three United States diplomats.

''I do not shake hands with Americans or Russians,'' the Albanian announced in a
loud voice. ''I have instructions.''

Joseph V. Reed, the American deputy chief delegate offered his hand as ''a
member of the human race,'' but Mr. Pitarka turned his back and the flustered
host rushed off to make sure they would not be seated within snubbing range in
the dining room.

Some of the most delicate exercises in diplomacy involve dealings among
countries that do not have formal relations. The United States, like other
nations, makes use of complicated arrangements, which vary with the degree of
hostility as well as practical needs.

Washington has been represented in Iran, for example, by the Swiss Embassy since
Islamic radicals seized the American Embassy in 1979. Because of Iranian
objections and fears for their safety, no American diplomats work there.

In Washington, Iran is technically represented by the Algerian Embassy but it
operates from offices across town. The United States allows Iranians to work
there, largely to deal with the consular requirements of the tens of thousands
of Iranians in the United States. But the Iranians representing Teheran in
Washington must have American passports or resident permits.

These channels often do not function, however, in part because Iran doubts
Switzerland's neutrality. During negotiations last week for the release of The
Wall Street Journal's correspondent, Gerald F. Seib, the Swiss were unable to
get any response from Foreign Ministry officials. Turkey and Pakistan, which
have good relations with both sides, helped arrange his release.

In Libya, where the United States broke off diplomatic relations after a mob
burned the American embassy in 1979, Belgium represents American interests.
Anti-American demonstrators often march past the Belgian Embassy in Tripoli.

In the case of Albania, which rejects any contact with either superpower, and
some other governments that the United States does not recognize - for example,
North Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia and Angola - no formal relations are conducted
through third countries.

But American and Vietnamese officials meet regularly in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh
City to discuss the fate of Americans missing since the Vietnam War.

Angola is another sensitive case. State Department officials acknowledge only
that ''an informal arrangement with a Western Embassy'' helps protect Americans
there.

In Cuba, however, United States business is conducted by an interests section
under Swiss auspices that operates much like an embassy. It has about 20
American diplomats. Havana and Washington have used their Interests Sections for
negotiations on topics such as punishing hijackers and regulating the
immigration of Cubans to the United States. But some subjects such as the Cuban
troops in Angola are only discussed at higher levels.

In Nicaragua and Afghanistan, although Washington finances and equips
anti-Government rebels, it nevertheless maintains diplomatic relations and
embassies. The top post in Kabul has been left vacant, however, since the 1979
murder of the American Ambassador, Adolph Dubs.

Perhaps the most convenient place for dealings between countries that have
hostile or nonexistent relations is the United Nations, where most countries
keep representatives. Talks leading to the re-establishment of United States
relations with Mongolia last month were conducted there by the American chief
delegate, Vernon A. Walters, and a deputy, Herbert S. Okun, both of whom speak
Russian, the language used by most Mongolian diplomats.

The State Department issues instructions explaining in detail the appropriate
conduct for officials who encounter diplomats from hostile countries. But Mr.
Walters has devised his own system. ''I nod to them twice,'' he says. ''When
they don't nod back, I give up.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gerald F. Seib and wife, Barbara Rosewicz (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HAVOC AT THE 19TH HOLE

BYLINE: By Willaim Ferguson; William Ferguson is the author of ''Freedom and
Other Fictions.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 472 words


STRANGERS IN PARADISE By Lee K. Abbott. 255 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons.
$18.95.

AS in his two earlier volumes of short stories, most of Lee K. Abbott's
characters in ''Strangers in Paradise'' live in the small town of Deming, N.M.
We see them either at home, driven to various kinds of excess by the pressures
of love and sports (golf, in particular, seems to inspire tragic breakdowns), or
confused and frightened abroad as soldiers in Vietnam. Plots tend to overlap, a
peculiarity that often becomes a virtue; it is as if several fields of force
were being directed at a single invisible core of meaning, in a prose at once
exuberant and inventive.

Speech comes easily to Mr. Abbott's characters, whether they are cursing under
fire at Khe Sanh or speaking in tongues in the locker room of a country club.
Communication, by contrast, proves supremely difficult. One of the most
successful stories, ''The End of Grief,'' is about how the shocks of war can
send incoherence ringing down whole decades. A father, terrified that his
draft-age son may be sent to Vietnam, obsessively schools him in every
particular of an uncle's death 25 years earlier in the terrible days of Bataan.
The son realizes he has become his uncle's surrogate: his father is simply
unwilling to lose him again.

Strategies of discourse are always suggestive, often desperately sad, as in the
bittersweet story about a disturbed soldier in Vietnam who chooses a stray dog
as his confidant; under fire, ''faced with the impossible choice between life
and love,'' he finds it necessary to kill the animal to protect his hiding
place. Back in America, as a peripatetic bandit, he invariably includes the ''
Vietnam dog story'' in his holdup notes, and soon petty bureaucrats across the
land - in an image that should please aspiring writers everywhere - are being
forced to read imaginative prose at gunpoint.

''Living Alone in Iota'' is perhaps the least successful of the 14 stories.
Reese, the hapless antihero, has lost his girlfriend; in describing his
buffoonish reaction, the author unfortunately retreats into writerly
self-parodies (Reese's face is ''a moil of desire and grue''). The humor is so
unrelentingly Olympian that it begins to feel unnerving and hubristic.

Echoing at times ''The End of Grief,'' ''X'' investigates the darker side of
family relationships. The narrator attempts to understand a lunatic childhood
experience in which his father, unhappy over a game of golf, destroyed an entire
locker room at the local country club. For the son this bizarre episode
represents the unknowable X of the human soul; in a truly fearful capitulation,
he concludes that he and his dad are the same: ''two creatures made blind by the
same light.'' Whatever else Mr. Abbott's X may be, it surely equals a fiction of
craft and pathos.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 118 words




U.S. to Review Data Secrecy
To keep sensitive information secret, the Pentagon will review data-processing
contracts awarded to foreign companies, an official said. Page A13.

More Local Tax Power?
Cuts in Federal aid have prompted a movement by some state officials to give
wider powers of taxation to local governments. Page A14.

Lopez Wins 35th Golf Title

Nancy Lopez captured the 35th title of her career to qualify for the Ladies
Professional Golf Association Hall of Fame. SportsMonday, page C5.

Unwanted 'Platoon' a Hit
''Platoon,'' a Vietnam War movie that no major Hollywood studio wanted to do, is
the top-grossing film in the country this month. Page C13.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMERY: MONDAY, FEBRUARY 9, 1987

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 980 words




INTERNATIONAL    A3-A12

Deploying ''Star Wars'' elements will be not be decided upon over the next two
years, according to Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who said he was
reflecting President Reagan's thinking.    Page A1

Andrei D. Sakharov sees change in the Soviet handling of human rights but does
not know how far it's going to go. He said in an interview, ''Something real is
happening.''    A1

White House officials knew in 1986 that the United States was dealing with
radical, not moderate, elements in Iran to gain the release of American hostages
in Lebanon, aides to Vice President Bush said.    A1

Leading senators are divided over the propriety and wisdom of the Reagan
Administration's policy of soliciting money from foreign governments to help the
Nicaraguan rebels and other guerrilla groups.    A8

A threat to kill hostages in Beirut came from a clandestine group that kidnapped
three American professors and an Indian scholar last month. The group seeks the
release of 400 Arabs held in Israeli jails.    A8

A hostage's family is 'holding on,' according to the American wife of Alec
Collett, a 65-year-old British journalist working for the United Nations who
disappeared almost two years ago in Lebanon.    A8

In Manila, finding the 'hidden wealth' of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos
is the task assigned to a presidential commission that, in less than a year, has
become in effect the nation's largest conglomerate.    A1

Mrs. Marcos left 1,060 pairs of shoes and slippers behind, according to a new
inventory, including one battery-run pair that glows in the dark. It had been
reported that she owned 3,000 pairs.    A12

A party power-struggle in Britain is under way, as Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher and her opponents position themselves for a general election that could
reshape party politics. The election date has not been set.    A3

Botswana has lived under a shadow of what some call ''demonstration sanctions''
by its neighbor, South Africa, for almost two months. A South African tribal
''homeland'' has in effect demanded recognition by requiring Botswana citizens
to obtain visas.     A4

Hu Yaobang is in a Peking hospital for an undisclosed illness, according to a
Chinese source, three weeks after he resigned in disgrace as the chief of
China's Communist Party. He was said to be ''distraught.''    A3

NATIONAL    A13-16, B12

The cost of medical care rose 7.7 percent last year, or seven times as fast as
overall inflation, according to new Government data that indicate medical
inflation remains a serious problem.    A1

The U.S. insurance crisis is ending as abruptly as it began. Last year,
liability insurance was hard to get because companies, citing coverage
cancellations and sharp premium increases, refused to renew policies.    A1

Teen-agers who mediate conflicts are the mainstay of Project Smart, which has
outposts in six New York City high schools and is part of a national movement to
tap the positive force of peer pressure.    A1

The Pentagon will review contracts on military data processing given to foreign
countries in the hope of preventing leaks of information to foreign governments,
a Defense Department official says.    A13

More local taxing powers for cities are being pressed by state officials around
the country because cuts in Federal aid have so weakened many city and county
governments.    A14

A Miami suburb is getting a facelift by promoting the old instead of the new. An
ordinance adopted last year created special districts within Coral Gables, Fla.,
to encourage development in its Mediterranean style.     A14

A new bridge across the Tampa Bay in southwest Florida, the Sunshine Skyway
Bridge, connects St. Petersburg with Bradenton and Sarasota, making largely
rural portions of the state easily accessible.    A15

Philadelphia's court system is mired in a crisis, plagued by corruption charges
and a growing backlog of cases. Officials say these factors could force the city
to start releasing inmates from jail next month.    A16

A charge of child stealing has been made against an Illinois mother who, with
her husband, was honored by the state in 1982 as ''Adoptive Family of the
Year.'' She has been jailed in Tijuana, Mexico.    B12

'Platoon' is the top-grossing movie in the country this month, showing that
America's relationship to the Vietnam War has changed drastically in recent
years. ''It's touching a nerve,'' said one film executive.    C13

WASHINGTON TALK    B6

A battle over drug fight's cost
They who were Senate chairmen

REGIONAL    A17, B1-4, D11

Crack has stricken families, women and children in particular, since it first
struck New York City's poorest neighborhoods two years ago, according to newly
gathered statistics and interviews.    B1

A child loses mother to crack     B2

Queens' District Attorney is unsure if he will seek a fourth term. That is what
John J. Santucci says after being caught in a whirlwind that has focused
attention on his record and judgment as a prosecutor.    B1

Thieves at Cardinal O'Connor's home ransacked his bedroom, rifled a desk in his
private office and rummaged through several other rooms. Both thieves escaped.
    B1

Jury selection in a civil rights case brought against The Daily News by four
black journalists three years ago is scheduled to begin today. Representatives
of both sides predict a bitter courtroom battle.    B2

News analysis: Transit politics     B2

Landmarks panel faces uncertainty     B3

Salmonella traced in Connecticut     D11

NEEDIEST CASES    A17

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: SUMMARY

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

UNWANTED 'PLATOON' FINDS SUCCESS AS U.S. EXAMINES THE VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1140 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Feb. 8


''Platoon,'' a movie that no studio wanted to make, is the top-grossing movie in
the country this month. Over the weekend ended Feb. 1, the Vietnam War picture
sold $8.3 million worth of tickets at fewer than 600 theaters, an average of
more than $14,000 a theater.

Had ''Platoon'' opened a decade ago, when the script was completed, it would
almost certainly have failed at the box office. Its success shows that America's
relationship to the Vietnam War has changed drastically during the last few
years.

Oliver Stone's script, which detailed his experiences as an infantryman in
Vietnam, was turned down as uncommercial by every major Hollywood studio. He was
finally able to get Hemdale, a British company, to produce it for the low price
of $6 million. Orion, which is distributing the film, put up about a third of
the money.

''It's a smash hit because it's touching a nerve,'' said the chairman of Walt
Disney Pictures, Jeffrey Katzenberg. ''People are ready for it,'' said the
president of distribution at 20th Century-Fox, Tom Sherak.

The quality of the film and the fact that critics are solidly behind ''Platoon''
are certainly part of its box-office success. Academy Award nominations will not
be announced until Wednesday, but a number of Hollywood executives are already
betting that ''Platoon'' will win the award for best picture. Yet any number of
good movies - including Stanley Kubrick's classic antiwar film ''Paths of
Glory'' - have failed at the box office. The delay of a decade has given
''Platoon'' the benefit of impeccable timing.

''If 'Platoon' had been released 10 years ago, people would have said, 'Don't
remind us of our mistake,' '' said the president of marketing and distribution
at Lorimar, Ashley Boone. ''The same thing would have happened if 'Gandhi' had
been made seven or eight years after Gandhi died. No one would have watched the
movie or cared. A lot of things with a historical background are too painful to
address when they're fresh.''

Memorial a Turning Point

''Platoon,'' which was directed by Mr. Stone and stars Charlie Sheen as a
college student who serves as the director's surrogate and Tom Berenger as a
sergeant who has become a killing machine, is an infantryman's-eye view of the
Vietnam War, the first realistic film about the war to be commercially
successful. According to a number of publishers who started trying to sell books
about Vietnam a decade ago, the turning point in sales and public interest came
in 1983 after the dedication in Washington of the Vietnam War memorial in
November 1982.

''In 1978, booksellers wouldn't buy any Vietnam books from me,'' said Richard
Kane, the sales manager for Presidio Press, a northern California publisher of
books on military history.

Robert Smith, vice president at Time-Life books, called the dedication of the
somber granite monument chiseled with the names of more than 58,000 Americans
killed or missing in action in Vietnam ''the key factor.'' The memorial ''ended
a 10-year period when no one wanted to talk about the war or even admit we were
there,'' he said. ''Suddenly it was a subject people no longer wanted to
avoid.''

Over half a million people have agreed to look at the first volume of
Time-Life's ''Vietnam Experience,'' a 23-book series that is sold by direct
mail. Recent heavy advertising of the books on local television stations - ads
show a young boy at the memorial asking his father what the war was all about -
have been another plus for ''Platoon.''

The Berkley Publishing Group has already printed 400,000 copies of a paperback
novelization of ''Platoon'' by Dale Dye. Berkley has sold three million copies
of its 9 or 10 nonfictional Vietnam War books during the last few years,
according to the publisher Roger Cooper. The biggest success was ''Nam,'' an
oral history edited by Mark Baker. ''Those millions of books paved the way for
'Platoon,' '' Mr. Cooper said.

Unusual Ad Campaign

''Platoon'' was released by Orion on Dec. 19 in New York, Los Angeles and
Toronto. Executives at several other studios have second-guessed Orion for not
immediately pushing the movie into more theaters once the company realized what
a box-office treasure it had. ''The people who criticize had no investment in
the picture and turned it down and they're the same people who also criticized
us for opening it at Christmas at all, even in six theaters, because it was such
a down movie,'' said Orion's executive vice president, Mike Medavoy.

One benefit of the movie's slow release is that theater owners are now bidding
competitively for the film, so Orion will get higher film rental than it would
have if the movie had been sold to many theaters before its box-office potential
was recognized.

Orion did none of the usual research about how to sell or advertise ''Platoon.''

''Occasionally in this business you feel you've got something very important,''
said Orion's executive vice president of marketing, Charles Glenn, in
explanation. The movie was originally sold as Oliver Stone's story, with what
the industry calls ''reader ads,'' advertisments with a large block of copy.
There were three or four Polaroid snapshots of Mr. Stone in uniform. The copy
told of his being wounded twice and winning a Bronze Star, and of his making a
movie about ''men he knew and fought with in the country they could not win.''

''The ads legitimized the picture,'' Mr. Glenn said. They made it the equivalent
of many of the Vietnam War books that had suddenly begun to sell so well, the
real story of the common soldier. And discussion of the movie began to appear on
editorial pages of newspapers and on television news programs.

That ''Platoon'' will be a box-office winner is now sure. Cinemascore, a
research firm that does audience surveys on a movie's first weekend, found that
nearly everyone in the audience rated the movie A, including those people who
were dragged along by their companions. The usual score from those who ''just
came along'' is a C plus.

''This picture will work in every hamlet in this country, and nothing works in
every hamlet,'' said Mr. Sherak, of Fox. ''It will work for people making
$65,000 a year and people on a farm in Des Moines. It's like a snowball.''

There is an emotional, almost passionate note in Mr. Sherak's voice when he
talks about ''Platoon.'' It is there in the voice of Mr. Glenn, of Orion, and
Mr. Cooper, of Berkley, and several others - symbolic of men who were in the
Army during the 60's or who marched against the war. They see ''Platoon'' as
neither prowar or antiwar. ''Platoon'' seems to mean both relief and
accommodation.

''Nothing is going to hurt this picture,'' Mr. Sherak said. ''Our country is a
strange country. There's a time and a place for everything. It's taken a long
time for people to be ready for 'Platoon.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Charlie Sheen and Keith David in scene from ''Platoon'' (Ricky
Francisco)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE STAGE: ARTHUR MILLER'S 'DANGER: MEMORY!'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1004 words


THE OPENING one-act play in ''Danger: Memory!,'' Arthur Miller's new double bill
at Lincoln Center, is titled ''I Can't Remember Anything,'' but it's Arthur
Miller's nature that he can never forget. The horrors that haunt his characters
today - the 20th century's police inquisitions, pogroms and wars - are the same
specters that hung over ''After the Fall'' and ''Incident at Vichy,'' plays he
wrote for the first Lincoln Center theater company, more than two decades ago.
What has changed with time is the writer's perspective. In ''I Can't Remember
Anything'' and its companion piece, ''Clara,'' characters of Mr. Miller's
American generation look back at history's cataclysms and their own liberal
crusades to ask what, if any, good came of it all. The answers they find are at
best ambiguous - a moral gray area where once the author of ''The Crucible'' and
''All My Sons'' would have found clear-cut blacks and whites.

As theater, ''Danger: Memory!'' is gray, too, resolutely resisting the efforts
of a high-powered cast to inject drama. While the plays are meant to be casual -
they've been staged in the intimate Newhouse Theater - the writing is studied
and ponderous. Mr. Miller seems to have begun with his themes and conceits, then
worked backward to fashion (and diminish) his characters to fit the
predetermined pattern. Despite the wide disparity of their settings and stories,
the two plays share the same tone and even some specific metaphors (bridge
building) and key props (phonograph records). While that parallelism may hammer
in the author's message, it doesn't make for much spontaneity on stage.

The central character in each play suffers from a case of symbolic amnesia. In
''I Can't Remember Anything,'' the forgetful one is Leonora (Geraldine
Fitzgerald), a wealthy New England widow who jousts over dinner with Leo (Mason
Adams), her and her late husband's best friend. Disillusioned with a
civilization still mired in brutality and lies after all these years, Leonora
retreats into Scotch, reclusiveness and a questioning of the value of her own
existence. Leo, an unregenerate Depression-spawned Communist, gently challenges
his old neighbor by stubbornly refusing to relinquish entirely his hope for the
world.

As night falls in the rural cottage setting, Miss Fitzgerald coaxes Mr. Adams
into a joyous, bumpy samba. Mr. Miller's sly sense of humor also surfaces in
wisecracks about crossword puzzles and Nixon bumper stickers, as well as in
Leo's amused, scientific view of the human race (''All we are is a lot of
talking nitrogen''). But the play fails to deepen our knowledge of its
characters or their differing, equally unremarkable credos. What might have
given this vignette a touch of ontological poignance - the steadily lengthening
shadow of mortality - is compromised by the production. As directed by Gregory
Mosher, the actors seem too young and spry for their roles; hokey atmospheric
touches (a pointless round of candle lighting, for instance) imbue ''I Can't
Remember Anything'' with cloying remembrances of ''On Golden Pond.''

After intermission, center stage belongs to Kenneth McMillan, who, like Miss
Fitzgerald, is an actor of such great authenticity and distinctive presence that
one always finds him compelling, whatever he's up to. Just the same, ''Clara''
is a bit of a trial. While Mr. McMillan is asked to bellow in rage, break into
sudden sobs of paternal grief and, at the end, deliver a lengthy account of a
race riot in the segregated Army of World War II, it's hard to care about any of
it.

''Clara'' is essentially a ''Dragnet'' episode, with middlebrow political
ruminations substituted for suspense. Mr. McMillan plays the father of the title
character, a murdered social worker whose killer may have been one of her
''rehabilitated'' former convicts. An inexplicably combative police lieutenant
(James Tolkan) grills Mr. McMillan for clues, but the father keeps blocking out
details of his daughter's life. Should Mr. McMillan reveal the name of Clara's
Puerto Rican suitor to the police? To do so would be to concede the bankruptcy
of his lifelong political ideals - and to admit that those progressive beliefs
may have helped precipitate his daughter's death.

Given that the detective, a lapsed liberal, proves to be the ideological
opposite of the father, ''Clara'' soon severs all connections with its
ostensible premise and becomes a bitter, unenlightening Sunday-morning talk-show
debate about the continuing validity of Great Society social policy. In the
process, the Vietnam War and the Holocaust are evoked, but, like the
concentration-camp memories intermingled with the Marilyn Monroe episodes in
''After the Fall,'' the heavy-hitting historical references don't add tragic
import to ''Clara'' so much as accentuate its pretensions.

Mr. Mosher places the play on a stage furnished only with a couch and a
surrealistically large pool of blood, trying at every opportunity to find
Pinteresque mystery in the father's pregnant memory lapses and the detective's
enigmatic innuendoes. These efforts are to no avail, however, because the author
can't leave anything unsaid, any ellipsis gaping: sooner or later someone will
say what everything means, and maybe more than once. While Arthur Miller's
admirable voice of conscience remains firm as always, ''Danger: Memory!'' is an
evening in which the pontificator wins out over the playwright. A Look Back
DANGER: MEMORY!, by Arthur Miller; directed by Gregory Mosher; sets by Michael
Merritt; costumes by Nan Cibula; lighting by Kevin Rigdon; production manager,
Jeff Hamlin; production stage manager, George Darveris; assistant stage manager,
Neel Keller. Presented by Lincoln Center Theater, Mr. Mosher, director; Bernard
Gersten, executive producer. At the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, Lincoln Center. I
CAN'T REMEMBER ANYTHING LeonoraGeraldine Fitzgerald LeoMason Adams and CLARA
Detective Lieutenant FineJames Tolkan TierneyVictor Argo Albert KrollKenneth
McMillan ClaraKarron Graves

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Kenneth McMillan and Geraldine Fitzgerald in ''I Can't
Remember Anything,'' from ''Danger: Memory!'' (NYT/Jim Wilson)

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 562 words


A TRIPLE DELIGHT A trio of operas, performed by the After Dinner Opera Company,
awaits the venturesome music-lover today at 4 P.M. at Lincoln Center. The
company is presenting concert versions of three short American works in the
Bruno Walter Auditorium of the Lincoln Center Library, 111 Amsterdam Avenue, at
65th Street.

The composers of the three works are to be present, and are to introduce their
works. The pieces offer several changes of pace. Ned Rorem's ''War Scenes,''
written during the Vietnam War, sets to music moments from Walt Whitman's diary
of the Civil War. Susan Bingham's offering is a tiny opera, 20 minutes long,
that is her musical setting, for soprano and tenor with piano accompaniment, for
O. Henry's ''The Gift of the Magi.'' Herbert Haufrecht's setting of the W. B.
Yeats play ''Pot of Broth'' will close the triple bill.

All three works will be sung in English, and the program should last no more
than an hour and 15 minutes. The appearance of the composers has been made
possible by a grant from Meet the Composer. Concert admission is free, but
reservations are recommended. Call 477-6212 for information.

DANCING BACK Last summer Steve Krieckhaus, a young and energetic choreographer
from Philadelphia, scored a hit at the Dance Theater Workshop with the
performance of his ''Missouri Driver's License.'' He returns at 8 P.M. today and
tomorrow for a reprise at Bessie Schonberg Theater, 219 West 19th Street.

Jennifer Dunning, in a New York Times review last year, said Mr. Krieckhaus was
''an artist of extraordinary gifts and daring'' and his performance ''promises
to be a highlight of the year.''

In his performance, Mr. Krieckhaus dances off walls, chairs and a mattress and
uses his body as compass, sextant and surveyor's transit to map the frontiers
and alter awareness of daily activity.

Admission: $8. Reservations suggested: 924-0077.

SPECIAL FEATURES Opening today at the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street,
is the retrospective of the great Swiss-born artist Paul Klee. For those who
want to learn more about Mr. Klee, the museum is offering a series of four
lectures, after usual museum hours on Mondays, beginning today.

A separate highlight, at 8 P.M. on Wednesday, Feb. 25, will be the appearance of
Pierre Boulez, conductor (formerly of the New York Philharmonic, among others),
composer and now director of a computer music center in Paris, who will address
himself to ''Klee's Influence on a Musician.''

The lecture series, at 8:30 P.M. each Monday, will cover many aspects of Klee
and his art. The first lecture tonight is an examination of ''Klee's Angels'' by
Gert Schiff of the New York University Institute of Fine Arts. Next Monday,
Rainer Crone of Columbia University discusses ''Cosmic Fragments of Meaning: On
the Syllables of Paul Klee.'' On Feb. 23, Andrew Kagan, author of ''Paul Klee,
Art & Music,'' describes ''Klee as Colorist.'' Finally, March 2, Marcel
Franciscono of the University of Illinois speaks on ''Ad Marginem: Paul Klee as
Ironist.''

Lecture admission for non-members is $7; for Mr. Boulez's special program, $10.
Tickets must be purchased at the museum. Those who attend the lectures will be
able to see the Klee exhibition, which will be held open on those Mondays from
6:30 to 8:30 P.M.; on the Boulez evening, from 6 to 8 P.M. For information, call
708-9500.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A Senator Who Put His Country Before Politics

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 286 words


To the Editor:

Frank Lynn's remembrance of Senator Charles E. Goodell (obituary, Jan. 22)
evoked the painful and tumultuous politics of the Vietnam War in the late
1960's. In saying, however, that Mr. Goodell ''joined liberal Democrats in
sponsoring legislation to cut off money for the war effort,'' the seminal event
of Mr. Goodell's 11-year career in Congress was blurred. The bill referred to
was introduced in April 1970, seven months after Mr. Goodell introduced S. 3000,
the first Vietnam disengagement bill. He did so in the face of many appeals and
extreme pressure from people in high places not to begin that effort.

As his principal Senate aide and later campaign manager in the bitter 1970
campaign, I can attest that he agonized deeply over that decision and its impact
upon our military forces in Southeast Asia and President Nixon's ability to
conduct foreign policy. United States troops were falling at the rate of 150 a
week, and the Paris peace talks were stalemated. But the President had
reiterated his pledge to end the war and had begun a policy of de-escalation.
The Senator's decision reaped an intense political whirlwind, which ultimately
ended his career in public life.

This man of talent and quiet courage demonstrated his vision on that September
morning on the Senate floor when he closed his remarks introducing S. 3000 with
the prophetic words of T. S. Eliot:
  We cannot revive old factions   We cannot restore old policies   Or follow an
antique drum.   We shall not cease from exploration   And the end of all our
exploring   Will be to arrive where we started   And know the place for the
first time.

BRIAN CONBOY
  Washington, Jan. 26, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Let's Get the Facts on the Arms Talks

BYLINE: By Gregory A. Fossedal: Gregory A. Fossedal is a fellow at the Hoover
Institution on War, Revolution and Peace, at Stanford University.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1004 words

DATELINE: PALO ALTO, Calif.


Debate swirls in Washington over a pair of arms deals with the Soviet Union. The
public is confused. Read the opinion pages of a few newspapers and you will see
why.

On one side of the page, a respected Government official tells us that the
Soviet Union has violated the second strategic arms treaty, a pact signed by
President Jimmy Carter but never ratified by the Senate, which limits the
quantities and types of nuclear weapons we and the Soviet Union can build. The
result, the official says, is a grave threat to American security.

On the other side of the page, however, an equally respected Senator or
Congressman tells us equally flatly that the Soviet Union has not cheated or
that any such cheating is minor.

Similarly, on any given day strategic expert X assures the public that the
Antiballistic Missile Treaty, a 1972 agreement that prohibits all but a quite
small defense against nuclear weapons, is basically intact.

The next day, strategic expert Y writes that in fact the Soviet Union is
building a large-scale antiballistic missile system that provides a thick
defense of Moscow and its missile fields and a light defense of the entire
Soviet Union.

Interestingly, this very issue of Soviet compliance has been debated for some 15
years before an obscure but vital panel, the Standing Consultative Commission.
Under the terms of the ABM treaty, if either side has a complaint about the
other one's behavior it can bring the complaint to the commission.

To promote a frank exchange of views, these discussions are kept secret. The
public, therefore, remains uninformed. The time has come to let the public in on
the debate. This is particularly important as the President considers
reinterpreting or abrogating the ABM treaty to deploy parts of a ''Star Wars''
defense plan and Congress moves to prevent him from implementing a previous
decision to nullify the strategic arms treaty.

Minutes of the Standing Consultative Commission meetings kept by United States
negotiators should be released. Reports to the Congress on commission activities
should be declassified. Perhaps even the secret record of how the ABM treaty was
negotiated - which Senator Sam Nunn has seen, but the public has not -should be
put out in the open along with intelligence data containing our assessment of a
reportedly vast Soviet Union's ABM capability.

Such a release could settle once and for all the flurry of flat accusations and
flat denials that now thwarts a productive debate.

As early as 1974, for example, the Soviet Union began conducting tests that
appeared to violate the Antiballistic Missile Treaty, especially tests of mobile
missiles and radar easily concealed from future verification. Arms control
enthusiasts say the test issue was ''resolved'' by the commission. Opponents say
that United States officials simply agreed to ignore the violations. Who's
right? It's a secret.

Several years ago, the Soviet Union began construction of a large radar near
Krasnoyarsk that could serve as the final link to an illegal ABM defense. Even
such vigorous defenders of the treaty as the former Secretary of Defense Robert
S. McNamara say the radar is a clear-cut prima facie violation of the treaty.

According to published reports, the matter again went to the commission -
several times. It was also brought up at both of the summit meetings between
President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, a recent report said.

If the commission record reveals plausible explanations for Soviet activity,
President Reagan's harsh rhetoric about Moscow would be discredited. If it does
not reveal such reasons, then the discredited people would be the ABM treaty's
defenders. What can the American people know and when can we know it?

Some may object that the release would undermine trust needed to conduct future
arms control talks. Yet history suggests that if mutual interest in agreement is
strong, temporary frictions caused by the release of sensitive information will
not hurt. Indeed, if one partner has been stubborn, publicizing that fact may
help break the ice. On Jan. 25, 1972, for example, President Richard M. Nixon
released the contents of several years of secret negotiations with North
Vietnam. Prominent Democrats such as Senators Edmund Muskie and Hubert H.
Humphrey reacted enthusiastically.

Within days, the Vietcong announced important concessions in their own hard
line. ''We found them off stride,'' Henry A. Kissinger wrote. ''This was new in
our experience.'' The result was a stronger American negotiating hand that
helped make possible the Paris accords.

The release of intelligence information equally embarrassing to the Soviet Union
also helped push the Cuban missile crisis toward resolution. Did the Soviet
Union refuse to deal after its humiliation at the United Nations? No, it looked
for a way to save face. And the Kennedy Administration, backed by world opinion,
was able to press for the complete withdrawal of Soviet missiles.

Interest in a release of the Standing Consultative Commission's record or a
report on it is bipartisan; it embraces Congressmen on the right as well as arms
control advocates to their left.

My own guess is that the commission's record would document a long history of
Soviet stonewalling. That conviction is based on, first, suspicions about the
Soviet Union and, second, my trust in the press, which surely would have
uncovered by now any plausible explanations the Russians have for their
behavior. But whatever the commission's minutes show, they should be put on the
record. Then and only then can the debate move forward.

Foreign policy, as Senate majority leader Robert Byrd has said, is too important
in today's world to be decided in the dark. Senator Byrd was commenting on a
more famous covert arms deal, the one with Iran. Yet his observation applies as
much, if not more, to one of the most important diplomatic exchanges of this
century: the still secret arms deal with the Soviet Union.

Copyright c 1987 Gregory A. Fossedal

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1987

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words


International    A3-17

The Kremlin pardoned 140 prisoners convicted of anti-state activities, and a
comparable number of cases are being reviewed for possible release, the
Government said, as part of a review of the Soviet criminal code.    Page A1

Soviet dissidents have paid respects, since their unexpected release from labor
camps, to the nerve centers of their movement - Andrei D. Sakharov and Yelena G.
Bonner, and Larisa Bogoraz, the widow of Anatoly T. Marchenko.    A12

Washington applauded Moscow for its decision to free 140 political prisoners,
calling it ''an important step'' and urging further releases as a way toward
improving Soviet-American relations.    A12

Robert McFarlane's sense of failure at living up to his own standards, rather
than his fear of pending investigations, prompted his apparent suicide attempt,
say people sympathetic to the former national security adviser who are familiar
with his mental outlook.    A1

When Mr. McFarlane overdosed on drugs, he was attempting suicide, the police
say, but they said they had ended their investigation because there were no
grounds for criminal charges.  A16

Valium seldom causes death but is commonly used in suicide attempts, experts
said. One doctor said it was ''the best thing for a would-be suicide to take,''
because it can leave a person with another chance at life.    A17

Washington's policy on South Africa has failed, according to a panel appointed
by the Reagan Administration to evaluate America's ''constructive engagement''
policy toward South Africa.    A1

Using Mexico as a U.S. entry point is becoming more common for citizens of
countries as far away as India, China, Yugoslavia and Lebanon, according to
American and Mexican Government officials.    A3

Anxiety over AIDS in Japan has spread, sending Japanese to clinics for blood
tests and prodding the Government to start special programs to keep the disease
in check.    A11

National    A19-24, B10-14

Experts doubt that a 'Star Wars' defense system of even a rudimentary nature
could be put in place in the next decade, as the Reagan Administration is
considering.    A1

'Star Wars' session inconclusive    A13

Eastern Airlines will pay $9.5 million as a fine, the largest civil penalty the
Federal Aviation Administration has ever imposed against an airline, for more
than 78,000 maintenance and safety violations.    A19

Vietnam veterans' death rate within the first five years of their return from
combat to civilian life was 45 percent higher than that of veterans of the same
era who did not serve in Vietnam, a new study said.    A20

A forger fooled the Mormon Church and scores of document collectors around the
country with forged historical papers. He has pleaded guilty of killing two
people to keep his forgeries a secret.    A20

Stanford began a fund-raising drive to raise $1.1 billion in five years, the
largest amount ever sought by an American university from private sources. The
school's president called the move ''audacious.''    B11

Television condom advertisements were advocated by the Surgeon General, C.
Everett Koop, who said condoms were the best protection from the AIDS virus for
those who ''will not practice abstinence or monogamy.''    A1

The Democratic Party chose Atlanta as the site for its 1988 national convention,
calling it ''the hub, heart and capital of the South'' and underscoring that
region's political importance in the Presidential election.    B14

A plea to close eight nuclear reactors of the Three Mile Island design until
they can be made more stable came from the Union of Concerned Scientists, which
also requested public hearings on the plants.    A24

One of Mr. Reagan's old confidants is being brought into the White House to
serve as a senior staff member, a source close to the President said. The
confidant, Stuart K. Spencer, is a master political operator.    B14

The dollar has declined enough against the Japanese yen, Treasury Secretary
James A. Baker 3d suggested. His remarks were seen as designed to put pressure
on West Germany to reach a currency accord similar to one with Japan.    D5

Starting over after losing a spouse early in life can carry added nuances of
tragedy, from guilt to debt to alienation, says to a book by the director of
Sinai Hospital's Widowed Persons Service in Baltimore.    C1

Washington Talk    B10
The politics of smoking
Sarah Brady's fight on guns

Regional    B1-9

Murder charges for 3 Queens youths were part of an indictment unsealed in the
Howard Beach assault case, which also charged nine other teen-agers with crimes
ranging from manslaughter to inciting to riot.    A1

The break in the Howard Beach case occured on the holiday honoring the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., when one of the youths suspected in the attack came
forward, according to the special prosecutor who investigated the attack.    A1

A Brooklyn shelter for the homeless is about to be constructed, Andrew Cuomo
announced. It is a model for other family shelters he hopes to build throughout
New York City and the state.    A1

Builders of a $636 billion hotel and apartment complex on a 13-acre platform
above the Hudson River have been selected. The team is headed by Julien J.
Studley, the real-estate broker and developer.    B1

A new design for the Guggenheim Museum's expansion was presented that is one
floor lower than a previous plan that had incurred the resentment of community
groups and preservationists.    C19

Turmoil for Suffolk government    B1
Urban aid pact in Jersey    B2
3 buildings named landmarks    B2
Two found stabbed to death    B3
Simon reviews pension rights    B3
Experts call Whitehead unstable    B4
Assembly petitions investigated    B6

Neediest Cases    B9

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS OF VIETNAM FOUND TO HAVE A HIGH DEATH RATE

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 840 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10


Within five years of returning to civilian life, Army combat veterans who served
in Vietnam had an overall death rate 45 percent higher than a comparison group
of veterans who served elsewhere in the same period, according to a Government
study about to be published.

The suicide rate for the Vietnam combat veterans in the first five years after
their separation from the military was 72 percent higher than that of other
veterans of the Vietnam era who did not serve there, according to the study.

The study, conducted by the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta,
involved roughly 18,000 discharged Army enlisted men, divided between men who
served tours of duty in Vietnam from 1965 to 1971 and a control group of
soldiers who served in Korea, West Germany and the United States in that period.

The Vietnam veterans consisted of those who served there as enlisted men in
infantry, armor, artillery or combat engineering units for at least one tour of
duty.

Part of Larger Study

The findings, which are to be published Feb. 13 in The Journal of the American
Medical Association, are part of the ''Vietnam Experience Study,'' an
investigation of the health effects of service in Vietnam being conducted by the
disease control centers. This and related studies of Vietnam veterans were
mandated by Congress.

In the first five years of individual discharges, there were 110 deaths among
9,324 Vietnam veterans and 73 deaths among 8,989 veterans who served elsewhere.
When these figures were converted into death rates, there was a 45 percent
difference, the report said, and violent deaths, including motor vehicle
accidents, suicides, homicides and accidental poisonings, mainly drug overdoses,
accounted for much of the difference.

Twenty-five veterans among both groups committed suicide within five years of
their discharge. The study, while reporting that the suicide rate was 72 percent
higher among the Vietnam veterans, did not provide a breakdown of the number of
suicides in each group. The Centers for Disease Control has not yet publicly
discussed the report.

While the finding on violent deaths among Vietnam combat veterans is consistent
with the results of several earlier studies, the new study may be regarded as
especially convincing because of the large size of the sample and rigorous way
that the Vietnam veterans were matched with a control group of similar veterans.

''Our findings and previous studies suggest that the post-service excess in
traumatic deaths among Vietnam veterans is probably due to unusual stresses
endured while stationed in a hostile fire zone,'' the report said.

The Federal scientists concluded that over the first five years after military
discharge there was ''a consistent pattern of elevated mortality associated with
Vietnam service.''

The effect was greater among those discharged before reaching the age of 21, the
study said, and among veterans discharged in 1970 or later. United States
participation in the war continued until the fall of Saigon in 1975.

The report said that ''Vietnam service seems to be associated with an especially
high rate of drug-related mortality among those drafted into service, those
whose jobs were in tactical combat operations and those who served in 1969,'' a
year after the Tet offensive when, according to contemporary accounts, the war
began to seem endless.

'Unique Environment' in Vietnam

The authors of the study, citing infectious diseases, psychological stresses and
possible exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange in Vietnam, wrote, ''Our
findings may reflect consequences of the unique environment and experience of
serving in Vietnam and returning to an unsupportive and sometimes hostile
climate in the United States.''

The data in the new report do not answer the question of whether any veterans or
their offspring suffered from exposure to Agent Orange, which has been the
subject of debate. The study described Agent Orange as ''among the many factors
that could have adversely affected those who served in Vietnam.''

The Veterans Administration has challenged claims for benefits based on exposure
to Agent Orange. Two other surveys being prepared by the disease control centers
are expected to provide more direct evidence on its effects.

''What this study tells us is that there is an urgent need for more studies and
for the C.D.C. to go on with the Agent Orange study,'' said Michael Leaveck, the
communications director of Vietnam Veterans of America, the most aggressive
group pressing for a resolution of the impasse over Agent Orange.

''If an increase in Agent Orange cancers finally is detected, we wouldn't be
seeing it this early,'' he said. ''The studies must go on.''

Difference Declines With Time

The difference in death rates for the Vietnam veterans declined markedly in the
period more than five years after their discharge. For the entire period of the
study, which continued through 1983, the Vietnam veterans had a 17 percent
higher death rate than the control group.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PROSECUTION ENDS IN FILMING DEATHS

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 10


The prosecution in the manslaughter trial over the filming of ''Twilight Zone:
The Movie'' completed its case today with a visit by jurors to an arid Los
Angeles park where the crash of a helicopter amid special-effects explosions
killed three actors in 1982.

The prosecutor, Lea Purwin D'Agostino, has elicited more than five months of
testimony since the first witness took the stand in early September. She has
sought to convince the jury in Superior Court that the combination of live
actors, a low-flying helicopter and special-effects explosions in the same scene
should have seemed a recipe for disaster to any responsible person.

These events came together July 23, 1982, and the actor Vic Morrow, 53 years
old, and two child actors, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee Shinn Chen, 6, were killed
when a helicopter plunged onto them after being disabled by the explosives.

The movie's director, John Landis, whose films have included ''National
Lampoon's Animal House,'' ''The Blues Brothers'' and ''Trading Places,'' faces
charges of involuntary manslaughter, a felony offense, along with Paul Stewart,
coordinator of special effects on the movie; George Folsey Jr., associate
producer; Dan Allingham, production manager, and Dorcey Wingo, the pilot who
flew the helicopter that crashed.

Mr. Landis and the other defendants have asserted their innocence on the ground
that the crash was an unforeseeable accident. #71 Witnesses Called Early in the
trial, the prosecutor screened film footage for the jurors, including shots from
six cameras of the helicopter crash. In one, the main rotor blade of the
helicopter could be seen striking the victims before they disappeared off
camera. Ms. D'Agostino called 71 witnesses in 69 days of trial.

A fire safety officer who was present on the set testified that he had told his
supervisor before the crash that he ''felt certain'' that disaster was imminent.
The safety officer, Richard Ebentheuer, said he considered the helicopter too
close to the explosives.

But later, a special effects man who worked on the film, Harry Blye Stewart,
testified that he saw nothing unsafe about the placement of the key mortar,
which the prosecution contends led to the crash.

His testimony was a disappointment to Ms. D'Agostino, who said his statements
differed from earlier statements he had given to the National Transportation
Safety Board. Federal law prevents proceedings before the board from being used
in court cases.

The trial has been closely watched by many in the motion picture industry for a
precedent that might be set regarding the responsibility borne by directors for
occurrences on movie sets. Mr. Landis is the first motion picture director
charged in connection with an event on a set. Debate over the case has also
raised a concern among some in the industry over curtailment of artistic freedom
in the pursuit of realism on screen.

Prosecutors have said that the flooring of a bamboo hut on the set for the
filming of a Vietnam War scene blew apart when a special-effects explosive went
off, and that debris flew up and caused the tail rotor of the helicopter to
detach.

Defense Cites Heat

The defense advanced an another theory: The explosion in the hut and one in
midair produced intense heat that melted the aluminum skin off the tail rotor,
causing the helicopter to spin out of control. The defense regarded it as a
significant victory when the technician who arranged the blast, Jerry Williams,
testified that the floor of the hut remained ''substantially intact'' after the
blast.

The prosecutor dismissed the testimony as coming from a friend of Mr. Landis.

Lawyers for the defendants also attributed the crash to a special-effects
technician, James Camomile, who they said set off an explosive at the wrong time
and with careless attention to the position of the helicopter. Mr. Camomile
denied the contention.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'Platoon' and 'Fortune' Are Box-Office Leaders

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 10


''Platoon,'' Oliver Stone's Vietnam War saga, remained the No. 1 film at the box
office last week on the eve of Academy Award nominations.

The film, now on 856 screens, drew $8.2 million, raising its gross to $38.3
million in eight weeks of release.

The No. 2 film for the week was ''Outrageous Fortune,'' a comedy starring Bette
Midler and Shelley Long, that took in $5.4 million in its second week of release
for a total of $13.75 million.

''Light of Day,'' starring Michael J. Fox and Gena Rowlands, debuted in the No.
3 slot with $3.5 million in ticket sales.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 978 words




International    A3-19

A panel has uncovered new data linking the National Security Council to private
efforts aiding the Nicaraguan rebels at a time when such activity by the
Government was illegal, according to informants.  Page A1

Prospects for new Congressional aid to the Nicaraguan insurgents are so bleak
that the Reagan Administration may postpone its formal request until September,
Administration officials said.  A1

Walsh widening inquiry on Contras   A9



Moscow's espousal of more openness in Soviet society has met a mixed response
from Mikhail S. Gorbachev's Eastern European allies, including applause in
Poland and apparent unease in Czechoslovakia.  A1

News analysis: Moscow has gained markedly in releasing dozens of imprisoned
dissidents, according to Western diplomats in Moscow. They said the recent steps
have gone beyond token gestures.  A1

Iran's President assailed the U.S. and ruled out any speedy reconciliation with
Washington as mass demonstrations marked the eighth anniversary of the Islamic
revolution.  A1

Captors holding two Americans in Lebanon said they were going on full alert in
anticipation of an American troop landing, while an Armenian group threatened to
end a four-month truce with France.  A18

Robert C. McFarlane's spirits rose as Washington officials praised him. The
former national security adviser is recuperating from a Valium overdose,
apparently in a suicide attempt.  A11

A serious split among Sikhs occurred when the religion's five head priests
excommunicated Surjit Singh Barnala, the moderate Sikh leader in Punjab State,
for defying their political orders.  A5

Mikhail Baryshnikov will not visit Moscow for a three-day conference on cultural
and scientific issues that begins Saturday, he announced. The dancer defected
from the Soviet Union in 1974.  A14

Broadened Olympic eligibility continued as the executive board of the
International Olympic Committee unanimously approved a code to permit tennis
millionaires to play in the 1988 Games. The code must be ratified by the full
I.O.C.  B27

Used cars in Saudi Arabia are increasingly common. The Saudi economy was
profligate during the oil boom of the early 1980's, but four years of weak oil
revenues have made most Saudis restrained.  D1

National    A20-28, B12-23

The armed forces lose arms, ammunition and explosives worth hundreds of millions
of dollars every year through theft, breakage, improper accounting and other
abuses, investigators for the Pentagon and Congress say.  B13

Letting the dollar's value drop in relation to other major currencies to help
repair the huge trade imbalance could revive inflation and recession, according
to currency specialists and economists.  D1

The proposed expansion of Medicare to offer insurance protection for the elderly
against catastrophic illness is opposed by some private insurers. They said
companies are handling the problem fairly well.  D1

Dwindling landfills plague metropolitan areas in most states. In the next decade
they will use up most landfills while few replacement sites are being developed.
Many officials call the problem a crisis.  A20

Pat Robertson muted statements in efforts to broaden his appeal on his first
visit to New Hampshire in three months, sounding more like a Republican
Presidential hopeful than a Christian broadcast crusader.  A20

A Klan leader called the hanged body of a black youth a ''pretty sight,'' two
witnesses said at an Alabama civil rights trial. The leader, Bennie Jack Hays,
denied making the remark about the slain youth, 19-year-old Michael Donald.  A23


The Oscar nomination list was led by ''Platoon,'' about the agony of the Vietnam
War, and ''A Room With a View,'' an Edwardian comedy of manners. Both movies had
eight nominations apiece.  C29

10 possible sites for BMX   A26

Washington Talk    B12 Cynicism on the budget

If Jefferson could see us now

Regional    B1-11

Flight delays southwest of New York are expected to ease under a new practice
effective today. Flight controllers will keep traffic flowing past any of 4
points 7 to 10 miles apart instead of only 1 point.  A1

Spurring the use of condoms has stirred public debate and controversy. People
differ over whether advertising condoms on television and distributing them on
college campuses is sexually permissive.  A1

A drug trial defendant was shot three times in the back while walking with his
wife on the Avenue of the Americas near Eighth Street. The police said that two
men had critically injured the defendant, Pietro Alfano, and a bystander, Ronald
Price.  B3

The 12 youths indicted in the Howard Beach assault have histories that generally
parallel those of middle-class white youths around New York City. The charges
stunned friends, neighbors and employers.  B1

A lawyer for one youth indicted in the Howard Beach assault asserted that the
prosecution had twice failed to respond to his efforts to discuss the case. He
said he had sought to get his client favorable consideration.  B6

Photographs of every building in New York City have been taken to help in
assessing property taxes. The 56-month effort has produced the most extensive
architectural record of the city to date.  A1

A Gothic revival library will soon open in the Metropolitan Museum at a time
when a renewal of interest in Gothic revival furniture seems to be underway.
Collectors say top-quality pieces are rare.  C1

Koch seeks more state aid   B2

Election inquiry assailed   B2

12th casino approved   B9

Cyanide found in Jersey store   B10

Many discount fares sold out   B24

Neediest    B11


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 12, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'ROOM WITH A VIEW' AND 'PLATOON' LEAD OSCAR LIST

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1292 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Feb. 11


''A Room With a View,'' a comedy of manners set in Edwardian England, and
''Platoon,'' an infantryman's view of the agony of the Vietnam War, led the list
of films nominated today for the 59th annual Academy Awards.

With eight nominations apiece, ''A Room With a View'' and ''Platoon'' were
joined in the race for best picture by ''The Mission'' and ''Hannah and Her
Sisters,'' which had seven nominations each, and ''Children of a Lesser God.''

Although the $24 million ''The Mission,'' which pits Jesuits and a South
American Indian tribe against the hierarchy of the Roman Catholic Church, is the
kind of large-scale, epic historical drama that is often favored by the academy,
the other four nominees were unusually low budget. ''A Room With a View'' cost
$3 million. ''Platoon'' was made for $6 million, while ''Children of a Lesser
God,'' from the Tony Award-winning play about a deaf woman who refuses to try to
speak, cost $7 million, and ''Hannah and Her Sisters,'' an affectionate
dissection of love and marriage in Manhattan, cost less than $9 million. The
average price of a Hollywood movie today is $16 million.

There were few surprises in today's nominations. The academy tends to award its
major nominations to serious but mainstream movies that have been at least
moderately successful at the box office. Slightly off-center movies like ''Blue
Velvet,'' a favorite of the critics, rarely get many nominations. ''Blue
Velvet'' got a single nomination, for its director, David Lynch.

STONE NAMED FOR TWO FILMS

 Oliver Stone, the writer-director of ''Platoon,'' won three nominations, while
Woody Allen, the writer-director of ''Hannah and Her Sisters,'' won two.

Mr. Stone, who wrote the script for ''Platoon'' 11 years ago but couldn't get
any studio to make the movie, was nominated for directing and original
screenplay. Mr. Stone will be competing against himself as a writer, since he
also earned a nomination as co-writer of ''Salvador,'' a muckraking look at
Central America today. Mr. Allen was nominated for directing and original
screenplay for ''Hannah and Her Sisters,'' a study of family relationships that
he says was inspired by ''Anna Karenina.''

The other nominees for director were Roland Joffe for ''The Mission,'' Mr. Lynch
for ''Blue Velvet'' and James Ivory for ''A Room With a View.'' It was Mr.
Ivory's first nomination; he has made 17 movies over the last 25 years as an
independent film-maker outside of the Hollywood studios. ''Room'' and the
several nominations last year for ''Kiss of the Spider Woman'' and ''The Trip to
Bountiful'' may imply a new openness to independent films released by
distributors.

Only two of the nominees for best actor and actress came from the five movies
competing for best picture. Marlee Matlin and William Hurt were nominated as an
angry deaf woman and the teacher who becomes her lover in ''Children of a Lesser
God.''

Ms. Matlin, a deaf actress making her screen debut, was joined in the
best-actress category by Sissy Spacek for her role as an eccentric woman who
shoots her husband and then offers him a glass of lemonade in ''Crimes of the
Heart''; Kathleen Turner as a 40-year-old woman who finds herself back in high
school facing the same choices once again in ''Peggy Sue Got Married'';
Sigourney Weaver as the tough leader in a battle against monsters in ''Aliens,''
and Jane Fonda as an alcoholic who wakes up in bed with a dead man in ''The
Morning After.'' The nomination of Ms. Fonda, who has been nominated six times
previously and has won twice, was something of a surprise, but perhaps the
biggest surprise was the failure of the academy to nominate Anne Bancroft for ''
'night, Mother.''

NEOPHYTE IS NOMINATED

 Mr. Hurt won the award as best actor last year as a homosexual prisoner in
''Kiss of the Spider Woman.'' He is competing against Dexter Gordon, a jazz
musician who had never made a movie before, for his role as a saxophonist who is
killing himself with alcohol in ''Round Midnight,'' and Bob Hoskins as a
small-time crook who falls in love with a high-class prostitute in ''Mona
Lisa.'' James Woods was nominated for his role as a journalist addicted to war
and danger in ''Salvador''; his nomination for the highly praised performance
was somewhat unexpected simply because ''Salvador'' disappeared from movie
theaters very quickly. However, the success of ''Platoon'' may have whetted
interest in ''Salvador,'' which has been available on video cassette for two
months. Paul Newman earned his seventh nomination, as an aging hustler lured
back to the pool tables in ''The Color of Money.'' Mr. Newman won his second
nomination, 25 years ago, in ''The Hustler,'' as the same character he plays in
''The Color of Money,'' Fast Eddie Felson. He has never won the Oscar, although
he was given an honorary award last year.

In the supporting actor and actress categories, seven of the 10 nominations, a
larger number than usual, went to performers in movies nominated as best
picture. The nominations point up the ensemble nature of ''Platoon,'' ''Hannah
and Her Sisters'' and ''Room With a View.''

Willem Dafoe and Tom Berenger won nominations as, respectively, good and evil
sergeants in ''Platoon.'' They were joined by Michael Caine as a man bedazzled
by his wife's sister in ''Hannah,'' Denholm Elliott as a rough diamond but
loving father in ''Room'' and Dennis Hopper as the alcoholic father of a
basketball player in ''Hoosiers.'' Mr. Hopper was nominated for this role rather
than for his part as a sadistic psychopath in ''Blue Velvet.'' Only Mr. Caine,
who has three nominations for best actor, has been nominated in an acting
category before. None of the nominations is a surprise. However, performances
that were considered to have an equal chance were Ray McAnally as the Pope's
representative in ''The Mission,'' Daniel Day Lewis as a prig in ''Room'' and
Ray Liotta as a psychopath in ''Something Wild.''

There was one major surprise in the supporting actress category -the nomination
of Piper Laurie for her role as the estranged mother of Marlee Matlin in
''Children of a Lesser God.'' Other nominees included Tess Harper as a pushy
cousin of the leading characters in ''Crimes of the Heart'' and two-time Oscar
winner Maggie Smith as a spinster cousin in ''Room.'' Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio won her first nomination as the sexy girlfriend of Tom Cruise in
''The Color of Money.'' A first nomination also went to Dianne Wiest as one of
the sisters in ''Hannah.''

CANADIAN AND AUSTRIAN FILMS

 Best foreign-language film nominations went to ''The Assault'' (the
Netherlands), directed by Fons Rademakers, the story of a survivor who attempts
to solve the puzzle of his family's murder by the Nazis; Jean-Jacques Beineix's
''Betty Blue'' (France), about a violent woman and a would-be novelist; Denis
Arcand's ''Decline of the American Empire'' (Canada), in which a group of
academics talk about and live out sexual relationships; Jiri Menzel's ''My Sweet
Little Village'' (Czechoslovakia), a comedy about a village of busybodies, and
Wolfgang Gluck's ''38'' (Austria) about the fate of a Jewish journalist under
the Nazis. Neither Canada nor Austria has previously received a nomination for
the foreign-language film award. The most prominent entries passed over by the
academy were Doris Dorrie's ''Men'' (Germany), Suzana Amaral's ''Hour of the
Star'' (Brazil) and ''The Sacrifice'' (Sweden), the late Andrei Tarkovsky's last
movie.

Among the other big winners today, ''Aliens'' earned seven nominations, mostly
in technical categories. Orion Pictures topped the studios with 18 nominations,
primarily for ''Platoon,'' ''Hannah'' and ''Hoosiers.'' The awards will be
presented March 30.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSH, IN MIDWEST, PUSHES IRAN ISSUE OFF A BIT MORE

BYLINE: By RICHARD L BERKE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: SPRINGFIELD, Ill., Feb. 12


Vice President Bush, apparently seeking to deflect the political liabilities of
the Iran arms affair, said today that he had voiced ''certain reservations''
about it as it was developing.

He said he communicated those doubts to high officials involved in carrying out
the policy, but he did not elaborate on what his concerns were. Nor did he say
when he expressed them or whether President Reagan was one of the principals he
alerted.

But his comments were notable because in the past he acknowledged only that
''mistakes were made,'' not seeking to distinguish his role from that of other
Administration officials.'

In another move aimed at showing his independence as he seeks the Republican
Presidential nomination in 1988, Mr. Bush said that in the coming months he
would begin to make clear proposals on a number of issues that might not have
necessarily been advanced by the Reagan Administration.

'A Little Bit of Friction'

''Some will say this approach, or that, is a deviation from the Administration's
policy and I can see places where there might be a little bit of a friction,''
he said. ''But I think the President would understand that, and I think most
people in the Administration would.''

Mr. Bush chose his words carefully today and declined to say which parts of his
approaching policy statements could irritate others in the Administration. He
also refused to say which aspects of the sale of arms to Iran had concerned him,
illustrating the difficult balance he is trying to strike.

Hubert H. Humphrey, when he was Vice President, had much the same problem while
running for President in 1968. Mr. Humphrey was unable to remain close to
President Johnson while demonstrating that he opposed the American role in the
Vietnam War.

Earlier this week, aides to Mr. Bush also tried to shield the Vice President
from the Iran crisis by saying that senior White House officials in addition to
Mr. Bush had known that contacts had been established with radical and not
moderate elements in Iran.

He Swings Through Midwest

The Vice President made those comments at a news conference this morning in
Lansing on a 24-hour Lincoln Day swing through Michigan and Illinois. He did not
mention the Iran affair in his public appearances, except at the news
conference, and he offered few details.

''The key players around there know that I express certain reservations on
certain aspects, but I also see some things in the media that I know not to be
true in terms of my role,'' he said.

The Vice President acknowledged that his popular support had eroded since the
Iran arms disclosures because he was ''closely identified with the
Administration.'' But, he said, ''If I'm going to take the credit for the good
things, then I've got to be man enough to take the associational guilt.''

Mr. Bush said he would not discuss what actions he might have taken last summer
when told by an Israeli official that the Administration was dealing with
''radical elements,'' not moderates, in Iran. The Administration's stated
position is that it would deal only with moderates. A text of the memorandum
confirming Mr. Bush's meeting with the Israeli official, Amiram Nir, appeared in
published reports over the weekend.

'It Does Raise a Red Flag'

At first, Mr. Bush played down the talk of moderates and radicals and said
people were making too much of the distinction. Echoing a White House spokesman,
he said the distinction was ''a question of semantics.'' However, Mr. Bush
indicated that, in hindsight, it was possible that his reaction to Mr. Nir
should have been different.

''In looking back at it, it does raise a red flag,'' he said. ''But it didn't at
the time, frankly.''

''There have been certain disclosures, and then you go back and read things, and
they do take on a different meaning,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And they do take on a
different emphasis.''

In explaining his refusal to address details of the Iran arms affair, Mr. Bush
said he did not have the answers and was waiting for investigatory panels to
reach their conclusions.

He Sees Policy Violation

Although Government documents have indicated that an apparent motivation of the
officials who backed the arms sales to Iran was the trading of arms for the
release of American hostages in Lebanon, Mr. Bush said he was distressed by
that.

''What does trouble me is a perception of swapping arms for hostages,'' he said.
''When you look in retrospect, look at certain testimony, that concerns me
enormously. I still know that the policy of the United States Government is not
to swap arms for hostages, but when I see that the conclusion is that the U.S.
Government is swapping arms for hostages, that is wrong, that is not the
policy.''

While he acknowledged that he had been hurt by the Iran affair in public opinion
polls, Mr. Bush said he was heartened by the response at campaign appearances in
the Middle West. He spoke Wednesday at a Lincoln Day dinner in Lansing, and
traveled to Springfield, Ill., today to lay a wreath at Lincoln's tomb and for a
luncheon speech.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vice President Bush (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Nina Darnton

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1317 words


''THE GOOD FATHER'' stars Anthony Hopkins as a middle-aged man fighting for what
he might call ''male liberation.'' It depicts the fury of a liberal British
publishing executive whose wife has left him for another man and who is forced
to see his 6-year-old child only on weekends.

His hatred of women and anguish over the loss of his son become obsessive, but
finally he is forced to admit that his anger is really against the boy, whose
birth destroyed his marriage. The director, Mike Newell, said his own child was
very young when he made the film. ''I could see how that could happen to you,''
he said. ''A kid is like a steel chisel. It works its way into any crack in a
relationship. But who could admit that the coming of a child may not always be
wonderful, that it may be disturbing and break up things? Most people can't, but
it's true. It's not the only truth, but it was a truth for that character.''

Mr. Newell said the film was also the story of self-involvement. ''None of the
characters in this film are really sympathetic, except perhaps the wife,'' he
said. ''I set out simply to make a modern monster. One is forced often to make
one's characters sympathetic, and it comes out as grey fudge. Well, some people
are monstrous. It's an exaggeration, meant to be a bit like a Ben Jonson comedy,
observable foibles pushed just over the bounds of reality.''

The camera shows a London that is grimy, bleak, depressing. ''It swims in the
water it swims in,'' Mr. Newell said. ''London looks like London looks these
days. It's not so much fun over here right now.''

PRODUCTION MAY INCREASE AMID RUMORS OF JULY STRIKE

Word around town is that several films are being rushing into production at a
less than leisurely pace, in order to finish by July 1, when a Directors Guild
strike may begin. There are fears that it could paralyze the industry. The
contract between the guild and the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television
Producers, which is the collective-bargaining agent of the studios, expires on
June 30th, and although negotiations have not yet begun, both sides seem girded
for battle. Officials at the Directors Guild expect the studios to attempt to
get rollbacks from the guild, especially on the issue of payment of residuals.

If a strike occurs, films scheduled for Christmas release may have to wrap up
production by June 30th or be delayed until a settlement is reached.

Barry Levinson started work on ''Good Morning Vietnam'' almost immediately after
finishing ''Tin Men,'' both for Disney's Touchstone Pictures. He began casting
the new movie while still doing publicity for his last. The new film is to be a
satiric comedy in which Robin Williams will play a disk jockey for Armed Forces
Radio during the Vietnam war.

Another Touchstone film about to begin is ''Big Business,'' starring Bette
Midler and Lily Tomlin. The film is the first in Ms. Midler's exclusive
three-picture deal with Disney Studios.

The story is a zany one of mistaken identity. Two sets of identical twins are
born in the same hospital - one to a wealthy industrialist and his wife, the
other to a poor Appalachian couple. But the girls are misarranged in the
hospital and each family is given a mixed set of twins, which will allow Ms.
Midler and Ms. Tomlin to play both sides of the class divide as the twins grow
up in their respective homes. Shooting is to begin in April in New York.

United Artists is also moving ahead on two big-budget, big-star films. The first
is ''Rainman,'' scheduled to start shooting in late March. Dustin Hoffman and
Tom Cruise are to star, under Martin Brest's direction. Mr. Cruise will play a
fast-talking schemer who finds that he has been disinherited by his father, who
left a million dollars to a mental institution. Investigating, he discovers that
he has an older brother, institutionalized since childhood, who is an idiot
savant. Mr. Hoffman is to play the institutionalized brother.

Another film as yet unannounced but tentatively scheduled to begin shooting in
April is ''Bright Lights, Big City,'' based on the Jay McInerney novel about an
editorial assistant for a New York magazine who loses his prestigious job and
fashionable wife, as he gets caught in a cocaine-induced downward spiral. The
film will star Michael J. Fox. It is directed by Joyce Chopra, with a screenplay
by Tom Cole - the same team that made the critically successful ''Smooth Talk.''
The movie is the first venture from Mirage Productions, the new company run by
Sydney Pollack, the producer-director, and Mark Rosenberg, the former head of
production at Warner Brothers.

If the Directors Guild does go out on strike, films started before the strike
date will not be allowed to proceed, and even post-production work would be
affected, according to Mike Franklin, the guild's national executive director.
Mr. Franklin said that the producers had requested that movies begun before a
certain date be exempt from the strike should it occur. The guild rejected the
proposal. ''No labor organization worth its salt would agree to that,'' Mr.
Franklin said.

FILM EXCHANGES BETWEEN U.S. AND SOVIET

''Come and See,'' the World War II epic about Nazi brutality in a Byelorussian
village as seen through the eyes of a 14-year-old boy, is strong stuff. Directed
by Elem Klimov, head of the Soviet Film Makers Union, it is powerfully and
emotionally anti-fascist, with bleak images and nearly unremitting peaks of
anguish. The film is difficult for many Americans to approach, according to
Gerald Rappoport, president of International Film Exchange, which is
distributing the film in the United States. ''It's now playing in Los Angeles
and New York'' Mr. Rappoport said, ''but it is only doing a fair business - not
what it deserves. It's so harsh and difficult; it shows the atrocities. It's a
true story, but here it doesn't get a large audience. And it doesn't even get
the art audience because they're not as interested in war films.''

The International Film Exchange, which buys Soviet films for distribution here
and sells American films to the Soviet Union, also represents the films of East
Germany, Rumania and Czechoslovakia in the United States.

Mr. Rappoport said that in the last six years the Soviet Union had bought rights
to 36 American films through his company. The Film Exchange has purchased about
68 films from the Soviet Union in the same time. Right now, according to Mr.
Rappoport, there are about 20 Soviet films being shown around the United States,
about half of them at universities, the other half in commercial theaters.

What kind of image do the films provide of their respective film industries?
Although Mr. Rappoport said the Soviet films represented the country's top
films, a look at the list of American films sold to the Russians indicates that
political considerations and inexpensive foreign rights may determine the
choices. Some of the films bought from Mr. Rappoport in recent years include
''The Image Maker,'' about corrupt politicians; ''Daniel,'' about two children
whose parents are executed as spies -based on the case of Julius and Ethel
Rosenberg; ''Under Fire,'' about dirty goings-on in Nicaragua, and ''Hangar
18,'' about a U.F.O. that crashes and is kept a secret by the United States
Government. Other films generally are old ones or are minor movies that probably
have low prices, such as ''Spartacus'' and ''The Adventures of Mark Twain.''

''We're not the only place they get their films,'' Mr. Rappoport pointed out.
''They also do about two major films a year. They've shown 'Tootsie,' for
example, and 'Absence of Malice.' '' ''Tootsie'' starring Dustin Hoffman, is
about an out-of-work actor who pretends to be a woman to get a job in a soap
opera. ''Absence of Malice,'' an attack on journalistic abuses stars Sally
Field, as a journalist who throws suspicion on an innocent man, Paul Newman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

LEHMAN RESIGNING AS NAVY SECRETARY

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 681 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 12


John F. Lehman Jr., the combative Secretary of the Navy, is leaving the Reagan
Administration, the Pentagon announced today.

The surprise announcement came as the Navy's request for two more aircraft
carriers was under fire in the Congress.

No date has been given for Mr. Lehman's departure and no letter of resignation
has yet been submitted, according to Robert B. Sims, a spokesman for the Defense
Department.

Mr. Sims said that Mr. Lehman informed Secretary of Defense Casper W. Weinberger
last Friday of his intention to leave Government service and that Mr. Weinberger
tried to talk him out of it. Mr. Lehman will return to private life sometime in
the spring, according to the Pentagon. There was no announcement of his plans
and no mention was made of his successor.

Mr. Lehman, who has been Secretary of the Navy throughout the Reagan
Administration, served as Ronald Reagan's military and foreign policy adviser in
the 1980 Presidential campaign. Mr. Lehman has been a vigorous and often
controversial advocate of a strong Navy. A skilled bureaucrat, he was successful
in persuading Congress to finance a huge shipbuilding program and became known
as ''the father of the 600-ship Navy.''

An Unusual Announcement

The announcement of his planned resignation was somewhat unusual because of the
lack of an official letter of resignation. Reports of the pending resignation
circulating here this morning prompted the Secretary of Defense to make the
announcement at a scheduled Pentagon news briefing, according to Pentagon
sources.

In the past months, rumors have been circulating here that Mr. Lehman would
resign to head the campaign of Vice President Bush for the Republican
Presidential nomination.

But Pentagon sources said the Secretary intended to return to private business
and that financial considerations played a part in his decision to resign.
Before he was appointed Navy Secretary, Mr. Lehman was president of the Abington
Corporation, a management consulting concern for military contractors doing
business with the Pentagon.

In 1982 the Office of Government Ethics conducted an inquiry into Mr. Lehman's
association with the corporation. At the time Mr. Lehman asserted that he had
fulfilled the necessary legal requirements to sever his connection with the
corporation and denied any conflict of interest. The results of the inquiry were
never made known, but no legal action was taken against him.

Some associates of Mr. Lehman said that he had hoped to be selected to replace
Mr. Weinberger this year and when he learned that Mr. Weinberger did not plan to
leave office in the immediate future, Mr. Lehman decided to do so.

New Navy Strategy Developed

Mr. Sims, the Pentagon spokesman, said there have been no policy disagreements
between Mr. Lehman and Mr. Weinberger. He said that the Defense Secretary
regretted Mr. Lehman's decision.

In addition to rebuilding the Navy, which had been in decline since the end of
the Vietnam War, Mr. Lehman reinterpreted the role of the Navy in any future
conflict with the Soviet Union. Mr. Lehman developed a strategy that was based
on an aggressive use of naval forces in the home waters of the Soviet Union.

Critics of the strategy said it would lead to the destruction of the American
Navy because of the strength of Soviet defenses.

Mr. Lehman was also a vocal opponent of recent legislation that reorganized the
Department of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Mr. Lehman frequently
clashed with members of Congress at hearings on the reorganization, leading to
complaints in Congress that the Secretary was misrepresenting Congressional
efforts at bringing changes in the military.

Several sources in the Government indicated that a prime candidate to succeed
Mr. Lehman is Robert D. Nesen, who was Ambassador to Australia from 1981 until
1985. Mr. Nesen served in the Navy Department as assistant secretary for
financial management from 1972 to 1974. At the time of Mr. Lehman's appointment
as Secretary, it was reported that Mr. Nesen was also under consideration for
the post.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John F. Lehman Jr. (UPI)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BOAT PEOPLE: FRESH FACES, NEW HORRORS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1165 words

DATELINE: PULAU BIDONG, Malaysia, Feb. 12


The story is best told in Nguyen Van Du's own words.

''We were all friends,'' Mr. Du said in halting English. ''We discussed it
together. Hai said: 'If we don't do this, more will die. It is the only way to
save the other passengers.' ''

Mr. Du, Tran Van Hai and 14 others, mostly in their teens and 20's - members of
a new generation of Vietnamese boat people venturing into the moody South China
Sea - are the survivors of a harrowing monthlong voyage that led to a desperate
act of cannibalism.

Theirs was one of two exceptional ordeals in January, refugee officials say. The
survivors of both are being cared for by Malaysian and international agencies on
this island set aside for Vietnamese plucked from Malaysian seas and beaches.

As the original group of 24 passengers on Mr. Du's drifting boat began to die of
starvation, dehydration and exposure, the living decided that they would have to
eat the flesh of a dead companion or perish.

They chose survival. Several days later - on about Jan. 5, although their
recollection is vague - their boat drifted into Malaysian waters near Desaru,
and they were rescued.

A week later, another boat of Vietnamese exiles capsized just before reaching
land, drowning 38 of its 68 passengers, several of them children too small to
survive the rough seas.

''When I reached the shore,'' To My Hue said quietly, ''I saw my husband
unconscious on the beach. I ran along the sand to find my daughter, my nephew,
my sister. They were alive. But I knew that my little son was dead. He was 5. He
was too young.''

'And Still They Come'

Beside her on a sitting-room couch her sister, Phuong, wept silently. Mrs.
Phuong's husband and 12-year-old son had also died. The capsizing was the
second-worst Vietnamese boat tragedy recorded in these waters. In 1978, 154
people drowned near here, also within sight of their goal.

''And still they come,'' a Malaysian official said. ''And still they come.''

The survivors of both January incidents - Boat 688 and Boat 689 on Malaysian
records - have joined more than 9,000 Vietnamese boat people waiting on Bidong
for resettlement abroad. At least another 22,000 are in centers in Indonesia,
Singapore, Thailand, the Philippines, Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Macao and
China. No one knows how many have died, unrecorded, at sea.

The Malaysian authorities allowed this reporter to meet the weakened and still
distressed survivors of Boats 688 and 689 on Bidong, an island normally closed
to outsiders, because refugee officials say the world has forgotten the boat
people. Each year it is more difficult to find them homes.

A Resurgence of Emigration

There are fears that the number of boat people will rise again this year with
the continued suspension of the Orderly Departure Program, a legal process of
emigration from Vietnam.

People processed under this program outnumbered illegal emigrants in 1985, but
Hanoi halted interviews for the program at the end of that year. Vietnamese
previously approved for emigration continued to trickle out of the country
legally through 1986, but the tide of illegal emigrants rose again.

Mr. Du described how he and his friends, all from the central Vietnamese seaside
town of Nha Trang, planned their escape for a month, using a boat belonging to
one of the group who - uncharacteristically in such matters -had charged his
accomplices nothing for the trip.

One of the passengers, Mr. Hai, 25 years old, was the son of a former South
Vietnamese soldier and said he could not hope for a good job because of his
father's past.

Also among the passengers were several students leaving Vietnam because, they
said, they thought neither they nor the country had a future. One of them, Huynh
Thi Nhu Tram, 19, said that she had talked over her decision with her parents
and that they had agreed reluctantly that she should escape.

New Levels of Desperation

''At Dec. 8 midnight,'' Mr. Du began, ''we got on the boat to go to the
Philippines.

''Three days, and the engine is out. I carry only five days' food and water. On
fourth day, I try make a sail from boat wood and nets.

''Six days. No water. I try boil seawater for steam to drink. I use gasoline for
fire. Two more days, no fire, no light.''

Twenty days after the voyage began, according to Mr. Du, a former South
Vietnamese soldier and the oldest member of the party, people began jumping
overboard. Two, including the boat's owner, thought they could swim to an oil
rig. Two others saw fishing buoys and hoped to cling to them, waiting for the
fishermen to return. ''They not come back,'' Mr. Du said. By that time, the boat
had drifted well off its easterly course for the Philippines and was heading
southwest. One passenger began drinking urine. Others drank sea water. ''It
stuck to mouth and throat,'' Mr. Du said. ''They choked. They died.''

That was when the survivors made their decision. ''We all eat,'' Mr. Du said.
Plan Was Almost Perfect Mrs. Hue's vessel, Boat 689, carried several people who
had been trying and failing to escape for nearly a decade. Mrs. Hue, 31, the
daughter of a South Vietnamese colonel, had been imprisoned after one escape
attempt.

The boat's owner, who drowned with seven members of his family, had bought the
vessel six years ago as part of an elaborate plan to make a getaway with the
largest possible number of people. Each passenger promised to pay $2,500 on
arrival; the amount would be deposited in the United States by relatives who had
fled earlier.

The plan was almost perfect. The passengers, all from the Ho Chi Minh City area,
made their way to the port of Bac Lieu on the southern Vietnamese coast, where
they boarded the boat on Jan. 10. The voyage, Mrs. Hue said, took only 56 hours,
almost a record crossing.

''All of us were very happy,'' Mrs. Hue, who speaks good English, said. ''We
thought, we have found freedom.'' Refugee officials say the boat was just off
the Malaysian port of Kuala Trengganu, not far from the seaside commercial
airport, when the accident happened.

Boat Suddenly Capsized

''A plane flew over us,'' Mrs. Hue said. ''The boat owner sees it and thinks it
is coming from an army airport. He is afraid, and decides to anchor.

''But the sea is very rough. Just after he puts down the anchor - immediately -
the boat turns down.'' She gestured, describing the capsizing. ''I couldn't even
talk to my husband or sister. Not one of us had time to say anything.''

Clinging to oil drums, planks and a few life preservers, fewer than half the
passengers were swept ashore by the waves.

Were they sorry they had taken this risk?

''No,'' Mrs. Phuong said, clutching her charity-issue sport dress, more
appropriate to a California golf course than a refugee camp.

''Before we left Vietnam, I understood all the possible dangers,'' she said, her
face drawn and stained with tears. ''I wished then that if my family would die,
we would all die together.

''I am sorry that I am the only survivor.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Nguyen Van Du with other survivors of a voyage from Vietnam,
Phung Phap, Tran Van Hai, Huynh Thi Nhu Tram and Nguyen Thi Thanh (NYT/Barbara
Crossette) (page 4); Map of Indonesia (page 4)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 1987

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1088 words



INTERNATIONAL    3-5

Material from the N.S.C. computer suggests that the secret operations conducted
by the council staff were far more extensive than investigators of the
Iran-contra affair previously thought, officials familiar with the material say.

    Page 1

Shots halted a food convoy in Beirut as the United Nations trucks approached an
embattled Palestinian district. It was the latest setback in efforts to relieve
the siege around the district.    1

Vietnam was told of new horrors after 15 boat people recently ventured ino the
moody South China Sea and survived a harrowing five-week voyage that led to a
desperate act of cannibalism.    1

Protests were called off in Moscow by the family of an imprisoned Jewish
dissident after plainclothesmen attacked protesters again on a Moscow pedestrian
mall.    3

Hungary's more liberal course may have served as an example for the initiatives
recently undertaken by Mikhail S. Gorbachev in the Soviet Union, some Hungarian
Communist Party officials have suggested.    3

Health experts meeting in Nairobi at a ''Safe Motherhood'' conference began an
international campaign to conquer a third-world health problem that has been
largely overcome in the West - deaths of women in childbirth.    5

A bitter struggle in Genoa, Italy, is unfolding over its port. Once the third
city, along with Turin and Milan, in the triangle of northern Italian
prosperity, it has become a place of disappearing jobs and diminishing hopes.
    4

Inquiry in Filipino deaths     3
A Contra chief calls for overhaul    5

NATIONAL    6-8, 15, 28

Martin A. Siegel pleaded guilty to criminal charges involving insider trading
that could subject him to a 10-year jail term. He agreed to give up more than $9
million in cash and assets in civil penalties.    1

Mr. Siegel is a 38-year-old whiz kid who was one of the foremost deal makers on
Wall Street. He won a reputation as an adroit protector of corporations that did
not want to be taken over.    1

A record surge in gasoline prices helped push the Producer Price Index for
Finished Goods up six-tenths of 1 percent in January, the Labor Department
reported, but analysts said it should not be seen as a worrisome sign of
inflation.    1

A signal to other extremist groups has been sent by the award of $7 million
returned by an Alabama jury against the United Klans of America.    6

Gary Hart told the A.F.L.-C.I.O. that he would welcome the labor federation's
endorsement in his quest for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination in an
attempt to mend his relations with union leaders.    7

Howard Baker has almost decided to seek the Republican Presidential nomination
in 1988, he has told supporters. The former Senate majority leader is expected
to declare his intentions publicly by early March.    7

Governor Cuomo added three trips to his planned travels outside New York,
including one to New Hampshire, which will hold the first Presidential primary
elections. The intent seems to be to increase his name recognition in other
states and to test the reaction.    7

More rigorous preflight shuttle tests are being considered by the space agency
because of growing concern about the ability of the vehicle to withstand the
stresses of wind turbulence and other dynamic forces.    15

The N.R.C. will allow an exception to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's
procedures when it permits the Governors of New York and Massachussetts to
appear before it this month to oppose its proposal to ease the licensing of
nuclear power plants.    28

Homeless people in Washington, D.C., survive in the shadows of the monuments and
great buildings that are symbols of the richest country on earth. There are an
estimated 10,000 ''street people'' in the capital.    6

A Navy relic, the carrier Coral Sea, has recently returned to sea after months
of maintenance. Officials are showing off the ship to demonstrate why they want
to keep building costly nuclear-powered carriers.    6

A former Guam Governor, convicted yesterday of bribery and extortion in
connection with favors he performed in office for campaign contributions, could
theoretically receive 130 years in prison and $2.5 million in fines.    7

The V.A. disciplined 33 physicians and other employees of the Veterans
Administration after closing an internal investigation into the acceptance of
gratuities and payments from a drug company.    50

Reagan call brings aid to boy     7
Liberace death report defended    7
Reagan shielded from journalist    8

WASHINGTON TALK    8
Profile: Clayton K. Yeutter

REGIONAL    29-32

Arrests in an apparent Mafia murder attempt were made less than 48 hours after a
defendant in the ''pizza connection'' drug trial was shot on a Greenwich Village
street. Three suspects were seized in New York and New Jersey.    1

An L.I. woman found a dead rare bird in her backyard in December that has never
been seen in flight north of Venezuela. Hers may be the first sighting of the
species, the Azur gallinule, in North America.    1

Sir Rudolf Bing and his new wife, who have fled to Anguilla in defiance of a
court order, are followed by allegations that the bride of the 85-year-old
former general manager of the Metropolitan Opera is not capable of managing her
own affairs, let alone his.    9

A halt in grants to religious schools was ordered by New York State Comptroller
Edward V. Regan until a Federal court decides whether the special
''members-item'' aid violates the constitutional principle of separation of
church and state.    29

A West German freighter rescued 25 people, 24 men and a woman, from a stricken
Turkish merchantman 720 miles east of New York at the heart of a winter storm
400 miles wide. Three other seamen were lost.    29

A reputed Sicilian Mafia ring is split into two warring factions and the
tensions are growing, according to investigators who have charged the group with
smuggled nearly a ton of heroin and cocaine into the United States.    31

Pain yields friendship for two    29
Coping with Hudson growth    30
Morale down at Eastern Airlines    30
Simon shifts his pension plan    31
Cocaine found in dead suspect    31

NEEDIEST CASES    15

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 14, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 445 words


Questions appear on page 10.

1. A new inventory of Malacanang Palace in Manila has determined that Imelda R.
Marcos, wife of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines, owned
more than 1,060 pairs of shoes and slippers, including one battery-equipped pair
that glows in the dark.

2. Water rights.

3. The shorter the distance Mr. Griffith covered between his pursuers and the
car that hit him, the stronger the basis for a murder charge, according to some
legal specialists.

4. That an Israeli official had told Mr. Bush last July that contacts were under
way with radical, not moderate, elements in Iran to gain the release of American
hostages in Lebanon.

5. Miss Oates's attempt to write a book under a pseudonym was discovered before
the book's publication.

6. Air traffic controllers are using four radio checkpoints to keep traffic
flowing, instead of a single checkpoint that has existed.

7. Mr. McFarlane's sense of failing to live up to his own standards.

8. By winning 35 times, Ms. Lopez has automatically qualified for selection to
the Ladies Professional Golf Association Hall of Fame.

9. The request is expected to coincide with the completion of potentially
embarrassing investigations into the Iran-Nicaragua affair by Congressional
select committees and a special prosecutor.

10. In a project intended to provide information for use in assessing property
taxes, the City Finance Department hired photographers to take pictures of every
building in the five boroughs, as well as every vacant lot.

11. The selection of Atlanta over Houston was in large part determined by
election results last November, when Georgia Democrats captured a Senate seat
and Texas Democrats lost a governorship.

12. Illegal aliens who are not eligible for legal status under the new
immigration law. A relatively liberal policy that protects refugees from certain
countries.

13. Donald Trump, the developer, paid $100,000 to $150,000 for the parade.

14. The granting of pardons to dozens of prisoners convicted of subversive
activities. Protests concerned the continued detention of one dissident, Iosif
Z. Begun, who officials said was not released because of his refusal to sign a
required statement renouncing future illegal activity.

15. When the script was completed a decade ago, every major Hollywood studio
rejected it as uncommercial, thinking the American public was not ready for a
film about Vietnam.

16. Zaire has a wider population of AIDS victims than the United States, and
wages there are low enough to permit tracking of thousands, a task that would be
prohibitively expensive in this country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: QUESTION

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHANGING TIMES IN TRENTON

BYLINE: By VICTORIA WHITE

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 2, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1289 words

DATELINE: TRENTON


IN 1985, The Trenton Times dropped the ''Trenton'' and became, simply, The
Times, a move intended to show that the paper was not for Trenton only.

Trenton, after all, was the city that, since the inception in 1945 of The
Times's competitor, The Trentonian, had steadily thrown its support toward the
upstart tabloid and in 1982 given The Trentonian the daily circulation edge it
still enjoys. (As of last March 31, The Trentonian's daily circulation was
67,310 and its Sunday circulation, 63,244; The Times's daily circulation was
62,683, and on Sundays, 81,009.) Today, Richard Bilotti, publisher of The Times,
would argue that the momentum was on his side, buoyed by what he said was stable
new ownership and a commitment ''to be completely community oriented,'' a
commitment sometimes lacking in previous incarnations.

Sold last December by the Allbritton Communications Company to the Newhouse
newspaper chain, The Times is now under its third owner this decade; however,
for the first time in its history, the change of ownership does not spell a
radical change of direction.

Mr. Bilotti, who said he had spent his three years at The Times ''developing our
personality as a strong local newspaper,'' and the executive editor, Linda Grist
Cunningham, have remained in place since the sale.

Characteristic of the Newhouse hands-off management style, Donald E. Newhouse, a
president of the Newhouse chain, said in a recent telephone interview:

''There will only be changes if Mr. Bilotti wants to make changes.''

Asked how a Newhouse-owned Times would differ from its predecessor, Mr. Bilotti
said:

''I think the difference is that Newhouse is solely interested in newspapers and
Allbritton is more diverse in its approach. Newhouse is a strong newspaper
family. Because of that, there's a lot more expertise that can be brought to our
paper.''

Mr. Bilotti said that, in his tenure as publisher, he had been developing plans
for the paper that were not being altered by Newhouse.

''We're trying to become the newspaper of record and dominancy in the
Princeton-Trenton area,'' he said. ''The area is growing up Route 1. There is an
awful lot of growth to be had here in both advertising and circulation.''

Today's Times evolved from a rocky past. The Washington Post Company bought the
paper in 1974 from the Kerney family, which had owned it for 71 years.

The Post publicly resolved to turn the paper into the state's most influential
publication, fully expecting to demolish The Trentonian in the process. What
happened, instead, was that, during the 1970's, The Times lost 11,500 daily
readers and The Trentonian gained 13,000.

The Post's chairman, Katharine Graham, once said that her experience with The
Times was her ''Vietnam.''

A newpaper industry analyst, who did not wish to be identified, said that The
Post was ''committed to making it a Washington Post group paper, a really fine
paper.''

''The Post's mission was a nice idea,'' he said, ''but it was the wrong place.''

''The Post came in from way out of town and totally misjudged the area that they
were in,'' said Jerome Aumente, director of the Journalism Resources Institute
of Rutgers University.

''They brought cosmopolitan values that were more reflective of Washington than
of Trenton. It was simply unrealistic. When you look at the demographics of
Trenton, it's basically a readership that is very much local and urban.''

Wilson Barto, city editor of The Trentonian, who worked at The Times under Post
ownership, said:

The Post ownership ''proceeded to go farther afield for stories in areas where''
the wire services ''could do so much better, to the extent that they abandoned
certain sections of the local coverage.''

The Times, he added, ''moved much more local under Allbritton.''

Although Allbritton may have got a better handle on who its readership was, the
company otherwise had an inauspicious beginning.

Immediately after it purchased The Times from The Washington Post in 1981, it
cut the 80-member news staff to 56 and then to a low of 52. In 1982, the company
dismissed a business reporter for disobedience; he had failed to use verbatim a
press release from a local advertiser in financial trouble, as ordered.

Although Joe L. Allbritton, chairman of the company, said that management had
made a mistake in issuing the order, the reporter was not rehired.

A quarter of the news staff left the paper over the first few weeks of 1982,
troubled by what they said was business office interference with the news
operations.

''They were awful,'' Mrs. Cunningham said of the first couple of years under
Allbritton. Brought in as executive editor shortly after the purchase, she said
that, during her first couple of years at the paper, she woke up each morning
wondering ''what crisis we're going to have today.''

''Morale was very low,'' Mrs. Cunningham said. ''People were shell shocked. They
had been operating under a very different kind of fashion.

''The paper was wrenched into becoming what the paper had traditionally been,
covering local, regional and state news as a priority, rather than national and
international news. Obviously, the layoffs had a lot to do with making people
uneasy.''

From the early low of the Allbritton years, the situation seems to have
improved. The paper's news staff now stands at 85, and Mr. Bilotti said that an
incident such as the business reporter's dismissal ''would never happen'' if he
had been publisher.

''The editorial and advertising departments are completely separate,'' he said.
''Advertisers don't buy the editorial department.''

The ''Trenton'' was dropped from the name when the paper started producing
editions specifically for the Trenton, Princeton and Burlington areas.

''We knew that we needed to expand our entire concept,'' Mr. Bilotti said.

Expanding the concept could result in expanded circulation and advertising
revenues.

''It could conceivably be a gold mine of a newspaper,'' Mr. Aumente said.

Trenton, he said, ''is at one end of an amazing growth corridor'' that extends
to Princeton.

The challenge, Mr. Aumente said, will be for The Times ''to pull it off without
alienating its hard-core central city readership, but coming up with enough
editions and enough coverage around Princeton.''

He said, however, that The Times was not alone in looking at the Princeton
corridor. ''A really good newspaper fight'' is developing there, he asserted.

''Newhouse is not going to make the mistakes that The Post did,'' Mr. Aumente
said. ''They know how to understand a local population. They basically let their
papers blend in with the surroundings.

''I'm sure that Newhouse went in there with the notion that they're going to
dominate the market. I'm sure they'll give The Trentonian a run for the money.''

What additional changes are in store for The Times under Newhouse remain to be
seen.

Mr. Bilotti said he would announce some changes later this month, but that he
''would prefer not to talk about them.''

''The paper has been so schizophrenic over the years,'' Mrs. Cunningham said. It
is a factor she believes is responsible for The Trentonian's daily circulation
edge over The Times.

''We out-write, out-report, out-photograph and out-edit them every day,'' Mrs.
Cunningham said. ''But there's something that says, 'I've always read this
newspaper and it's never been ugly to me.'

''We've come a long way in the last couple of years. What Newhouse brings to us
is the sense of security and stability. Now I can make five-year plans and feel
very comfortable, not worry about a change in ownership or direction.

''Whatever The Times is today, it's going to continue to be tomorrow.''

But, added Mrs. Cunningham, ''it may be better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Linda Grist Cunningham, executive editor of The Times

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
'AMERKIA' - SLOGGING THROUGH A MUDDLE

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1638 words


The 14 1/2-hour production of ''Amerika,'' beginning a weeklong run tonight at
9, has been a costly exercise for the ABC Network division of Capital Cities/ABC
Inc. In dollars, the mini-series, set in a Soviet-occupied United States in
1997, has added up to at least $40 million, or somewhere around $2.8 million per
49-minute (before commercials) hour. In terms of corporate image, the network
is, with good reason, being forced to fend off charges that the project
represents a cave-in to right-wing interests who loudly objected to the
antinuclear message of ABC's ''The Day After.''

Purely on the level of television drama, of popular entertainment, ''Amerika''
is a staggering muddle, a fill-in-the-blanks hodgepodge that is likely to leave
observers on most points of the political spectrum fuming. And there is an
overriding irony: Designed as a call for a resurgence of the American spirit, of
the sacrifices that made this country great, ''Amerika'' was made in Canada
-because it's cheaper that way.

First, a bit of background. When the three-hour film ''The Day After'' was shown
in 1983, assorted fringe protests prompted ABC to follow the broadcast with an
80-minute ''Viewpoint'' panel discussion for ''balance.'' One of the guests,
Henry Kissinger, called the movie ''simple-minded.'' He had a point. One could
only wonder what all the fuss was about.

Around the same time, a neoconservative novelist, Ben Stein, suggested in a
newspaper column that, for further balance, the network might consider a movie
that ''would be about a few days or weeks in the life of several American
families after the Soviet Union has taken over America.'' Mr. Stein received a
''quit-claim fee'' from ABC for the idea and Brandon Stoddard, then the
president of ABC Motion Pictures and now president of ABC Entertainment,
developed the basic scenario that became ''Amerika.'' Donald Wrye was offered,
and understandably accepted, the triple-threat position of executive producer,
director and writer.

In the past, Mr. Wrye has been associated with TV films that were impeccably
''liberal'': ''Heart of Steel,'' about a steelworker facing the horror of
unemployment, and ''Fire on the Mountain,'' about a landowner fighting to hold
on to property wanted by the Army for a missile base. But in ''Amerika,'' Mr.
Wrye was confronted with Mr. Stoddard's ready-made concept: ''What would happen
if the Soviets were to occupy the United States?''

And therein lies the fatal flaw of ''Amerika.'' The root idea - that the United
States would simply crumble from within because of a national moral flabbiness -
is monumentally implausible. ''The Day After,'' whatever its artistic quality,
at least dealt with tangible realities. There are indeed nuclear stockpiles
hovering over our lives. There have been colossal nuclear accidents. And the
possibility of a nuclear holocaust must be confronted. But ''Amerika'' asks us
to believe that our country was taken over by the Soviets in 1986 (yes, last
year) in a bloodless coup - the few revealed details are bewildering - primarily
because the bulk of the American population had lost its moral fiber, its will
to fight for freedom. Rubbish. This is the kind of Armageddon vision nurtured by
those who find men in long hair or women in short skirts threatening.

As this column was being written a few days ago, I had seen eight hours of the
program; ABC still hadn't made available for review the final six hours of it.
But a novelized version of the script, entitled ''Amerika: The Triumph of the
American Spirit,'' has been published in paperback by Pocket Books, and I was
able to establish that the rest of the project will contain few surprises. It is
all heavy slogging.

At the center of the story is the Milford family, heroic Nebraskans with a
domestic pedigree of several generations. Devin (Kris Kristofferson), a Vietnam
veteran and a former Presidential candidate, is just being released from a
''gulag'' where he has been held as ''an enemy of the people.'' His father Will
(Ford Rainey) is bitter about the family farm being reduced to ''only 50 damn
acres'' and blames Devin for bringing the Russian scourge upon the land. His
sister Alethea (Christine Lahti) is caught in a love-hate, sadomasochistic
relationship with an East German named Helmut (Reiner Schoene), leader of the
local ''peace-keeping'' forces that operate under a United Nations flag. Devin's
former wife Marion (Wendy Hughes), a feminist type who has betrayed him, is
having an affair with an elderly, courtly Russian general. And that's only for
starters.

Also living in Milford is Peter Bradford (Robert Urich), Devin's boyhood friend
from more humble social circumstances. Practical Peter collaborates with the new
authorities in an effort to make the best of things. Meanwhile, his wife Amanda
(Cindy Pickett) becomes increasingly more dubious about her husband's strategy
and begins to think fondly once again about her first love, Devin Milford.
Weaving in and out of these lives periodically is the elegant, sophisticated
Russian Col. Andrei Denisov (Sam Neill), who, when not ruminating endlessly on
the admirable ramifications of the American dream, is engaging in a torrid love
affair with the young actress Kimberly (Mariel Hemingway), who is committed to
what has become underground theater. Eugene O'Neill? Tennessee Williams? No, we
first see Kimberly in ''The Fantasticks,'' which presumably will keep on running
no matter what the world comes to. Needless to say, given the time, money and
intense effort that has gone into ''Amerika,'' the production does contain a few
considerable assets. While several members of the cast - especially Mr.
Kristofferson, long a vocal protestor against nuclear arms - have publicly
expressed reservations about appearing in the film, the nervous concern seems to
have given some of the performances an extra edge. Mr. Kristofferson gives a
fine, strong performance that takes on Lincolnesque dimensions. And Mr. Neill as
the suave Russian Colonel Denisov just about walks off with the mini-series,
bringing authority and charm to every scene he steals. Ms. Hemingway's actress
is a bit of inconsequential fluff, but Ms. Lahti and Ms. Pickett are splendidly
solid, making two rather odd women genuinely sympathetic. Add this to the
effectiveness of some of the more emotionally choreographed scenes - the parade
that ends Episode Two is a heart-tugging display of flag-waving patriotism - and
''Amerika'' clearly can claim a decent share of dramatic assets. But getting
through the enormous glut of stereotypes and preachifying dialogue that surround
them will tax even the most willing suspenders of disbelief. (The only real
villain, incidentally, is the East German named Helmut; the Russians on display
are positively enlightened sorts, ashamed of the ''hotheads'' back in the
Kremlin.) While the viewer gets occasional, mystifying reports of the Soviets
dealing with problems in other parts of the globe, from Afghanistan to Alaska,
the story sticks to locales in Nebraska, Washington and Chicago. Will Devin be
able to lead the people against Peter's compromise for a decentralized and thus
fatally weakened America?

Wriggling under a barrage of pre-broadcast criticism, Mr. Wrye insists that
''this is not a picture against socialism or for capitalism - it's
totalitarianism versus democracy.'' But, trapped in his concept, he cannot avoid
situations carrying messages that are decidedly puzzling. Indeed, his America of
1997 bears an uncanny resemblance to the America of 1987. There is high
unemployment, drug and alcohol addiction, homeless on the streets foraging for
food, and farmers complaining about how they worked hard all their lives for
nothing. The surface message of ''Amerika''? It's all the Russkies' fault.

Meanwhile, the key images keep dredging up other associations. Victims wired for
brainwashing look like audiences recruited by television to test new shows.
Shantytowns being demolished by tanks resemble scenes from Soweto. And when
someone remarks that sports in this new society are being used for bread and
circuses, who cannot help remembering David Wolper's extravaganza opening for
the 1984 Summer Olympics.

In fact, after a while, we begin to wonder if Mr. Wrye and Mr. Stoddard, in
trying to please everybody, aren't turning intentionally ''subversive.'' Some
may well note that this fictional overthrow of America presumably takes place
after six years of the Reagan Administration, which prides itself in restoring
national pride. John F. Kennedy is the only President of this century whose
portrait is glimpsed in passing, clearly with admiration. One character in the
film, a collaborator formerly with J. Edgar Hoover's F.B.I., explains in the
novel that ''the ideology at the top might in theory be different, but in
practice, one dictator was like another.'' And in one of the culminating scenes
in the script, the noble Wilfords get together with the ordinary folk to sing a
medley of songs that includes ''This Land Is Your Land,'' ''Blowin' in the
Wind'' and ''We Shall Overcome.'' It is hardly a repertory to sooth the
suspicions of, say, Jesse Helms.

In the end, ''Amerika'' was made by people who couldn't be less interested in
leftist or rightist politics. They are entertainers interested in grabbing an
audience, whether it be with the regular whippings in ''Roots'' or the
trivialized sufferings in ''Holocaust.'' With ''Amerika,'' they got caught in a
political crossfire that seems to have left them genuinely stunned. After all,
goes the argument, they meant well. I suspect that as the project unfolded, some
of the original material was fudged in an effort to assuage assorted protestors.
It is difficult to come up with any other explanation for such a massive,
perplexing muddle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ford Rainey in scene from 'Amerika'

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'I DROP BOMBS. THAT'S MY JOB'

BYLINE: By Tom Ferrell; Tom Ferrell is an editor of The Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 987 words


THOSE WHO FALL By John Muirhead. Illustrated. 258 pp. New York: Random House.
$18.95.

PEOPLE who have been in battle have a claim on our attention, as the Vietnam
veterans keep insisting. This is not because we are grateful, or even because we
should be. There's a terrible disproportion between risk and gain, increasing
with time. The Americans in a World War I cemetery lost all they had to lose,
but it would be a bold and speculative accountant of history who might try to
show just how we are better off in 1987 for men who died very young in 1917.

John Muirhead isn't dead, though men were killed in his plane and more than
enough airmen went down in flames before his eyes. He too has trouble defining
his claim on our attention. This is how ''Those Who Fall'' begins:

''I suppose I am like most men who soldiered for a time. I think that something
unusual happened to me; some particular meaning was revealed to me so I should
set it down. Men have been boring their wives, their children, and other men
with these kind of stories from Marathon through Chickamauga, and I'm no
different from the lot. Having survived it all, I can't leave well enough alone,
but must ponder on it and remember and talk at least about one part of it that
was, I think, a kind of glory.''

Mr. Muirhead, whose first book this is, is now a retired engineer. In early 1944
he was a B-17 pilot based near Foggia, Italy, flying missions up the Adriatic
and over the Alps to targets like Regensburg, Munich and Wiener Neustadt. For
combat soldiers, the men of his heavy bomber group enjoyed reasonable material
conditions: hot meals, dry beds in which they could safely sleep, even hot water
at times. Then they would rise, before dawn, to start a long day's ride over an
armed and hostile industrial society, 10 men in a contraption 75 feet long and
weighing not all that much more than a New York City bus.

The chief hazards were fighters - Germany still had at that time enough planes,
pilots and fuel to mount a vigorous defense - and flak. ''We edged past Pola,''
Mr. Muirhead writes, ''and were saluted with a barrage of flak that for all but
a few bursts fell short of the low-left squadron. Three stray shells exploded in
the center of the formation. I could see the orange flame in the middle of the
black puffs. Two successive bursts erupted off the tip of our right wing and
magically an array of star-shaped holes appeared in our windshield. . . . It
never seemed to us that the flak came from anything on the ground. Not from guns
that men fired. Flak came from the sky itself; it blossomed there.'' Things got
rapidly worse and stayed worse for hours; on this trip to Regensburg, a
particularly horrible one, Mr. Muirhead's left waist gunner was killed, one
engine was shot out and his group lost 11 of 21 planes.

Fear and self-induced amnesia became the poles of Mr. Muirhead's service life.
He avoided knowing the other members of his crews. He tells us, repeatedly, that
he forgot why the war was being fought and didn't want to know. ''I work in this
little parish,'' he tells a nonflying officer friend. ''I'm employed to fly a
bomber from here to there. I drop some bombs there, and then I come back here -
if I'm lucky. That's my job; I'm used to it.''

On June 28, 1944, he was shot down over Bulgaria, surviving with most of his
crew. Defeat brought a kind of relief, but apparently not only because capture
enhanced his chances of living out the war. ''Peace and comradeship,'' he
writes, could now replace professional relations among his crew and his new
acquaintances in captivity. Though he nowhere says so, I suspect he was glad to
see his responsibility diminished. Another pilot's error in formation that had
destroyed two B-17's and 20 men returns oppressively to his memory several times
in his narrative.

His P.O.W. camp was atop a hill, with splendid views; but life in it was very
lousy, literally. Also hungry and unmedicated, though it isn't clear that his
Bulgarian captors were in much better case; the Germans had stripped their
unfortunate ally to support their own military machine as their situation
deteriorated on both fronts. In September, with the Russians massed on the
Bulgarian border, the camp commandant opened the gate and released the
prisoners. What happened after that Mr. Muirhead doesn't say. WE haven't been
bored; the battle stuff has been keenly drawn, the terror and desperation, some
of it quiet, are as real as can be. There's a lot of soldierly helling around
and a lot of funny obscene conversation, funny in the way reflex obscenity can
be when it supplants or augments official military jargon (there's also a lot of
effortful, quasi-poetic writing, much of which deserves good marks for trying).
And there's enough nuts-and-bolts matter about caring for planes and running the
squadron to fix the whole tale solidly in the slot of 1944 material technology.
All excellent of its kind, and it is a kind, the kind that feeds little
bookstores and catalogue houses specializing in ''militaria'' and
''aeronautica.''

But what about the glory? Promised at the start, it begins to glimmer in the
P.O.W. camp when the men win a tiny victory over toilet regulations. ''To endure
we sought to win such trifles to measure the day. We had become aliens of the
poorest kind, and we had to find more than bits of bread to live on. . . . The
last hour, the last minute, the last second of the last day, would come to pass,
opening the way for us. That would be the moment of our glory, our
long-remembered glory.'' And so it proved, when Mr. Muirhead and two comrades,
with four legs among them, walked out the prison gate and across their hilltop -
a victory parade without a band. Military memoirs don't dare to dress themselves
in glory much any more, and maybe you had to be there, but Mr. Muirhead has the
courage to trust his memories. I'm convinced he was there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By Patricia T. O'Conner

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1004 words



THE SACRED COW AND THE ABOMINABLE PIG: Riddles of Food and Culture, by Marvin
Harris. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $6.95.) Hindus won't eat beef, while Jews
and Moslems avoid pork and Americans quake at the idea of consuming cockroaches,
thought a delicacy in some cultures. Marvin Harris examines the reasons people
eat what they do in this book, originally titled ''Good to Eat.'' In 1986 our
reviewer, Richard Flaste, found it ''marvelously readable.'' While the author's
point of view (people eat what they do because of an acute sense of costs and
benefits) can be exasperating, he said, ''Mr. Harris writes well and has a good
ear for stories.''

AGAINST INTERPRETATION: And Other Essays, by Susan Sontag. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, $7.95.) A collection of early-1960's essays and reviews on art,
litera-ture, film and drama, ''Against Interpretation'' is ''a ponderable,
vivacious . . . and quite astonishingly American book,''

Benjamin DeMott said here in 1966. He called it ''a vivid bit of living
history.'' The same publisher has reissued Susan Sontag's novel DEATH KIT
($7.95), in which a 33-year-old businessman is convinced he has killed a
railroad worker while his train was stopped in a tunnel. In 1967 Mr. DeMott said
the author ''probes the relations between sex and violence, and even ventures .
. . to confront those riddling issues of perception, objectivity and freedom.''

GERALD'S PARTY, by Robert Coover. (Plume/New American Library, $7.95.) Robert
Coover offers, on the surface, a sort of parlor mystery - a gathering of
characters at a party, a murder and a police inspector. But what he has done,
Charles Newman said here in 1985, ''is to take all the elements of such
conventional escapist literature, stand them on their head and create a
literature of absolute affront.'' The plot accumulates randomly, the characters
become less clear as they go along, and no one is allowed to finish a sentence
or an action uninterrupted. The resulting texture is ''technically fascinating
and conveys perfectly the hallucinatory disconnectedness of a drunken party.''

THE SIEGE: The Saga of Israel and Zionism, by Conor Cruise O'Brien.
(Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) This history of Zionism, Israel and the
Arab-Israeli conflict can be of value to the scholar and specialist as well as
the general reader, Elie Kedourie said here in 1986. The author, he said, has a
historian's instinct, and employs ''a critical and discriminating mind and a
shrewd practical judgment.''

A CAGE OF ICE, by Duncan Kyle. (St. Martin's, $3.95.) The C.I.A. airlifts a team
into the Arctic to rescue a Russian scientist held prisoner at a remote, frozen
outpost in the Soviet Union. Duncan Kyle's novel has ''a few special twists''
that are ''worth waiting for,'' Thomas Lask said in The Times in 1971. He called
it ''a good tight thriller that provides first-rate armchair excitement with a
tension that doesn't let up until the last page.''

JESUS THROUGH THE CENTURIES: His Place in the History of Culture, by Jaroslav
Pelikan. (Perennial/ Harper & Row, $8.95.) Jaroslav Pelikan's study is ''a rich
and expansive description'' of Jesus' impact on the history of culture, John
Koenig said in these pages in 1985. It is ''a sweeping visual and conceptual
panorama'' and ''unique among current publications in bridging scholarly and
popular discourse.''

HONORABLE MEN, by Louis Auchincloss. (McGraw-Hill, $4.95.) Louis Auchincloss's
novel follows Chip Benedict, a wealthy and privileged American princeling, from
his prep school days in the 1930's to disillusionment in the world of
Washingtonian diplomacy during the Vietnam War. ''In its descriptions of
upper-class life, particularly boarding schools . . . and summers in Bar Harbor,
Me.,'' the book ''ushers us into a rare world in prose as smooth and burnished
as well-oiled furniture,'' A. R. Gurney Jr. said here in 1985.

ESCAPADE, by Evelyn Scott. (Carroll & Graf, $9.95.) In 1913, at the age of 20,
the future novelist Evelyn Scott ran away to South America with a married man,
living with him in poverty and illness for six years. ''Escapade,'' a narrative
of her self-exile, is ''a high and heroic adventure,'' one reviewer said in
1923. ''Uncharted seas and poisoned trenches are not more deadly than that
extra-social limbo'' into which the couple plunged.

CAUGHT, by Jane Schwartz. (Ballantine, $3.50.) The setting is 1958, and lonely
10-year-old Louie Sands' playground is the rooftops of her poor Brooklyn
neighborhood, where she befriends Casey, a 38-year-old man whose solace is
training and caring for pigeons. Jane Schwartz's novel is ''moving, engrossing
and thoroughly believable,'' Ann M. Martin said in The Book Review in 1985.

ORIGINS: A Skeptic's Guide to the Creation of Life on Earth, by Robert Shapiro.
(Bantam, $9.95.) The ''primordial soup'' model of how life began on earth is no
longer convincing, and newer theories fare little better, according to Robert
Shapiro. But the author's sympathies lie firmly on the side of scientific as
opposed to biblical explanations, our reviewer, Laurence A. Marschall, said in
1986, and Mr. Shapiro speculates about where future research may lead. His
''gift for vivid explication makes this book readily accessible to the general
reader, and his eye for logical fallacies will make it compelling reading for
scientists as well. . . . To those who view science as a sterile body of
burnished truths, this book should come as a revelation. It is a penetrating
picture of a science in a healthy state of disarray.''

TOURIST SEASON, by Carl Hiaasen. (Warner, $3.95.) A newsman turned detective is
the hero of ''Tourist Season,'' whose plot revolves around a conspiracy to save
Florida for future generations by toppling its tourist-based economy. ''Reading
Carl Hiaasen is fun,'' Tony Hillerman said here last year. ''We're caught up in
another remarkable example of what talented writers are doing these days with
the mystery novel.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Susan Sontag

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ASIAN CRIME VICTIMS ENDING SILENCE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 58, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Feb. 13


Vietnamese immigrants who have settled in Philadelphia over the last decade have
often been silent victims of assault, robbery and extortion by a small gang of
Vietnamese youths. But that silence appears to be ending, say the police, who
attribute several recent arrests to the cooperation of Vietnamese crime victims.

Police and legal officials say that cultural differences and language barriers
have inhibited many Southeast Asian immigrants from reporting crimes. But they
say a concerted effort among the police and neighborhood groups is now
encouraging Vietnamese residents to come forward.

In one case last December, a month after a gang of young Vietnamese disrupted a
crowded dance and stabbed a teen-age Vietnamese boy, informers told the police
that gang members would show up at another dance. About 40 police officers and
several Federal agents arrived at the dance site in northeast Philadelphia.

''I wanted to make a big show,'' said Capt. Thomas M. Seamon of the Philadelphia
Police Department. ''These gang members had been bragging that the police were
afraid of them, so I wanted to make a big show. Since then we've had more
cooperation from complainants. They're beginning to see that if we're given
information, we won't compromise.''

Language Barrier a Problem

There were no incidents at the dance but the police made six arrests on
outstanding felony warrants.

Many community organizers and police representatives attribute the silence to
cultural differences and language barriers. ''If you dial 911 and you only speak
Cambodian or Vietnamese, you won't be understood,'' said Fernando Chang-Muy, a
lawyer with Community Legal Services' Southeast Asian Refugee Project.

The Philadelphia police have no Vietnamese-speaking officers. But in September
the department set up a unit to defuse racial incidents throughout the city.
Lieut. Marshall Smith, head of the unit, said that with the help of Asian ethnic
organizations his officers are finding ''people to translate and to get people
to report crimes.''

''It's the beginning of things being exposed,'' Lieutenant Smith said. ''We're
going to get a rise in the number of Asian incidents but that will be connected
with the dialogue we can have with the community.''

'A Personal Assault'

Since the 1975 Communist takeover in Vietnam, an estimated 650,000 Southeast
Asians have settled in the United States. About 25,000 Vietnamese, Hmong,
Cambodian, Laotian, Korean and Chinese immigrants have settled in Philadelphia.
In addition to language difficulties and cultural mistrust of police authority,
many Southeast Asians have treated victimization as ''a personal assault rather
than a crime against the state,'' said Capt. Frank P. Friel, head of the
Philadelphia police organized crime intelligence unit. ''It was a lot easier to
pay $20 a week to an extortionist than to go to the police.''

As a result, Southeast Asians have been subjected to crimes often described as
''very vicious.'' In one case, Captain Seamon said: ''Five Vietnamese robbed a
store owned by a Vietnamese family and terrorized them until they'd say where
their money was hidden. They threw the grandmother down the stairs and then
stole their car. Two days later two of them were apprehended in Boston. About
four months later one was arrested in Chicago, one in New Orleans, and the fifth
in Port Arthur, Tex.''

Keeping Track of Gangs

Police departments around the country are keeping in touch when crimes by
Vietnamese gangs are reported. Captain Friel believes there is ''a loosely
organized structure'' among these gangs, which are often heavily armed.
''They're not a monolithic group but they appear to know each other and have
contacts in different places where they can flee to avoid apprehension,'' he
said. Philadelphia's gang is estimated to have 12 to 25 members.

In 1985 the President's Commission on Organized Crime found that many of the
gangs originated in resettlement camps before moving to cities across the
country.

Debbie Wei, a 29-year-old Chinese-American teacher who has taught English to
hundreds of Asian youths, said many youths who have ended up as gang members
came to the United States as orphans and badly need education and counseling
services.

''These kids were on the streets over there,'' she said. ''They're very tough.
They've spent years in refugee camps where you had to steal to survive. The
longer they're in refugee camps, the harder they get.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
A SECRETARY'S DEPARTURE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 129 words


Like his tenure, John F. Lehman Jr.'s departure from the Navy is somewhat bumpy.
The announcement last week that the Secretary would leave this spring was made
by a Defense Department spokesman; there was no letter of resignation, no word
of Mr. Lehman's plans and no mention of a successor - though it was said that
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger had tried to talk him out of leaving.
Mr. Lehman had guided the Navy out of its post-Vietnam slide, despite frequent
clashes on Capitol Hill prying enough money out of Congress to assure President
Reagan's goal of a 600-ship fleet. His career strategy was perhaps less
successful: Some of his associates said Mr. Lehman decided to quit when it
became clear that he did not have a shot at Mr. Weinberger's job.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John F. Lehman Jr.

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Armed Forces Could Be a Chance to Start Over;
The Use of Draftees

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 152 words


To the Editor:
    When James W. Davis laments the shrinking pool of volunteers for the armed
services, I'm forced to recall the complexion of my outfit in Vietnam in
1969-70, when I was an Army draftee in Pleiku Province.

No rich man's son or child of privilege did I meet there. Sure, they may have
been flying their airplanes or sailing their dreadnoughts in support of Army
grunts, but neither the Air Force nor Navy drafted during the Vietnam War, and
guess who took the preponderance of casualties?

If Professor Davis wants genuinely to insure a healthy flow of troops to the
armed services via the draft, then I think it's inevitable and desirable that we
increase the eligibility for draftees to well beyond age 26, perhaps even into
middle age, and then extend our web to include women, so we can truly become a
modern-day Sparta.

DONALD J. SYPEK
  Chicopee, Mass., Feb. 5, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRYING TIMES FOR A POPULAR PRIME MINISTER

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 773 words

DATELINE: SYDNEY, Australia


BOB HAWKE is a casual, down-to-earth kind of Australian, a former union leader
who in 1954 set a world beer-drinking record by guzzling two and a half pints in
12 seconds. Soon, he will try to set another record by becoming the first Prime
Minister from the Labor Party to win a third term.

Mr. Hawke is likely to call a national election in the coming months that will
amount to a referendum on his many innovations - such as a controversial new tax
on fringe benefits, which critics say will require more complicated bookkeeping.
Perhaps more important, however, the election will indicate whether the Labor
Party, traditionally in the opposition, or the more conservative Liberal Party
is best positioned to lead the the continent through the convulsions of economic
and demographic change. Australia has one of the highest immigration rates in
the world. One Australian in five is now foreign-born, many of them from Asian
nations such as Vietnam and Malaysia. While they grapple with increasing ethnic
diversity, Australians also face a severe economic downturn that is testing
their famed self-assurance.

''There's much greater appreciation that you can't just throw some rocks on a
ship and sit back and watch cricket,'' says Tom Mockridge, a spokesman for
Australia's Treasurer, Paul Keating. He was referring to the fact that
Australians have prospered because of immense natural resources - oil, gold,
diamonds, coal and other ''rocks'' that are traded for manufactured goods. But
with prices dropping for just about everything that the country exports, from
barley to oil, Australians are being told by their politicians that they can no
longer assume that ''she'll be right'' - that problems will sort themselves out.
''The party's over, finito,'' Mr. Hawke warned in a much-quoted speech last
year.

Mr. Hawke is only the second Labor Party Prime Minister since 1949, and the
first one lasted only three years. But while Labor used to be often at odds with
the United States, these days Mr. Hawke has maneuvered his party into a strong
friendship and military relationship with Washington.

John W. Howard, the Liberal Party leader, says Australia is moving to the right.
That shift, he thinks, will help elect him the next Prime Minister. ''I'm very
confident that we'll win,'' he said in an interview. ''The Government has lost
the support of 'middle Australia.' ''

The problem is that, given the rapid pace of social change, ''middle Australia''
is becoming harder to define. And Mr. Hawke has proved adept at cultivating the
middle class as well as the blue collar workers who have been the Labor Party's
main constituency. ''Hawke has done what no other Labor Party leader since World
War II could do: He has made Labor seem the natural party of Government,'' said
George H. Brandis, a Brisbane barrister and co-editor of two books on the
Liberal Party. ''Meanwhile, the Liberal Party is so used to the politics of
power, it has yet to master the politics of impotence.''

Mr. Hawke must call an election by the time his term expires in April 1988. Some
analysts say an election late this year is likely, but others say the
57-year-old Prime Minister may choose to wait until early 1988, partly to
capitalize on the ebullient mood expected after Australia's bicentennial
celebrations in January 1988.

Mr. Hawke and his Cabinet made many enemies with their efforts to make the
sheltered Australian economy more competitive and check the growing trade
deficit. The currency was floated, resulting in a plunge in the Australian
dollar that has made imports and foreign travel substantially more expensive.
The country was opened up to foreign competition, which put pressure on domestic
industries. The price of improved competitiveness has been a 5 percent drop in
real wages since Mr. Hawke was re-elected by a narrow margin in 1984.

So it is perhaps surprising that the opposition is only three percentage points
ahead in public opinion polls. And Mr. Hawke's personal approval rating is well
ahead of his opponent's. Mr. Howard's low standing has caused dissension within
his coalition of the Liberal Party and the much smaller National Party.

Mr. Hawke, however, is the undisputed leader of the Labor Party. While he is
conservative by the party's standards, he has maintained strong links to the
unions and achieved a period of unusual labor peace.

Much of Labor's popularity, however, may derive from Mr. Hawke's appeal as a
personality with ''Aussie-on-the-street'' qualities. Two years ago, for example,
television viewers were moved when he wept as he reported that his daughter was
addicted to heroin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Prime Minister Bob Hawke (Camera Press/Chris Gregory)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: FEBRUARY 15, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1341 words


FICTION
1       1     2 WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow,
                $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences that befall a woman
                and her family after her appointment as Ambassador to
                Rumania.
2       2     3 THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King. (Viking, $18.95.)
                A fairy tale, complete with an aged king, two princes, an
                evil wizard and a mouse.
3       3    29 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.) The
                West tries to stave off the Russians in World War III.
4       5     5 NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon & Schuster,
                $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans from being
                discovered by the Germans.
5       4    23 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood horrors
                haunt six men and a woman who grew up in a small Maine
                town.
6       8     4 THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday, $17.95.) A
                financial wizard undertakes to defuse the crisis besetting
                the American economy.
7       6    15 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.) Iran during
                the month following the Shah's departure.
8       7     5 BANDITS, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $17.95.) A gang
                of three plots to heist millions being sent to the contras
                in Nicaragua.
9       9    16 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over Vietnam.
10     10    20 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton Mifflin,
                $19.95.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina and
                New York City.
11     14    16 A TASTE FOR DEATH, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $18.95.)
                Inspector Adam Dalgliesh investigates a brutal double
                murder.
12     11     2 PATIENCE OF A SAINT, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Geis/Warner,
                $18.95.) A hard-bitten newspaperman learns a lot about his
                family and decency while on the trail of a wily politician.
13     12     4 THE COUNTERLIFE, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
                $18.95.) More about the ambitions and anxieties of Nathan
                Zuckerman, who resembles the author in some things,
                sometimes.
14            1 WATCHERS, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $17.95.) Two
                creatures emerge from a secret government laboratory - one
                to spell doom, the other to spread love across the land.
15     13     4 DEATH QUEST, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge Publications,
                $18.95.) A hit man sets out to kill Countess Krak and seal
                the fate of the Earth; sixth volume in the ''Mission
                Earth'' series.


NONFICTION
1       1     7 A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein. (Macmillan,
                $16.95.) A chronicle of one season spent with the coach Bob
                Knight and his Indiana University basketball team.
2       2    41 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday, $14.95.)
                Anecdotes and ruminations from the television star and
                father of five.
3             1 THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $24.95.)
                Australia from penal colony to its gradual emergence as a
                flourishing nation.
4       4    49 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $9.95.)
                A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme;
                the first Dr. Seuss book for adults.
5       3    19 HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.) From Hoboken
                to superstardom: an unauthorized biography of Frank
                Sinatra.
6       8     5 THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE,
                by Jane Wagner. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb observations
                on life today; script of the show starring Lily Tomlin.
7       7    19 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $19.95.) The
                crisis in the American automobile industry and Japan's role
                in it.
8*     12     2 REAGAN'S AMERICA: Innocents at Home, by Garry Wills.
                (Doubleday, $19.95.) The 40th President as the product and
                embodiment of an American mythology.
9      15    34 NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst. (Simon & Schuster,
                $17.95.) Life is a series of losses, the author argues, and
                we must confront them in order to grow.
10      6    39 JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James Herriot. (St.
                Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a Yorkshire veterinarian
                about his favorite animal.
11     13     5 MARILYN, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, $24.95.) A biography of
                Marilyn Monroe, with many photographs by her friend George
                Barris.
12      9    13 DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland with Greg
                Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The ballerina recalls her
                checkered career.
13      5    21 MCMAHON! by Jim McMahon with Bob Verdi. (Warner, $16.95.)
                The autobiography of the quarterback for the Chicago Bears.
14*    11     7 ACROSS CHINA, by Peter Jenkins. (Morrow, $18.95.) The
                author of ''A Walk Across America'' takes his wanderlust to
                Asia.
15            1 ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Morrow,
                $18.95.) A case involving the murder of a Pennsylvania high
                school teacher and the disappearance of her two children.


ADVICE, HOW-TO AND MISCELLANEOUS
1       1    16 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.
                (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at moderate cost.
2       2    19 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM, by Susan
                Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with
                overbearing men.
3       3    35 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton, $15.95.) A
                regimen based on the Vanderbilt University Weight
                Management Program.
4       4    75 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.
                (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard reference work in a
                1983 revision.
5       5    53 THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $14.95.) A
                television chef's inexpensive dishes.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.
  AND BEAR IN MIND
  (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE MAKING OF THE ATOMIC BOMB, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
Short on heroes and villains, long on drama and suspense, this book offers both
a close-up look at nuclear scientists and an overview of the century's pivotal
event.

WATCHING TELEVISION: A Pantheon Guide to Popular Culture, edited by Todd Gitlin.
(Pantheon, Cloth, $19.95. Paper, $9.95.) Interesting and raucous essays about
the tube. The consensus: it replaces the authentic with the artificial whenever
possible.

HIGH GROUND, by John McGahern. (Viking, $15.95.) High seriousness and low comedy
coexist in the work of this Irish writer. His stories invoke passionate
conflicts - between fathers and sons, men and women, Roman Catholics and
Protestants.

STRANGERS IN PARADISE, by Lee K. Abbott. (Putnam, $18.95.) Fourteen short
stories, mostly about residents of a small town in New Mexico, written in an
exuberant and inventive prose.

MOLECULES OF THE MIND: The Brave New Science of Molecular Psychology, by Jon
Franklin. (Atheneum, $18.95.) A provocative discussion of exciting research in
neuroscience. Especially good is the compassionate reporting on the plight of
the mentally ill.

FEARFUL SYMMETRY: The Search for Beauty in Modern Physics, by A. Zee.
(Macmillan, $25.) Science approaches religion when it assumes a grand design for
the universe. Mr. Zee describes in detail the role of unity in modern physics
and accurately conveys the religious beliefs of theoretical physicists.

HOTEL SAVOY. Fallmerayer the Stationmaster. The Bust of the Emperor, by Joseph
Roth. (Overlook, $16.95.) A darkly moving novella that portrays dislocated lives
in Europe after World War I. The book also includes two of the author's short
stories.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN SHELVING TREATY TO REVISE LAW ON CAPTIVES

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 15


In a move intended to deny international legal protection to terrorists and
anti-Western guerrillas, President Reagan has decided against ratification of
part of a major revision of the 1949 Geneva Conventions on treatment of
combatants and war victims, according to Administration documents.

Notice of Mr. Reagan's decision was sent to the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee without announcement two weeks ago. In his letter, the President said
he would not submit Protocol 1, as the revision dealing with international armed
conflicts is known, because it was ''fundamentally and irreconcilably flawed.''

The Administration has concluded that Protocol 1 would have the effect of
legitimizing insurgent movements and terrorist groups by granting their members
the status of combatants and prisoners of war.

Senate Support Sought

The notice contains an unusual request that the Senate support his judgment in a
nonbinding vote. At the same time, Mr. Reagan urged that Protocol 2, which deals
with internal conflicts, receive the consent of the Senate to ratification.

The United States signed the two protocols in 1977, with the understanding that
a decision on ratification would await a formal study by the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. Since then, more than 100 nations have signed the protocols, and more
than 40 have ratified them. Signing obligates a nation to act in accordance with
the treaty, but only formal ratificiation gives the treaty legal force. If a
nation that signs a treaty then declines to ratify it, it is no longer obligated
to abide by it.

Israel Opposes Ratification

The Soviet Union has not ratified the protocols. Israel has said it opposes
ratification of both protocols. Among members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, Denmark, Norway, Belgium and Italy have ratified the revisions.
France announced last year that it would not ratify Protocol 1.

''It is unfortunate that Protocol 1 must be rejected,'' the President wrote.
But, he added, ''we must not, and need not, give recognition and protection to
terrorist groups as a price for progress in humanitarian law.''

His decision effectively ends an effort that had lasted more than a decade to
revise the Geneva Conventions to improve the treatment of combatants and
civilians in wartime.

Some State Department officials who supported the revisions maintain that the
bulk of the protocols were worth salvaging because the emphasis on international
cooperation in the treaty would facilitate extradition and prosecution of
terrorists, and that its provisions attach legal consequences to taking hostages
and using force indisicriminately.

Memo From Weinberger

Protocol 1 first encountered political opposition when the Joint Chiefs opposed
its ratification in July 1985. The Joint Chiefs determined, according to a
memorandum from Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger to Secretary of State
George P. Shultz, that the protocol would ''politicize international
humanitarian law and, inter alia, afford legal protections to terrorist and
'national liberation movements' at the expense of noncombatants.''

On March 21, 1986, Mr. Shultz concurred with the objections of Mr. Weinberger
and the Joint Chiefs in a memorandum to President Reagan. Mr. Shultz asserted
that the Protocol would ''politicize'' the international rules of war by making
their applicability hinge on ''nonlegal standards couched in highly charged
rhetoric.''

He cited as an example Article 1 of Protocol 1, which says the provisions apply
to nations and ''peoples'' who ''are fighting against colonial domination and
alien occupation and against racist regimes in the exercise of their right of
self-determination.''

Regional Groups' Judgment

Mr. Shultz was also opposed to Protocol 1, he wrote, because it gives regional
political organizations, such as the League of Arab States and the Organization
of African Unity, authority to judge which ''peoples'' constitute a legitimate
party to armed struggle.

In a memorandum to the Administration in late spring of 1986, Vice Adm. John M.
Poindexter, then the White House national security adviser, informed agency
heads that President Reagan had decided against ratification of Protocol 1.

''This is a significant step in defense of traditional humanitarian law and in
opposition to the intense efforts of terrorist organizations and their
supporters to promote the legitimacy of their aims and practices,'' Admiral
Poindexter wrote. Copies of the memorandums were provided to The New York Times.


Delay in Informing Senate

Administration officials said the United States' Western allies were told of the
President's decision last summer. They attributed the delay in informing the
Senate to what one called the White House bureaucracy's ''distraction'' over the
Iran-contra affair.

According to one former official, another consideration that motivated the
Carter Administration to sign the protocols in 1977 was that they would
stengthen the United States' right to search for and seek information about
Americans missing in Vietnam.

Another reason for signing, the official said, was pressure from the
International Committee of the Red Cross, which won added protections in the
protocols for its medical personnel.

Argument Against Ratification

Douglas J. Feith, a former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Negotiations Policy and a key official in the debate who is now a private
attorney, argued throughout last year that the negative factors in Protocol 1
far outweighed its potential benefits.

''President Reagan's decision is a victory for anti-P.L.O. diplomacy,'' Mr.
Feith said, referring to the Palestine Liberation Organization. ''The P.L.O.
could well have been considered an ordinary combatant.''

Mr. Feith and other critics maintain that Protocol 1's definition of what is
combat and what is a soldier are worded vaguely and that the distinctions
between guerrillas and regular soldiers would be blurred.

As a result, Mr. Feith said, guerrillas could claim the same protection granted
prisoners of war and thus avoid criminal prosecution for what might otherwise be
considered terrorist acts. Currently, guerrillas can be treated as criminals,
and in past wars they have been shot when captured.

Mr. Feith has also said Protocol 1 would alter the traditional definition of
international conflicts as being between two or more sovereign nations by giving
regional political groups the right to confer on insurgent movements the
trappings of sovereignty.

The effort to revise the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, which mandate humane
treatment of the sick and wounded in the field and at sea, for prisoners of war
and for civilians, began in 1974, when delegates from almost all nations
gathered in Geneva.

Also present as nonvoting participants were representatives of 11 insurgent
movements, including the African National Congress of South Africa and the
P.L.O.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GENERATION IN TROUBLE: SPANISH AND RUSSIANS FIND THEIR YOUTH ALIENATED;
SUDDENLY, A SOVIET VEIL IS LIFTED, REVEALING SCENES OF BITTER YOUTHS

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 964 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 15


On Soviet movie screens, punk rockers spray-paint hostile graffiti on building
walls. In one Soviet journal, a drug addict's diary describes watching a fellow
addict slit his wrists and die, and in another a sociologist drily chronicles
greed and disaffection among Soviet youth.

The images themselves are startling here, but even more startling is their
context. Missing, more and more often, are the comforting homilies that usually
cushion reports of disturbing phenomena, assigning blame and prescribing remedy.

For Soviet society, nonconformist youth - the disturbed, the disaffected, the
simply different - have customarily been kept discreetly out of sight or shown
only in sanitized versions. Now society is being pummeled with blunt images of
rootlessness, apathy and scorn among young people.

Twenty-three percent of the Soviet population - 41.3 million of the total
population of 281 million - was in school or university in 1985. Several million
more - exact figures are hard to determine from Soviet statistical sources -
were young workers already out of school.

Part of New Openness

In the past, the voices of these millions were usually heard singing patriotic
songs or offering party slogans in sweet treble tones. Now, as Soviet press
institutions react to Mikhail S. Gorbachev's call for openness, the limits on
what young people can say are being stretched, and their voices are sharp and
unforgiving.

''We are dirty, we are crude, but all the same we are your children,'' says a
young Latvian punk rocker in a controversial and highly popular new documentary
film that is filling Moscow theaters, ''Is It Easy to Be Young?''

Another film blames the older generation for ''the lies that created us.''

''Is it easy to be young?'' asks a Latvian youth, in words that gave the film
its title. ''No. I walk out on the street and the militiaman sees this'' - he
turned his head to show his pony tail -''and takes me down to the station.''

In the latest issue of the journal Yunost, a drug addict, Oleg T. Dukhovnii,
writes: ''Nothing caught my attention, as mama said. Nothing held my interest.
For a month I just kept on using drugs, not understanding that I was hooked.''

Hard Work Seen as Useless

Although more such images of alienation show up in the arts, sociologists are
producing statistical portraits of young people who try to create their place in
Soviet society through hard work but quickly find it will neither advance their
careers nor feather their nests.

A Soviet sociologist, Valery A. Mansurov, said in an interview with a Western
correspondent: ''A young man may well see the situation as hopeless.'' He added
that the young man ''may work very well, but there is a line'' beyond which
there will be no extra reward for extra work.

The single greatest source of dissatisfaction among young men, he said, is
housing. A chronic shortage of housing - even though 1985 was a record year for
construction of dwelling units -forces many young men to live with their parents
or in huge, drab workers' dormitories built on the outskirts of Moscow and other
large Soviet employment centers.

Official Soviet sources estimate that 70 percent of young people change jobs or
careers as a direct result of housing dissatisfaction. Housing is generally
distributed by factories, institutes and other employment centers, with
seniority a key criterion of eligibility.

Even if a young man gets a satisfactory apartment, Mr. Mansurov said, the cost
of furnishing it and supporting a family may be beyond his means. ''This
dependence,'' Mr. Mansurov said, ''creates a sense of hopelessness.

''He begins to think: 'My level of material life depends not on me but on
parents, relatives and my factory. So what's the point of trying?' ''

The crowded housing, he added, encourages early marriages, since marriage and
family allow young people to jump ahead on housing eligibility lists. But the
crowding and the financial dependence on parents also lead to early divorces,
Mr. Mansurov said.

Soviet statistical journals report that, in the 25-to-29 age bracket, for every
10 women married in 1985, 6 were divorced. And three-quarters of the men that
age who married were doing so for the second or third time.

No More Western Poison

There are official attempts to ease or channel the dissatisfaction of the young.
Rock music has lost its reputation as a Western poison and can be seen on Soviet
prime-time television. So can break dancing and satiric caricatures of
previously untouchable figures like scholars or heads of institutes.

Komsomol 'Bureaucratic'

And although the Communist youth organization Komsomol is still deferred to as
the vanguard of Soviet youth, it seems largely irrelevant. It was criticized
recently by the Soviet press agency Tass as ''formal and bureaucratic.''

Although official Communist organizations are heard from somewhat less among the
babble of newly unedited voices, some of the old, carefully crafted ideals of
Soviet heroism are also being slightly transformed or avoided.

In ''Is It Easy to Be Young?'' veterans of the Soviet war in Afghanistan are
shown describing the brutality they saw. They pay lip-service to the rightness
of the Soviet cause and the eternal verities of war, but a world-weariness
hovers about them, as does a latent anger reminiscent of America's Vietnam-era
veterans.

One said his time in Afghanistan had only put him years behind his fellows at
school and at work. He compared himself to a child who has been forced to repeat
a grade.

Another mused eloquently on what combat has done to the man he was. ''The
feeling that I have that I have done something dirty, something not really
human, will remain with me,'' he said. ''A stain is sure to remain on me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MIDWEST JOURNAL;
ASSESSING THE CRISIS OF FARMS

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 815 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Feb. 15


Asserting that it is not enough to have sermons, songs and nice poems about
farmers, a group of nearly 100 Christians and Jews has just concluded a two-day
conference here on the social impact of the continuing farm depression.

''We had an interreligious coalition on civil rights and then Vietnam,'' said
Rabbi A. James Rudin of New York. ''We needed the same thing on the worsening
problems of small towns and the farms. It's become a chronic problem, and a
national one.''

Sponsors included the American Jewish Committee, the National Council of
Churches, the Lutheran Church of America and the National Catholic Rural Life
Conference, as well as several regional rural advocacy groups.

''The loss of land and livelihood,'' the conference's formal declaration said,
''by thousands of rural families engaged in farming and ranching, forestry,
mining and other extraction industries and in manufacturing has caused profound
spiritual and emotional devastation, leading to an alarming degree of
helplessness and hopelessness.''

The conference cited increased rates of suicide, alcoholism and spouse and child
abuse as manifestations of the social problem.

''The level of human suffering is incompatible with our Judeo-Christian
commitment to social and economic justice,'' the declaration added.

Each of the religious groups will return to its constituency, Rabbi Rudin said,
to press for personal and financial support of broader social and emotional
counseling in rural areas and more legal and financial advice for troubled
residents.

''There is a steep price that America will pay for this social and financial
unraveling of our heartland,'' Rabbi Rudin said in an interview. ''Whether it's
through increased food and welfare costs, mass migrations to the cities or the
continued brain drain from vast areas of our country, you can see that the
problems of such instability are no longer confined to the countryside. They
have become urban and suburban problems as well.''

NO RESPECT IN ST. PAUL

State legislators in Minnesota are feeling unappreciated, uninformed, overworked
and underpaid, according to a recent poll.

They also think they spend far too much time on agricultural issues, especially
since so many state powers have been superseded by the Federal Government. But
the legislators were not bothered by the amount of time spent on spending. In
fact, 53 percent are concerned about their pay and would like to spend more on
themselves. A member's salary is about $23,200, plus $36 a day for expenses,
during the annual five-month legislative sessions in St. Paul.

The survey, conducted by the Hubert H. Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs and
titled ''How Minnesota Legislators View Their Jobs,'' found the lawmakers'
biggest complaint was a lack of public respect; 65 percent of the 173 responding
legislators felt strongly about that.

Charles Backstrom, a University of Minnesota political science professor who ran
the survey, said he feared the state could lose its best lawmakers because of
their perceptions of the public's perception of their work. ''You're not going
to have good people working in a place they're ashamed of,'' Mr. Backstrom said.

Nonetheless, the poll found that 25 percent of the legislators want to serve
''as long as possible.'' Twenty-three percent prefer private life; 22 percent
want to be legislative leaders; 16 percent hope to reach Congress; nine percent
prefer statewide office; four percent prefer ''other'' and one percent would
like to be lobbyists.

DEALING WITH GUESTS

One Midwestern city is delighted over the growing number of visitors this year
while leaders of another community could do with a few hundred less.

Indianapolis, once known primarily as the home of humidity and a 500-mile car
race, has broadened its appeal in recent years. This year it expects to attract
a million visitors to the Pan American Games and thousands of others to a
growing array of conventions, including the National Conference of State
Legislatures, the American Home Economics Association and two hardware
wholesaler meetings, not to mention the American Pork Congress.

But in Muscatine, Iowa, conservationists are suggesting that residents shoo away
some foreign visitors. The visitors from Canada include several hundred ducks
and geese, who stopped off on their annual flight south and never left once they
experienced the mild winter and tasted the generous offerings of grain, bread,
lettuce and even cookies that some humans left out.

Park officials are concerned that the unexpected volume of the drop-ins's
droppings may tip the chemical balance in Muscatine's sloughs and ponds, adding
to the algae problem and damaging the fish population.

A few citizens apparently have another partial solution. Under the cover of
darkness, they have killed some of the sleeping creatures for consumption
elsewhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CONTRA AID PROTESTERS FOUND GUILTY

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb 15


Eighteen people were found guilty here last week of parading in and obstructing
the rotunda of the Capitol, in a case stemming from the arrest of 112
demonstrators who last August protested United States aid to the Nicaraguan
insurgents.

In the trial, the defense called a series of former Government officials and
other expert witnesses in an effort to prove that international law required
that the protesters make an effort to stop the aid to the insurgents, or
contras.

Judge Luke C. Moore, a former United States marshal, presided over the 25-day
jury trial in Superior Court here. He imposed what a defense lawyer described as
light terms for the first eight defendants sentenced. The rest will be sentenced
later.

'Views of Majority Ignored'

Mark Goldstone, a defense lawyer, said, after the verdict Friday, ''The
President can get national press attention by calling the contras 'freedom
fighters' on television, but the views of the majority, which these people
represent, are ignored.''

Their trial received almost no press or other public attention. Both former
Attorney General Ramsey Clark and Daniel Ellsberg, the former Defense Department
analyst linked to the Penatgon Papers, testified, saying that protest
demonstrations were a legitimate and effective means of altering national
policy.

Among the defendants was David Dellinger, who was also a defendant in the
Chicago Seven conspiracy trial, charged with seeking to incite rioting at the
1968 Democratic National Convention. A lifetime radical pacifist, Mr. Dellinger,
now 70 years old, teaches history, politics and writing at Vermont College in
Montpelier. He was not among those sentenced last week.

The demonstrators were arrested in the rotunda Aug. 4 and charged with three
counts each of parading, obstructing and unlawful entry, misdemeanors to which
most pleaded guilty the next day.

After a night in jail, nearly 100 of them were released upon paying fines of
$100 or less. Most were placed on six months' probation and warned that another
appearance in court here might bring them stiffer sentences. #18 Demand Jury
Trial But 18 pleaded not guilty and demanded the jury trial that began Jan. 5
and ended Friday, after two days of jury deliberation. Most trials in Superior
Court last hours or days.

According to Nina Kraut, the main defense lawyer, an appeal is planned. She said
that although Judge Moore, had declared that the defendants had acted out of
what they believed was ''the highest responsibility and sense of national
duty,'' the court had declined to let the jury hear arguments on ''a duty to
take action to stop the United States' illegal war of aggression against the
Nicaraguan people'' and to ''prevent crimes committed by the state.''

Ms. Kraut and her co-counsel, Linda A. Delaney, cited the 1986 decision of the
International Court of Justice, rejected by the Reagan Administration, that
American aid to the contras was in violation of international law.

The testimony of Mr. Clark and Mr. Ellsberg that, as former Government officials
they had personally witnessed the impact of protest demonstrations on national
policy in forcing the gradual American withdrawal from Vietnam, was received out
of the presence of the jury, on an order of Judge Moore.

Eight of the 18 convicted defendants some of them veterans of peace marches
around the country, were given sentences that Ms. Kraut described as ''light''
and ''compassionate.''

Each was sentenced to a suspended 30-day prison term and placed on six months'
probation. That means that unless they are rearrested here in the six-month
period, they will not serve further jail time nor pay fines. All were ordered to
perform 100 hours of community service in their home towns.

The 10 other defendants are to be sentenced April 27, a day after another
planned demonstration in Washington against American involvement in Nicaragua.
Facing revocation of probation and time in jail for an arrest then, Robert
Simpson, a retired business executive and Presbyterian leader from Philadelphia,
who was among those sentenced last week, said ''that's going to be a very hard
choice for some of us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS WORLD SPECIALS;
Catching Up

BYLINE: By Robert McG. Thomas Jr. and Thomas Rogers

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 125 words



* Remember Bob Wieland, the legless Vietnam veteran who took more than 99
excruciating hours to complete the New York City Marathon last November? He's
still on the go. Wieland, a weight lifter who propels himself by using his arms
to lift and drag his 123-pound body, is now entered in the Los Angeles Marathon,
and this time he hopes to win. That's right, win. He's received approval from
race organizers to begin the course Feb. 25, four days before the official
start. If all goes well, he'll reach the finish line just about the time it's
crossed by his world-class competitors.

* Butch Carter, the former Knick, is 11-6 in his first season as basketball
coach at Middletown (Ohio) High School, where he starred more than a decade ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 17, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

What Philippine Farmers Are Willing to Die For

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 291 words


To the Editor:

In your report on troops in Manila firing into a large crowd of demonstrators
and killing 12 (front page, Jan. 23), you say that many of the marchers were
peasant farmers ''demanding changes in land policy.'' But the story did not
explain the changes that the farmers of the Philippines want.

According to experts on Philippine agriculture, huge amounts of farmland lie
idle in plantations that once produced such export crops as sugar. Some of these
plantations were assembled by taking land from the peasant farmers by legal
chicanery and forced sale. The plantations needed fewer workers than the family
farms, so that unemployed farm people had to migrate to city slums to get fed.
The plantations did not produce food for feeding the Philippine people, and
widespread malnutrition resulted.

The farmers hoped that President Corazon C. Aquino would push land reform, to
buy up idle plantations and redistribute their land to them. Mrs. Aquino so far
has done this on only a token basis, and some people question her commitment to
land reform because some of her own relatives are said to own idle land.

The United States Government has often talked about land reform as a way to
reduce peasant rebellion, particularly in Vietnam and in El Salvador. However,
there does not seem to be a solid commitment to the idea, as little has been
said in Washington either about the death of land reform in El Salvador or about
its counter-Marxist occurrence on a large scale in Nicaragua.

It seems that our Government really is not in favor of land reform. The current
Philippine situation will no doubt force some reaction in Manila and possibly
also in Washington.

FREDERICK S. LIGHTFOOT
Greenport, L.I., Jan. 28, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 17, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

'DISABLED' PRISONER FLEES WITH HOSTAGES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 266 words

DATELINE: FORT MYERS, Fla., Feb. 16


A convicted killer who had got around prison for seven years in a wheelchair
shocked the authorities by jumping out of his chair and taking hostages at
gunpoint Friday.

The search continued today for the 43-year-old convict, Robert Blackmon, who was
considered armed and dangerous.

According to the authorities, Mr. Blackmon, who was convicted in 1978 of
murdering his wife, jumped from his wheelchair Friday as he was returning to the
Avon Park Correctional Institution from a medical center nearby.

''Somehow, the guard turned around momentarily and he dove out of his chair on
top of the officer'' and grabbed the officer's gun, said Dale Landress, the
superintendent at Avon Park, where Mr. Blackmon has been for the last year.

The guard, a medical technician and another inmate were taken hostage, Mr.
Landress said.

Mr. Blackmon exchanged clothes with the guard and forced the other prisoner to
drive the four of them to Fort Myers, where they had a minor automobile
accident. When Mr. Blackmon got out of the car to inspect the damage, the
hostages ''took off and left him standing there,'' Mr. Landress said.

Mr. Blackmon then persuaded the driver of the car that had been hit to drive him
to a store. When the driver got out, Mr. Blackmon stole the car, the authorities
said.

Mr. Landress said most of the prison staff had believed Mr. Blackmon was a
paraplegic. He had been injured in Vietnam, but apparently not so severely as
the authorities believed.

''We've never seen him walk here,'' Mr. Landress said. ''We've heard rumors that
he could move his legs, that was all.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 17, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

WASHINGTON TALK: SUPREME COURT;
Justice Scalia, in Public, Considers a Hypothesis

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS, Feb. 16


It is rare for a member of the Supreme Court to engage in an animated public
debate and submit to interrogation on disputed legal issues. It is even rarer
for one to discuss in such a forum how he would resolve a hypothetical case.

But Justice Antonin Scalia, the Supreme Court's newest and most outgoing member,
did both with gusto at symposium before several hundred students at Tulane
University here Sunday night. In the process he made clear his distaste for
disclosures of national security secrets to the press and his willingess to bar
publication of such secrets, at least in an extreme case.

His remarks came in a discussion with six other panelists of a hypothetical case
in 1992 about a high-level Government official's unauthorized disclosure to a
television network of a Presidential plan to invade a foreign nation rich in oil
to rescue some hostages.

As described by Fred W. Friendly, the moderator, another purpose of the planned
invasion was to seize oilfields so as to relieve an economic crisis and energy
shortage in the United States. How Should the Court Rule?  Justice Scalia was
asked by Mr. Friendly, a former president of CBS News, how the Supreme Court
should rule if the Government asked it in an unprecedented secret hearing to
order the hypothetical network not to broadcast the information for 12 hours, so
that the operation could go forward in secret.

''This is not a case that the press is going to win,'' the Justice responded.
''I think where the President is conducting military operations, I think the
Court, out of respect for the political branches, is not going to try to
second-guess the need for secrecy in those military operations.''

He added, ''It's a narrow situation, it's a troop ship situation, and in these
circumstances and for a limited time period, a prior restraint should issue.''

Justice Scalia also referred to the person who disclosed the Government
information in the hypothetical case as ''some fink in the Defense Department.''

And he said the reporter, whom Mr. Friendly said had been given the secret plan
unsolicited, had ''suborned this information out of some public servant who was
violating his duty.''

Making his points in good-natured but forceful tones, the former law professor
sometimes leaned back with arms folded. At one point he hunched forward on the
front of his chair like a coiled spring, waiting to rebut an argument made by
Burt Neuborne, a New York University law professor and noted civil liberties
lawyer.

The Supreme Court has never upheld a prior restraint on publication of
Government secrets. In the 1971 ''Pentagon Papers'' case, it rejected by 6 to 3
the Nixon Administration's request for an order barring publication by The New
York Times and others of a classified study of the Vietnam War.

But the Court has suggested it might issue a prior restraint if necessary to
avert grave and imminent harm to the national security. And the two Federal
appellate judges who took part in the Tulane discussion agreed with Justice
Scalia's view that Mr. Friendly's hypothetical case qualified. They were Judge
Ruth Bader Ginsburg of the District of Columbia Circuit and Judge John Minor
Wisdom of the Fifth Circuit.

Even Floyd Abrams, a prominent First Amendment advocate for news organizations
who helped represent The New York Times in the Pentagon Papers case, conceded at
the symposium that the press was unlikely to win Mr. Friendly's hypothetical
case.

But Mr. Abrams disputed a statement by Justice Scalia that the absence of a
declaration of war by Congress was totally irrelevant to analysis of Mr.
Friendly's case, in which the White House had informed only one member of
Congress of the planned operation.

'We're Talking About a Dictum'

Justice Scalia had said no inference that a Congressional declaration might be
necessary could be drawn from a 1931 statement by Chief Justice Charles Evans
Hughes, in Near v. Minnesota, that the general rule against prior restraints was
subject to an exception, ''when a nation is at war,'' to prevent publication of
such information as the sailing dates of troop ships.

''Lookit, I don't know why we're getting onto this,'' Justice Scalia said.
''We're talking about a dictum, you know, an offhand remark in a case, and when
he's talking about troop shipments in time of war, it seems to me the fair
import of it is that when the armed forces of the United States are at risk,
there is an exception to the general rule. I don't think it makes a bit of
difference whether it's a declared war or an undeclared war.''

Mr. Abrams said he thought any argument by the Government that publication would
necessarily jeopardize the lives of American soldiers had been weakened since
there was not a declared war in progress and the operation might be aborted
entirely if the plan were disclosed.

Earlier, Mr. Friendly had remarked that ''in my copy of the Constitution and in
Justice Scalia's copy'' it says that only Congress can declare war.

''Not in Justice Scalia's copy,'' Mr. Abrams interjected, provoking a round of
laughter from the audience and a smile from the butt of his joke.

Another Hypothetical Case

In discussing another hypothetical case, Justice Scalia said that if a reporter
learned that a prominent opponent of abortion who was a candidate for a Cabinet
appointment had herself had an illegal abortion when she was 14, the reporter
''shouldn't print the story.''

He said the fact the woman had had an abortion as a child had ''very little to
do with the woman's qualifications for the office.''

But, he said, ''a lot of things that are constitutional are quite
reprehensible.'' And when asked whether as a judge he would issue a prior
restraint barring the reporter from exposing the abortion, Justice Scalia said:
''No, I wouldn't restrain it. Let him be reprehensible.''

Many of the students applauded loudly when other panelists disputed Justice
Scalia's views on the importance of government secrecy and his arguments against
publishing the abortion article.

But the loudest applause came at the end, when Mr. Friendly, thanking the
panelists, said, ''It takes a hell of a Justice to sit here and put up with all
this.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article on the Washington Talk page Feb. 17, about Supreme Court Justice
Antonin Scalia misstated the Court's history on prior restraint of publication
of Government secrets.  In 1980, in Snepp v. United States, the Court upheld an
agreement under which a former agent of the Central Intelligence Agency had to
submit anything he wrote about the agency for prepublication review and deletion
of any national security secrets.

GRAPHIC: photo of Justice Antonin Scalia (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 17, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BABY M CASE ETCHES A STUDY IN CONTRASTS

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1907 words

DATELINE: HACKENSACK, N.J., Feb. 16


The two couples mired in the custody fight for Baby M have been etched as stark
contrasts, from their social class to emotional makeup, from their education and
financial stability to marital bliss and style of life.

Both Mary Beth and Richard Whitehead and William and Elizabeth Stern came to
surrogate parenting in open-eyed eagerness and anticipation - Mr. Stern to
preserve a family genealogy all but destroyed in Nazi concentration camps; Mrs.
Whitehead inspired by the infertility of her sister, who, Mrs. Whitehead hoped
would conceive if she herself became pregnant.

But maternal instinct and other emotions intruded on the agreement under which
Mrs. Stern was to pay Mrs. Whitehead $10,000 to bear a child by artificial
insemination.

Secrets, Loves and Foibles

Mrs. Whitehead refused to surrender the baby legally. Mr. Stern sued to enforce
the agreement, strip away Mrs. Whitehead's parental rights, win custody and deny
her any legal chance of ever seeing the child.

The result has been an anguishing trial in a 57-seat courtroom here. Before the
world, lawyers and hired experts have dissected each couple's intimacies and
innermost secrets, their loves, their foibles and their motivations - all to win
the parenthood of a chubby 10-month-old girl who, everyone agrees, is a delight
to all who see her, a picture of contentment and curiosity.

The Sterns have had temporary custody of Baby M six months. The trial, which is
about half-finished, resumes Tuesday after a nearly weeklong recess. Ultimately,
the presiding judge, Harvey R. Sorkow, must decide which couple is more suitable
to meet Baby M's ''best interests'' - the undefined, yet guiding tenet of the
state's custody law.

Layers of Contrasts

The portraits of the couples that are emerging in testimony, psychological
reports and trial documents will weigh heavily in the decision. But in their
sharp contrasts and many layers, those portraits also illuminate the different
and, in some ways, conflicting, worlds that surrogate parenting has brought
together.

To three mental-health experts hired by Baby M's legal guardian, Mrs. Whitehead
is troubled. One, after interviewing her and observing her with Baby M,
diagnosed Mrs. Whitehead as suffering a ''mixed personality disorder.'' The
other experts stopped short of agreeing, but found her overly dramatic,
impulsive, self-centered and in need of psychotherapy.

The experts cited Mrs. Whitehead's possessive behavior while being observed with
Baby M; her fleeing to her parents' home in Florida with the baby in last May
and two emotional calls to Mr. Stern in which she appeared to threaten her life
and the baby's. The calls, secretly recorded by Mr. Stern, followed a court
order that froze Mrs. Whitehead's assets at the Sterns' request.

Mrs. Whitehead, who is allowed to see Baby M four hours a week, will present her
experts to challenge the testimony. But so far, through the assessments and the
attacks by the Sterns' lawyer on her background and style of life, she has
appeared iron-willed and unflinching in her conviction that she will win, simply
because she is Baby M's natural mother.

''I'm here to fight for something that's mine,'' she said outside court
recently. ''The bottom line is she's my child.''

In various ways, Mrs. Whitehead has said the same thing almost daily since the
trial began Jan. 5.

Affection for the Infant

Mr. Stern, in testimony from witnesses called by his lawyer and in reports by
the guardian's experts, has appeared shy and sensitive, a biochemist who
collects miniature trains and model trolleys, a man who became overwrought on
the witness stand and wept as he struggled to explain his affections for the
baby.

''She's the most important person in my life,'' he testified. ''And I mean no
insult to my wife.''

A witness for the guardian, Dr. David M. Brodzinsky, said Mr. Stern, who is 41,
had a ''strong need'' for a child that could be traced to the deaths of all Mr.
Stern's relatives, except his parents, in Nazi camps in World War II.

''Consequently, he developed a deep-seated need to re-establish ties with
biological kin - to see and feel and love someone else to whom he is
biologically connected,'' Dr. Brodzinsky said.

Biochemistry and Genetics

Mr. Stern's need for a child was finally realized when he signed the surrogate
agreement with Mrs. Whitehead early in 1985.

Years ago, he and his wife had placed their education and careers before
marriage and children. The Sterns dated five years before marrying in July 1974.
Both were in their late 20's, and both had doctorates, he in biochemistry and
she in human genetics.

In 1974, Mrs. Stern began seven years of medical studies toward a degree in
pediatrics. They decided then to put off attempts at pregnancy until Mrs. Stern
had finished her medical residency, in 1981, when she would be 36.

Mr. Stern earns $43,500 a year. Dr. Stern's salary as professor of pediatrics at
the Albert Einstein College of Medicine was $48,000 a year before she took a
leave last year.

By the time Mrs. Stern finished her studies in 1981, the couple had rejected
having their own child. During the 70's, Mrs. Stern had suffered several
symptoms of multiple sclerosis, including brief numbness in her toes and legs
and blurred vision, and the couple ruled out pregnancy and child birth as a risk
to aggravating the multiple sclerosis.

Worked in Stores as Youth

Dr. Stern's infirmity, considered mild by neurologists, was not independently
diagnosed until after the custody fight for Baby M had started.

Part of Mrs. Whitehead's legal attack on the surrogate agreement is that it is
fraudulent because it states Dr. Stern is infertile, when some neurologists
would advise a woman with her condition to become pregnant if she wanted her own
child.

At roughly the same time, the Whiteheads were embarking into the rocky early
years of their 13-year marriage in blue-collar towns on the Jersey Shore. When
Dr. Stern's medical studies started in the fall of 1974, Mrs. Whitehead was 17
and the mother of an infant son, Ryan, now 12. By then, she had already worked
part-time for three years in a pizzeria and in her brother's deli.

She had dropped out of high school, against her parents' wishes, in her
sophomore year, at 15. Mrs. Whitehead has testified that she disliked school and
that her closest friends, who had been seniors, had graduated. #13 Months in
Mekong Delta In December 1973, at 16, she married Richard Whitehead, eight years
her senior. A high school graduate, he became a truck driver for construction
and sanitation companies, after having served 13 months on combat duty in the
Mekong Delta in Vietnam. They met about a year before their marriage, after Mr.
Whitehead had been hit by a car and blinded in the left eye.

During the seven years that Elizabeth Stern pursued her medical degree and Mr.
Stern worked to help finance it, the Whiteheads endured rough times, emotionally
and financially.

In late 1978, Mr. Whitehead fell asleep at the wheel after drinking and hit
three poles. He lost his driver's license and his truck-driving job and entered
Alcoholics Anonymous for a year. To help support the family, Mrs. Whitehead took
a job as a dancer and bartender in her sister Beverly's bar for a few months.

''I never did anything to embarrass my husband or my children,'' she said.

'To Be Home for Them'

Over the course of their marriage, she had earned extra money cleaning houses,
running coat-check counters in restaurants and selling ski equipment at
Christmas in department stores.

All the work has been part-time, she said, so she could be home parts of the day
with Ryan and her daughter, Tuesday, who was born in January 1976.

''I wanted to be home for them,'' she testified. ''I felt that was more
important than making money.''

Through the late 70's, the Whiteheads rented a series of houses. They separated
for six months. In 1983, they declared bankruptcy.

Mr. Whitehead now is a sanitation worker earning $28,500 a year. Financial
problems persist. In late 1985, the Whiteheads bought her sister's house, a
three-bedroom ranch in a lower-middle-class neighborhood in Brick.

The sister and her husband lent the Whiteheads $33,000 to complete the purchase.
The terms of the mortgage called for payment of a lump sum of $8,000 last March,
The Whiteheads did not make the payment, and the infertile sister whom Mrs.
Whitehead had hoped to help and her husband have sued to foreclose.

'Something Took Over'

Mr. and Mrs. Whiteheads have testified that they fully understood the agreement,
including the surrender of parental rights, and that they fully intended to
comply with them.

At the birth, however, Mrs. Whitehead could not bring herself to give the infant
girl to the Sterns or sign the papers allowing Dr. Stern to adopt the baby
legally.

''At the end, something took over,'' she said. ''It overpowered me. I had no
control.''

Mrs. Whitehead's obstetrician, Dr. James F. Marino, said that throughout her
three days in the hospital, she was distraught. ''From the time of delivery,
every time I saw her she was crying,'' he testified.

But amid the guardian's critical evaluation of Mrs. Whitehead's mental health
and the drumbeat of negative factors raised by the Sterns' lawyers, no one has
even remotely suggested that Mrs. Whitehead neglects or abuses her children -
the legal criteria for establishing a mother unfit.

Views From Neighbors

If anything, she has emerged as domineering and overly lavish, if not cloying,
in her attention and affection. She blow-dries their hair in the morning and
selects their clothes daily. The guardian's experts noted that she often
answered for them and called them her ''Barbie and Ken dolls.''

Neighbors consider the children polite, well groomed and well behaved, according
to a probation officer's report submitted to Judge Sorkow.

''She's as good a mother as anyone can be,'' one neighbor, William McGee, a
former New York police officer, was quoted in the report.

As to her husband, the guardian's experts found him deferential to his wife's
wishes. They also found Mr. Whitehead forthright, articulate, genuine, quiet and
''down to earth.''

'All the Corny Things Kids Love'

Mrs. Whitehead called him ''sensitive and loving.''

''He doesn't let down his walls for too many people,'' she said.

On Halloween night, she said, 25 neighborhood children were out with Mr.
Whitehead. ''He does all the corny things kids love,'' she testified.

On the eve of the trial's resumption, there are contrasts, too, in the exposure
of Baby M to Mr. Stern and Mrs. Whitehead. She was with Mrs. Whitehead the first
four months of her life, mostly at Mrs. Whitehead's hideaway at her parents's
home in Holiday, Fla.

For six months, the Sterns, who have temporary custody, have raised the baby at
their three-bedroom colonial home in Tenafly, a suburb of upper-middle-class
professionals 15 miles from Manhattan. They have taken the infant to museums;
model-train shows; supermarkets; department stores, to see a Santa at Christmas,
and on visits to friends in Manhattan.

Since October, Mrs. Whitehead has been allowed to visit the baby four hours a
week, always under a guard's supervision, at a county home for wayward youths
here. Most days, she said, she feeds the baby lunch and Baby M sleeps. Mrs.
Whitehead said she was ''humiliated'' by the atmosphere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of the Sterns and the Whiteheads (NYT/William E. Sauro; AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 17, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'CLEVELAND AND HALF-WAY BACK'

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 671 words


AS Leslie Lyles's ''Cleveland and Half-Way Back'' begins (at the Ensemble Studio
Theater), Cynthia Nixon is washing a vast quantity of laundry -shirts, shorts
and straitjacket. That last item is the first clue to the setting, a mental
institution catering to disturbed young people. As long as Ms. Nixon and Keith
Reddin, as a fellow resident, are confined in the institution - not very long -
the evening has a certain spark of eccentricity. But almost as soon as the
couple escape and take to the open road, the play starts to wander. Eventually
it swerves entirely out of control.

''Cleveland and Half-Way Back'' is muddled both in the writing and in the
staging (by James Hammerstein). It simply moves quixotically from one situation
to another. Thematically, the play is a hitchhiker, taking a free ride from
other stylish vehicles. A wedding ceremony, in which the bride (Ms. Nixon) wants
to be rescued at the altar, may remind one of ''The Graduate.'' Scenes from a
quarrelsome Italian-American marriage have the outline but none of the flavor of
the world of Albert Innaurato.

Ms. Lyles's play is not only derivative, it also raises far too many unanswered
questions. We are led to believe that Ms. Nixon is hopelessly in love with Mr.
Reddin, with no action on his part to justify the passion. The young woman's
unseen father, a wealthy WASP businessman, unaccountably forces her to marry an
unemployed actor (Bruce MacVittie, in one of the show's several unrewarding
roles). Later, the father, apparently confusing the 1960's with 1929, plunges
from a building, Wall Street style. Mr. Reddin, again without ample motivation,
joins the Army to fight in Vietnam. The war, like so much else in the evening,
is there to fulfill a contrived purpose.

Unhappily married to Mr. MacVittie, Ms. Nixon becomes a drudge and a doormat in
Cleveland, chained to her cartoon Italian-American mother-in-law (a role that
wastes the comic talent of Lola Pashalinski). In the play's most unamusing
sequence, Ms. Nixon is once again doing laundry, this time by hand, with washtub
and wringer. It was at this juncture that I began to think that, covertly, the
play's principal subject was laundry.

It is not about much of anything else. Deep in the second act, the heroine,
trapped in that dreadful marriage, a victim of her husband's machismo,
announces, ''I forgot to breathe and live my life.'' That, in fact, may be
intended as a summary of her character and of the play - a small point,
insufficiently explored.

Ms. Nixon, who has been maturing into a graceful actress, occasionally manages
to transcend the script, and, in a cameo role as a flirtatious friend, a woman
with a personality as jaunty as her high hairdo, Julie Garfield briefly
brightens the second act. The other actors, however, are lost somewhere on the
road to Cleveland.

Mr. Reddin, himself an artful playwright and actor, is once again playing a
would-be psychotic, but this time his role is insupportable. In compensation, he
occasionally shouts, an approach that is also taken by Mr. MacVittie, forced to
deliver a Stanley Kowalski caricature.

Standing in for minor characters are life-size cutouts, awkwardly placed on
stage. Richard Harmon's set design - intentionally blurred projections and
rummage-sale furniture - is one of the evening's debits. Up to now, the
playwright has been known as a talented actress (most recently playing a Russian
in Mr. Reddin's ''Highest Standard of Living''). ''Cleveland and Half-Way Back''
should not encourage her to switch professions.

WANDERERS - CLEVELAND AND HALF-WAY BACK, by Leslie Lyles; directed by James
Hammerstein; set design, Richard Harmon; costume design, David Woolard; lighting
design, Tina Ann Byers; sound design, Bruce Ellman; production stage manager,
Jane Sanders. Presented by the Ensemble Studio Theater, 549 West 52d Street.
Piper...Cynthia Nixon
Jeffery...Keith Reddin
Buffy...Rebecca Nelson
Anthony...Bruce MacVittie
Mama...Lola Pashalinski
Betty...Julie Garfield

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MANY TOP LEADERS SHIFTED IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 519 words

DATELINE: CHIANG MAI, Thailand, Feb. 17


Vietnam reorganized its Government today, replacing the Interior and Defense
Ministers along with at least a dozen other officials, according to the Hanoi
radio.

Among the new appointments, Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach has taken on the
additional title of Deputy Prime Minister.

Le Duc Anh, commander of Vietnamese forces in Cambodia, becomes Defense
Minister, replacing Gen. Van Tien Dung, who was credited with building the Ho
Chi Minh Trail through Laos and Cambodia in the Vietnam War. General Dung was
the strategist of the final assault on South Vietnam in the mid-1970's.

The changes announced today come two months after a shake-up in the hierarchy of
the ruling Communist Party. That shake-up followed criticism of party and
Government officials for inefficiency, corruption and other failures.

City Mayor Is Promoted

In the Government changes announced today, Mai Chi Tho, a former Mayor of Ho Chi
Minh City, becomes Minister of the Interior. He replaces Pham Hung, now the
second-ranking member of the Politburo, who remains one of the Deputy Prime
Ministers.

Prime Minister Pham Van Dong will retain his post, despite his reported pleas to
be relieved of his Government responsibilities. Mr. Dong, who is 80 years, old
and frail, resigned from the Politburo in December.

In the December changes, Prime Minister Dong was one of three leaders of the Ho
Chi Minh generation to resign his Politburo seat. The others were the General
Secretary, Truong Chinh, and Le Duc Tho, the negotiator in the peace talks that
led to the withdrawal of the United States from Vietnam.

Mr. Chinh, who is also the country's President, was replaced as party leader by
Nguyen Van Linh, a man with years of experience in former South Vietnam.

Mai Chi Tho, who was named Interior Minister today, is another high party
official with long experience in the South. The brother of Le Duc Tho, he is
reported to be a tough internal-security advocate who was trained in the Soviet
Union in 1985. New Food Ministry Among other appointments announced today were
these:

The Deputy Prime Ministers, in addition to Foreign Minister Thach and Mr. Hung,
will be Nguyen Khanh, Ngoc Triu, Tran Duc Luong, Nguyen Van Chinh and Doan Duy
Thanh, who will also be responsible for foreign trade.

Nguyen Cong Tan will head a newly created Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Industries. Hoang Quy will be Finance Minister; Vu Tran, Minister of Light
Industry, and Vu Ngoc Hai, Minister of Energy, another newly revamped
department. All these ministries are critical to Vietnam's attempts to redirect
its faltering economy.

Tran Van Phac becomes Minister of Culture, Pham Minh Hac becomes Education
Minister, and Tran Hoan will head a new Information Ministry.

The country's Nationalities Commission, which dealt with minority groups, has
apparently been dissolved, the announcement indicated today.

A new Commission for Economic Relations with Foreign Countries has been created.
Hanoi has made one of its major goals the building up of exports. It also hopes
to attract investment from the the Western industrialized nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MYSTERY IN MANILA: SINGLAUB'S QUEST

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1128 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Feb. 17


Maj. Gen. John K. Singlaub, a retired United States Army officer who has played
a major role in advising and raising money for the Nicaraguan rebels, is now
spending much of his time on what he describes as a treasure hunt in the
Philippines.

The nature of General Singlaub's activities here is not entirely clear. The
general and some associates, who include several American military veterans,
have received a Government permit to hunt for treasure. They are said to hope to
find the ''Yamashita treasure,'' a hoard of gold, jewelry and artifacts said to
have been plundered by the Japanese during World War II and hidden in the
Philippines.

But various Philippine sources say General Singlaub, formerly Chief of Staff of
United States forces in Korea and later the chairman of the World Anti-Communist
League, a private group, may also be engaged in efforts to foster anti-Communist
groups here.

A senior Philippine military officer who said he had been tracking General
Singlaub's activities here said today that he believed the general was engaged
in ''intense psychological operations'' to lay the groundwork for unofficial
counterinsurgency programs.

As speculation about General Singlaub's purpose here has intensified, he appears
to have avoided contacts with the press. Efforts to contact him at an office
here were unsuccessful.

Visiting as 'Private Citizen'

Officials of the United States Embassy and the presidential palace said they
believed that General Singlaub was engaged only in treasure hunting.

Allan Croghan, an embassy spokesman, said the general was here ''as a private
citizen'' and had no connection with the United States Government.

Teodoro Locsin, an assistant to President Corazon C. Aquino, said he believed
General Singlaub was ''obsessed'' with treasure hunting. He said he had
requested permits to hunt treasure in 209 locations and had received permission
to hunt at one site, which was not specified.

An American diplomat said that ''wacky as it may seem'' he was convinced that
General Singlaub was really here for the Yamashita treasure. It is named for
Gen. Tomoyuki Yamashita, the Japanese military commander during the World War II
occupation, who was executed for war crimes in 1946.

According to Philippine and American sources, Ambassador Stephen W. Bosworth
approached Philippine officials last year in behalf of General Singlaub's
attempt to gain a treasure-hunting permit.

Meetings With Business Groups

But several Philippine sources say General Singlaub has also been meeting with
various right-wing and business groups, giving them the impression he is
representing the United States Government. He has reportedly encouraged his
listeners to defend themselves against the Communist insurgents and the leftists
who, some have asserted, hold positions of influence in the Government.

General Singlaub has reportedly also met with Government officials, including
Juan Ponce Enrile, who was then Defense Minister. Mr. Enrile was ousted by Mrs.
Aquino in November and is now a leading opposition figure.

In an interview today, Mr. Enrile said he had met General Singlaub twice, in
March or April 1986 and again last fall. ''He was asking me about security for
his treasure hunting,'' Mr. Enrile said. ''That's about it.''

The latter meeting aroused speculation in local newspapers because it came while
dissident military officers appeared to be threatening a coup against President
Aquino.

The senior military officer, who declined to be identified by name, said General
Singlaub appeared to be making ''intense psychological preparations for
launching a counterinsurgency campaign.'' He said the general was offering
''methods and models of how to fight Communism if the Government does not.''

He said the suggestions ''center mainly on self-protection.''

Possibly a 'Cover Activity'

The officer said he did not believe such activities were a threat to national
security, adding that he felt that the country could benefit from having ''a
broad anti-Communist party.'' He suggested that a treasure hunt could be ''a
complementary activity or a cover activity'' for this project.

Gen. Luis Villareal, head of the National Intelligence Coordinating Agency, said
he believed that the treasure hunt was intended to raise money for
anti-Communist activities.

General Villareal, the president of the Filipino Anti-Communist Movement, an
affiliate of General Singlaub's group, said the treasure-hunting operations
included American veterans of the Korean and Vietnam Wars.

But both he and the senior military officer said they did not believe General
Singlaub was either importing or training mercenaries.

''That's all false, and I ought to know,'' General Villareal said. He said
General Singlaub had given no funds to anti-Communist groups here.

One well-placed military source said: ''Singlaub comes in and out of the
country. He can even land at Clark without our knowing it.'' He was referring to
Clark Air Base, a major American installation here.

Offers of Weapons Reported

One man involved in the activities of groups loyal to the former President,
Ferdinand E. Marcos, said Americans whom he believed to be associates of General
Singlaub had offered weapons and communications equipment to pro-Marcos forces.

But General Villareal said General Singlaub had turned down requests to meet
with the Marcos loyalists.

General Singlaub has established himself in the Manila office of a Hong
Kong-registered company called Nippon Star. The company opened an office last
year in a building owned by Raymond Moreno, an associate of Gen. Fabian C. Ver,
who was the armed forces Chief of Staff under Mr. Marcos.

General Singlaub, 65 years old, has served in three wars and was wounded in two,
winning 29 medals.

He retired under pressure in 1978 after criticizing decisions by President
Carter to reduce the number of troops in South Korea and to bar production of
the neutron bomb. The Korean troop withdrawal plan was later reversed.

Tales of the Treasure

The Yamashita treasure has spawned its own mysteries and legends since the end
of the war. In various accounts the loot has been estimated at tens of billions
of dollars and is said to have been stashed in 172 locations around the
Philippines, marked on a ''super-secret Japanese map.''

The treasure is said to be cursed, and tribesmen who have found caches of gold
are said to have met with misfortune. There are also stories of a
three-foot-high golden Buddha whose hollow stomach was filled with jewels;
legend has it that the figure ended up in the hands of Mr. Marcos himself.

Some former associates of Mr. Marcos say he told them that his own huge wealth
came from having discovered the Yamashita treasure.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John K. Singlaub (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY ANALYSIS;
AFGHAN WAR: IN YEAR SEVEN, A DEADLY STALEMATE

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1772 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


With the Afghan war now in its seventh year, and with serious fighting having
ebbed for the winter, neither side appears any closer to winning than they were
when Soviet troops joined the fray in December 1979, military experts say.

The situation is difficult to assess because few qualified, independent
observers are permitted into Afghanistan. But despite the uncertainty over
details, patterns and trends suggest that the outcome will be in doubt for some
time to come.

The war has been costly to the Soviet Union - its forces have reportedly
suffered 30,000 casualties - and analysts say the Russians would like to get out
of ''their Vietnam.''

There is no easy way out, however, that does not imply a Soviet defeat, a
repudiation of the Brezhnev doctrine or the abandonment of the Soviet-installed
Afghan Government under Najib. That doctrine, formulated at the time of the
Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968, holds that the Soviet Union cannot
allow a Communist regime on its borders to be overthrown.

Russians Not Seen Leaving

''If the Americans were fighting the war,'' an expert on the Soviet Union said,
''they would be losing.''

He said American frustration with the inconclusiveness of the war would have
created domestic pressures to abandon the effort, something that is not the case
in the Soviet Union.

So, despite the assessment of the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, that the
Afghan war is a ''bleeding wound,'' and the recent offer of a cease-fire and a
phased Soviet withdrawal, it is not likely that the Russians will call it quits
in Afghanistan anytime soon.

What is likely for the coming year, according to experts, is that the Soviet
Union will seek to improve the military situation with the current force of
115,000 soldiers. Intelligence sources say they do not believe the Russians are
willing to commit more troops.

At the same time, the experts say, the Moscow leadership will seek an acceptable
political formula that will leave a friendly Afghanistan on the Soviet Union's
southern border. According to one Afghan specialist, ''The Russians know they
can't win militarily, so they are looking for a creative political solution.''

Much American intelligence on the war is based on satellite photographs and
radio interceptions. Although this results in accurate, quantifiable
intelligence on such things as numbers of tanks and troops, it provides little
in the way of insight.

Unclear on Who Is Ahead

In the absence of firsthand information, American experts differ on which side
has the upper hand. The State Department and the Pentagon are generally
optimistic over battlefield prospects for the guerrillas, as long as arms and
supplies continue to flow to them by way of Pakistan. Many intelligence
analysts, however, are divided in their opinions, as are outside experts on
Afghanistan.

The 120,000 Afghan guerrilla fighters have suffered heavy losses since the war
began in the summer of 1979, with armed insurrection against a new leftist
Government. The guerrillas have seen portions of their homeland devastated by
the fighting.

The Afghan insurgents have demonstrated traditional skill in guerrilla warfare
and have shown a limited ability to carry the war to the Soviet-occupied cities.
But to date, the guerrillas do not pose a serious threat to the Soviet
occupation. Nor have the guerrillas shown more than a marginal willingness to
put aside tribal differences and help one another against the Russians and the
Kabul Government.

Military experts agree that the performance of the Soviet Army has been
generally poor throughout the war, with the exception of special units. Its
allied Afghan Army of approximately 30,000 has been known more for desertions
than for effectiveness, according to most experts.

Soviet troop morale is reported to be low, and drugs have become a problem. Poor
sanitation and hygiene in the field have resulted in a high incidence of
sickness such as hepatitis. Even Soviet air supremacy, the Russian strong suit
in the war, is being trumped by the insurgents now that they have received
hand-held American Stinger antiaircraft missiles.

About 150 of the heat-seeking missiles were delivered to the guerrillas last
year and there are reports that additional ones will be sent soon. According to
a Defense Department source, the mujahedeen, as the guerrillas are known, have
been quick to learn how to operate the weapon and have had a 70 percent success
rate aginst Soviet planes and helicopters. The source also indicated that morale
among Soviet helicopter pilots has become a problem since the appearance of the
Stinger on the battlefield.

To avoid embarrassment to Pakistan, United States officials are reluctant to say
much about the flow of American military aid that goes to the guerrillas by way
of Pakistan. It has been reliably reported, however, that in addition to
providing Stingers, the Central Intelligence Agency finances the purchase of
Chinese-made arms, which are shipped to the guerrillas through Pakistan.

Sources say that the combination of United States-supplied weapons and those
captured from the Russians and the Afghan Army has solved the weapons shortage
experienced by the resistance in the early days of the war.

Throughout the last six years, the Russians and the Afghan Army have
experimented with strategies and tactics in search of a successful military
antidote to the guerrillas. To date they do not appear to have found it.

At the outset, the Russians tried to leave fighting to the Afghan Army and
restricted use of Soviet forces to small-scale forays against the guerrillas.
When it became clear that the Afghan Army was no match for the guerrillas and
that desertion by Government troops was widespread, the Soviet Army became more
actively involved.

There followed large-scale operations and the deliberate destruction of villages
and crops, and officers planned combined offensives that made heavy use of
bombers, tanks and artillery. But the Russians soon realized that this tactic,
suitable for the plains of Central Europe, would not work in mountainous
Afghanistan. The guerrillas merely melted into the hills in the face of superior
Soviet firepower.

Thereafter, the Russians tried helicopter-borne attacks with regular army units.
Special units known as ''spetsnaz'' were brought in to employ counterguerrilla
tactics, and Soviet attack aircraft were introduced to harry the guerrillas and
their supply lines from Pakistan.

Each shift in Soviet tactics met with some initial success, but the guerrillas
quickly came up with countertactics to frustrate the Russians.

Success, but Not Victory

As successful as the guerrillas have been in defending themselves, however, this
cannot be viewed as victory. The guerrillas have hurt the Russians, but they
have not defeated them.

To date, guerrilla successes have been of three types. They have frequently
ambushed Soviet and Government forces. These include ambushes of Soviet aircraft
and helicopters that are lured into valleys only to come under insurgent fire
from heavy machine guns and missiles.

The guerrillas have also been successful in disrupting Soviet supply lines. In a
land of few roads, most of which wind through the mountains, the guerrillas have
trapped and destroyed many supply trucks. In the eastern regions, the Russians
can safely move down the roads only in convoys heavily supported by aircraft and
helicopters providing covering fire.

The most dramatic and visible guerrilla successes have been in the form of
rocket attacks on Government-controlled cities, airfields and supply depots. The
Russians have established defensive positions around the most important targets,
but the guerrillas still manage to avoid the defenses to launch rockets against
targets in Kabul and other heavily defended areas.

But for all their tactical successes, the guerrillas have failed to come up with
a strategy that will lead to military victory. Unless they do, military experts
say, the initiative remains with the Russians, and six years of experience may
allow them to develop a tolerable and potentially successsful long-term
strategy.

New Soviet Strategy

Evidence of a new and possibly workable Soviet strategy began to emerge last
year. The goal of the strategy seems to be to safeguard the major cities in
Afghanistan and the routes that connect them with the flow of supplies from the
Soviet Union. Offensive operations may be restricted to local pacification
efforts around the cities and attacks against guerrilla supply efforts from
Pakistan.

The cities to be put under firm Government control are connected by a road that
forms a circle around the country and is called the Ring Road by some American
military analysts. The cities include Kabul, Ghazni and Jalalabad in the
mountainous east; Kunduz and Mazar-i-Sharif, north of the Hindu Kush mountains;
Herat, Shindand and Farah to the desert west, and Kandahar in the south.

Control of these cities and the surrounding territory would put much of the
population under Government domination. To do this, informed sources say,
semiautonomous commands have been established in zones around the country.

The zone commander is a local Afghan of proven ability, who is assisted by
Russian advisers. Each zone commander is in a population center and has at his
disposal a variety of Afghan units to include the army, the secret police,
tribal militias and special light units of Pushtoon warriors called Sarandoy.

In addition, the zones contain Soviet light battalions made up of airborne
troops trained for motorized or helicopter operations. Each zone commander is
responsible for the pacification of his region with the units assigned and can
call upon Kabul for additional help.

The rest of the Soviet and Afghan forces remain under the control of higher
headquarters, available for other operations like the reinforcement of zones and
the protection of supply lines, airfields and convoys.

With this strategy, the Russians are apparently settling in for a methodical
pacification of the populated areas. Military analysts say they believe that top
priority is being given to the Kabul region and the area north of the Hindu
Kush, astride the three major Soviet supply routes into Afghanistan.

In addition to military pacification efforts, the Russians have also undertaken
political, economic and psychological programs to try to convert the Afghans
under their control into loyal supporters of the Kabul Government. If they
succeed over time, military experts say, the guerrillas will be reduced to a
mere nuisance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows location of Ring Road (NYT)

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. - SOVIET TIES: A SENSE OF INERTIA

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1116 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


Even as Mikhail S. Gorbachev takes dramatic steps to liberalize some aspects of
Soviet society, the Soviet-American relationship seems overcome by a strange
sense of inertia, apparently immune to the momentum of change occurring in the
Soviet Union.

Among American officials and scholars who monitor Soviet affairs, there is
little disagreement that Mr. Gorbachev desires - even needs - reduced tension
with Washington. He said as much Monday, telling an audience of prominent
Westerners who were invited to the Kremlin that his concentration on domestic
changes required ''lasting peace, predictability and constructiveness in
international relations.''

But the Soviet leader's call for ''new thinking'' on domestic issues has given
no sign of representing a change in the traditional elements of Moscow's policy
toward Washington, which remains focused on controlling strategic arms as the
centerpiece of relations between the superpowers. As a consequence, less
intractable problems such as regional disputes have been left festering, and the
impasse in the arms talks has become pivotal in the overall relationship.

U.S. Officials at Odds

Furthermore, Administration officials are reportedly at odds with one another on
whether to interpret the Gorbachev moves as a public-relations deception or an
unusual opportunity for progress in East-West relations.

Senior State Department officials are said to believe that Washington should
look hard for creative approaches to Moscow, but some doubt President Reagan's
inclination to make decisions that would break the arms-control deadlock.

Nor do the Russians seem to have mapped out a clear course. ''They need some
agreement that will give them some kind of a respite from tensions with the
United States,'' said William G. Hyland, editor of Foreign Affairs Quarterly.
''I don't think they've quite figured out how to do it themselves.''

One of Mr. Gorbachev's tactics is to approach a broad spectrum of Americans
outside government, perhaps in an effort to create a climate more conducive to
conciliation by the Reagan Administration. Mr. Hyland, for example, was part of
an extraordinarily high-level group of former American officials who held
discussions earlier this month with Mr. Gorbachev and other Soviet leaders; the
group included two former Secretaries of State, Henry A. Kissinger and Cyrus R.
Vance, as well as a former Secretary of Defense, Harold Brown, and a former
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. David C. Jones, retired.

'Keep an Open Mind'

''There's no doubt at all that there is a dramatic new line, and the new line is
about the 'new thinking,' '' said another participant, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick,
former chief delegate to the United Nations, who was making her first trip to
Moscow. ''There is an affirmation of the need for new approaches, but there were
no new approaches. Now that's not a criticism, because new thinking and new
changes invariably take time if they are to occur. My own view is that what we
should do is try to keep an open mind and see what happens.''

Specialists in Soviet affairs say they see no contradiction between Mr.
Gorbachev's program of domestic liberalization - he has released political
prisoners, invited public criticism of economic shortcomings and opened screen
and stage to anti-Stalinist themes - and a posture of inflexibility in foreign
policy.

''Gorbachev recognizes that if the don't do something about the technology gap,
they'll enter the 21st century as a declining power rather than one that is
catching up,'' a senior American official said. ''This would erode the power
position of the Soviet Union in the world, so it is consistent to be changing at
home and rigid about Soviet foreign policy.''

Indeed, economic change is seen by Soviet military industrialists as essential
to ''Soviet geopolitical competitiveness,'' according to Dimitri K. Simes, a
Soviet emigre now at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, writing in
the current issue of Foreign Affairs.

''But any Soviet leader,'' he writes, ''might find his credibility among the
powerful national security elite badly damaged if change at home were to become
coupled with a perceived softness abroad.''

Conciliatory and Tough

Therefore, Mr. Gorbachev has been both conciliatory and tough. He has talked
about withdrawing Soviet troops from Afghanistan, but American officials doubt
that Moscow has reached the point of reconciling itself to having an Afghan
Government it cannot control. Similarly, new gestures but no new initiatives
have been made in the Middle East and the Far East. And although his aides have
talked about negotiating on testing ''Star Wars,'' President Reagan's idea for a
space-based missile defense, Mr. Gorbachev has not begun to bargain on this at
the Geneva talks.

The overriding emphasis on the arms negotiations is Moscow's choice, not
Washington's, and it reflects the longstanding disparity between American and
Soviet perceptions of superpower competition. For the United States,
Soviet-American rivalry in third parts of the world - the Middle East, Central
America, Africa, Afghanistan - has occupied a major place in the anxieties about
Moscow's policies.

But the Soviet Union has never given high priority to these matters, and
American officials say Soviet-American talks on regional problems have amounted
to little more than recitations of each side's familiar positions.

'Think About Real Things'

''We try to get the Soviets to think about real things they might do and not
just talk in generalities,'' a senior American official said. ''We say, 'If
you're interested in easing tensions, why don't we start in areas where the
problem is - Vietnam, Cambodia, North and South Korea?' ''

For example, he said, the Administration asked Moscow to urge North Korea to
permit some ties with the South, such as a mail agreement and permission for
Koreans to travel back and forth between North and South.

Moscow has been flirting with a policy shift in the Middle East but has stopped
short of renewing diplomatic ties with Israel. After several gestures - Poland
opened an interest section in Israel, Hungary revived a trade relationship, and
Bulgaria invited Shulamit Shamir, the wife of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, to
visit to Sofia - the Russians suggested sending a diplomatic delegation to
Israel, an Israeli official said. But the Russians pulled back when Israel
insisted on a return mission to Moscow.

Now, the Kremlin has revived the idea, the official said. But with domestic
change and arms control highest on the agenda, Moscow is not expected to take
any bold steps in the Middle East or elsewhere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON AIDE MAY GET NAVY POST

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 579 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


James H. Webb Jr., better known for his novel on the Vietnam War than as the
current Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve Affairs, is expected to be
nominated to replace John F. Lehman Jr. as Secretary of the Navy, Pentagon
officials said today.

Mr. Lehman, 44 years old, who handed his resignation to Defense Secretary Caspar
W. Weinberger several days ago, said at a news conference today that he would
stay on the job until his successor was named by the White House and confirmed
by the Senate. He said that, after a few months of leisure, he intended to seek
an executive position in private industry.

The Navy Secretary did not say who would succeed him.

Mr. Webb, 40, is the author of three books, including the critically acclaimed
novel ''Fields of Fire.'' He has spent the last three years in the Pentagon
managing the reserve and National Guard forces that back up active duty military
personnel.

A Naval Academy Graduate

He was graduated from the Naval Academy in 1968, fought as a Marine officer in
Vietnam, then earned a law degree at Georgetown University here and served as a
staff member to a Congressional committee.

Officials said Mr. Webb had been asked by Mr. Weinberger to serve as his Navy
Secretary.

Mr. Webb had announced his intention to leave his Pentagon post before Mr.
Lehman decided to resign.

Mr. Webb would be moving from one of the less visible positions in the
bureaucracy to one that affords relative prominence. As Navy Secretary, Mr.
Lehman was among the most outspoken members of the Reagan Administration. He is
credited with being an influential advocate for growth in spending for the Navy.

Those who know Mr. Webb say that he can be as pugnacious as his predecessor.
Indeed, he was a boxer at Annapolis, where he was defeated for the sparring
championship by a classmate, Oliver L. North, the former National Security
Council aide who figures prominently in the Iran arms affair.

In recent months Mr. Webb has actively defended the training of United States
reservists in Honduras despite opposition from Governors who oppose the use of
National Guard troops to support the Administration's Central American policies.

But while the Navy might continue to be led by a youthful and aggressive
bureaucrat, the problems facing Mr. Webb could be different from those addressed
by Mr. Lehman. The growth of the Navy to 600 ships, one of Mr. Lehman's
principal goals, has been virtually assured by the current construction program.
It would be up to Mr. Webb to see the fleet equipped and manned.

Navy Personnel Shortage

The Navy continues to face shortages of personnel, especially in the ranks of
nuclear officers and aviators. Many military experts say that reserve forces
will be crucial in filling the personnel slots in the years ahead.

Mr. Lehman said that after spending some time with his three young children he
would seek a position in industry. He said that he had no plans to run for
public office and that he intended to continue living in suburban Virginia.

He said he did not plan to work in the military contracting industry, although
he would not rule it out. Before becoming Navy Secretary he was a partner in a
consulting concern.

For more than a year Mr. Lehman's associates have said they expected him to
leave his job before the end of the Reagan Administration, but they consider him
likely to stay active in politics, perhaps returning to a future Republican
administration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of James H. Webb Jr. (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Japanese View U.S. Industry

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words


PRESIDENT REAGAN met with a group of top business leaders in the East Room of
the White House yesterday to discuss America's loss of competitiveness in world
markets - and what can be done about it. The Scottish poet Robert Burns
suggested that we should see ourselves as others see us, and nobody seems to see
the problems of American industry more clearly these days than do the Japanese.
With their growing stake in the United States economy, not only as a market but
also as a site for production and investment, the Japanese companies are
studying the American scene more intensively than ever.

The Japan Foreign Trade Council Inc., composed of the Japanese trading
companies, has commissioned a report on the outlook and problems of trade and
industry of the United States, a copy of which has been obtained by The New York
Times.

The study is striking for its originality and objectivity. In part, it accepts
the American view, expressed in the latest report of President Reagan's Council
of Economic Advisers and frequently by Treasury Secretary James A. Baker 3d,
that America's trade problems stem from macroeconomic causes: not only the
disparity in economic growth between the United States and other major countries
but also imbalances in currency rates. But the Japanese report goes beyond these
macroeconomic factors to look at underlying industrial and structural
developments. It employs the input-output analysis developed by Prof. Wassily W.
Leontief, a Nobel laureate at New York University, to disclose the roots of
America's trade problems.

These structural problems are found in the regional breakdown of the American
economy. Starting in World War II, the Japanese report says, the population grew
faster in the West but stagnated in the Northeast and Midwest. The Korean War,
the space age and the Vietnam War increased Government spending in the West and
South, the Japanese find. The energy crisis in the 1970's accelerated the shift
to the West and South. Further, direct investments of foreign capital in the
West and South, especially by Japan, encouraged the trend.

The problem today, as the Japanese see it, is that while demand has grown more
rapidly in the West and the South, supplies from the North cannot fill that
demand, producing a mismatch between demand and supply and leading to larger
imports.

The Japanese study stresses other American developments that aggravated the
trade deficit. One is a loss of management effectiveness in basic industries. At
the end of the 1970's, the report says, the United States was exceeded in steel
output by the Soviet Union and in auto output by Japan. In electronic products
and machinery ''Japan has been fiercely challenging American industry.'' The
trade deficit, they believe, ''may imply that a weakening of international
competitiveness has sped to the technologically advanced sectors.''

The Japanese report also notes that American management has been changing its
external strategy as the nation moves into different stages of development. In
phase one, America imported capital, but after World War II American
multinational corporations made huge investments abroad. Since the early 1970's,
the report states, American companies have been cutting direct investments
abroad and instead have sought joint ventures with foreign firms. As a result,
imports have been growing much faster than exports. The country is still in
phase three in which enterprises increase their imports to make their products
domestically competitive with cheap imports.

The Japanese express concern about the ''hollowing'' - or de-industrialization -
of American industry. They blame deficiencies in management, unfavorable
relationships between labor and management and poor adaptation to new production
technology. They note criticism that the American economy is in danger of
becoming a ''hamburger stand economy,'' mainly composed of primary and tertiary
sectors - raw materials industries at one end and service industries at the
other.

However, the Japanese investigators, headed by Masahira Sakamoto, chief
economist of the International Trade Institute, find many advantages remaining
in American industry. The first advantage, they state, is that American industry
has kept its technological superiority in most advanced fields. ''Especially in
the basic and development stage, there is a huge accumulation of innovative
ideas,'' the report says. But stronger efforts are needed, it adds, to develop
these ideas commercially through cooperation of universities, businesses and
local governments.

Second, the Japanese report says, wage costs, ''the principal reasons why
businesses shifted their production sites abroad,'' have been declining or at
least not increasing recently.

Third, it adds, ''the most beneficial advantage is that the United States has an
abundant and advanced market, which is the precondition for the development of
key advanced industries.''

The Japanese still regard the United States as ''the most dynamic society among
the industrial countries as indicated by population and internal migration.'' It
now finds the coastal regions both in the West and the East to be developing
rapidly.

The Japanese report, in putting its greatest stress on underlying structural
developments, pays little attention to the obstacles to American exports imposed
by Japan and other governments. The new trade legislation that President Reagan
and his advisers are considering will, in all probability, insist that trade
surplus countries such as Japan and the newly industrializing countries of Asia
liberalize access to their markets or face retaliation by the United States. The
Administration also means to broaden the scope of unfair trade legislation to
reach new issues, such as rights in the workplace, the theft of intellectual
property and American access to foreign markets.

Also the Administration is paying greater attention to the need to capitalize on
America's technological advantages. It is sympathetic to the idea, discussed by
Democrats in Congress, of creating a department of trade that would pull
together the feuding American trade policy bureaucracy and monitor American
high-tech performance.

The Japanese, in their study of the American economy, have ventured to write
different scenarios - optimistic and pessimistic - for the future American
economy. We will look at these scenarios in another column.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DIRECTOR TESTIFIES IN 3 FILM DEATHS

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 18


The film director John Landis testified today at his trial on manslaughter
charges that he knowlingly violated California labor law by having two children
work on the set of the movie ''Twilight Zone'' at night without permits. The two
children were killed in the filming, along with the actor Vic Morrow.

''We decided to break the law,'' Mr. Landis testified in his own defense, saying
that the sky would not have been dark enough in the legal hours for filming with
children.

''I thought we would honor not the letter of the law but the spirit of the
law,'' Mr. Landis said. ''We would find the children and explain to the parents
that we were going to do a technical violation.'' ''I understand it was wrong,''
he said.  Mr. Landis, 36 years old, bespectacled and bearded, facing a courtroom
crowded with spectators and reporters, described in a clear voice the events
leading up to the deaths of Mr. Morrow, 53 years old, and the two children,
Renee Cnin, 6, and Myca Dinh Le, 7, when a helicopter being used in the filming
crashed on top of them on July 23, 1982.

Landis Is First Defense Witness

Mr. Landis, who was directing the film, and four associates, are charged with
involuntary manslaughter stemming from the helicopter's loss of control and
plunge to the ground amid the firing of special-effects explosives in a
simulated Vietnam War scene.

Mr. Landis, the first witness in the defense case, was called to the stand by
his leading lawyer, James Neal, a former prosecutor in the Watergate case.

Mr. Landis testified that he spoke to both sets of parents of the children, who
had been recruited for the film, and told them that a helicopter and
special-effects explosives would be used in the scene. He said he did not tell
them, however, that the children would be working in violation of labor code
requirements.

He said he did not tell them as a result of a discussion he had with an
associate producer, George Folsey, who is also on trial.

Attempts by Mr. Neal to have Mr. Landis tell the jury what Mr. Folsey had told
him were successfully opposed by the proseuctor, Lea Purwin D'Agostino.

The other defendants are Dan Allingham, production manager; Paul Stewart,
special-effects coordinator, and Dorcey Wingo, the helicopter pilot.

Mr. Landis described what he had told a third set of parents, whose children
were ultimately not selected for the movie; he said he repeated the same
description to the parents of the children who were killed.

Mr. Landis said he told them that Mr. Morrow was to ''find'' the children in a
mock Vietnamese village, ''that a helicopter would fire upon them, there'd be
rockets and explosives, then Vic would pick up the children and run across the
river and there'd be explosives.''

The movie was a production of Steven Spielberg at Warner Brothers. Mr. Spielberg
brought in Mr. Landis as director of one of the film's four-story segments. Mr.
Landis said he wrote the script himself and had added the scene with the
children at the suggestion of two Warner Brothers executives, who advised him to
find a way to ''soften'' the nature of the main character, who was depicted as
an embittered racist.

Did anyone ever suggest to him that the scene was dangerous, Mr. Neal asked his
client? ''No,'' Mr. Landis replied. Mr. Landis contradicted an earlier witness,
who testified for the prosecution, that she had raised concerns about danger.
Mr. Neal reminded Mr. Landis that Marci Liroff, an assistant to the picture's
casting director, Mike Fenton, testified that at a casting meeting she had told
Mr. Landis that the scene ''sounded kind of dangerous.''

Asked whether she had ever said that to him, Mr. Landis replied, ''Absolutely
not.''

In five and a half months of testimony, the prosecutor, Ms. D'Agostino,
attempted to show that Mr. Landis and his co-defendants had wrecklessly
endangered the lives of the actors by placing them in the helicopter scene.

The defense lawyers have contended that the crash was an unforeseeable accident
in which the helicopter was unexpectedly disabled by heat from a special-effects
explosion. The lawyers have also asserted that a special-effects operator set
off one of the explosions too soon, before the helicopter had moved far enough
away.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John Landis and his wife, Deborah (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

White House Tells of Choice To Replace Secretary of Navy

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 90 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 18


The White House announced today that President Reagan would nominate James H.
Webb Jr. to succeed John F. Lehman Jr. as Secretary of the Navy.

Mr. Webb, a 41-year old veteran of the Vietnam War, is currently the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for reserve affairs. On Tuesday, when Secretary Lehman
announced his resignation, Pentagon officials said Mr. Webb would be named to
the job.

Mr. Webb, who faces a confirmation vote by the Senate, is the author of several
books, including a novel about the Vietnam War, ''Fields of Fire.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN-REFUGEE ABUSE REPORTED

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: CHIANG MAI, Thailand, Feb. 18


More than 250,000 Cambodians, many of them survivors of the Khmer Rouge era and
victims of an eight-year-old war against the Vietnamese who ousted it, continue
to be vulnerable to abuse in refugee camps in Thailand, according to the New
York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights.

In a report made public today, based on extensive interviews in Thai-Cambodian
border camps for refugees and displaced people, the human-rights organization
documented cases of rape, robbery, assault, extortion and murder, often
perpetrated by fellow Cambodians who roam the lawless border area in well-armed
bandit gangs.

Attackers Singled Out

The report, ''Seeking Shelter: Cambodians in Thailand,'' concludes that the
residents of a string of border camps and a refugee center now in the process of
being closed are often abused by the people assigned to protect them.

Their attackers sometimes come from the guerrilla armies they support -
particularly soldiers or former soldiers of the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, some of whom act as warlords in border areas - or from Thai
forces, in particular the paramilitary ''rangers'' of Task Force 80, a unit
created in 1980 specifically for this border area.

The material on Thai military abuses was gathered and analyzed by the
committee's principal interviewers, Stephen Golub, a lawyer and consultant to
the committee who did research in the camps; Floyd Abrams, a New York lawyer,
and Diane Orentlicher, director of the committee's international human-rights
program, who had talks with Thai and international officials.

The charges have never been so convincingly or comprehensively documented, an
official of an international relief organization said here.

'Caliber of Ranger Units Varies'

''The caliber of ranger units varies widely,'' the report says. ''Some have
heroically defended Cambodian camps from raids by Cambodian bandits. Several
rangers have been wounded, and at least two killed.'

''All too often, however,'' the report concludes, ''ranger units are
ill-disciplined, unruly, and even violent. Some relief workers suspect that many
ranger units include juvenile delinquents and paroled convicts.'

Information on Task Force 80 abuses collected by a reporter from refugees in
border camps over the last two years corroborates these conclusions. Several
women at Site 2, where 140,000 people live within a mile of Cambodian territory,
described sexual assaults by rangers.

Amnesty International documented a case of torture in March 1986 by Thai forces
at Khao I Dang, the refugee camp Thailand is now closing. Three Cambodians told
a Khmer-speaking foreigner investigating the incident for Amnesty that they had
been burned, struck with rifles, whipped with electric cables and doused with
boiling, salted water.

An Example Is Cited

The lawyers' committee report says: ''As recently as Nov. 18, 1986, an illegal
entrant who had been hiding in Khao I Dang was apprehended by several rangers.
He was fatally shot in the back of the head, and a post-mortem examination
identified a bullet hole in his wrist, which seemed to indicate that the
victim's hands were behind his head when the fatal bullet was fired.''

The report drew these conclusions:

* The proximity of camps to the border exposes them to attack by the Vietnamese.
The report recommends they be moved to safer ground.

* Khmer Rouge control over 59,000 Cambodians should be a greater cause of
concern. The report, finding that some civilians under Khmer Rouge control have
been forcibly moved or taken away for ''re-education,'' suggests that displaced
people in these camps should be given the option of moving to camps under
non-Communist control.

* Many abuses occur at night, when international agencies are not represented in
the camps. The report recommends that international personnel should be
stationed in the larger camps at night. It also recommends that the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees be given responsibility for protecting
all the displaced Cambodians, not just those classified as resettleable refugees
by Thailand.

Mr. Abrams and Ms. Orentlicher, who produced two years ago the first report on
human-rights abuses inside Cambodia since the end of the Khmer Rouge era -
''Kampuchea: After the Worst'' - were denied entry to that country by the Phnom
Penh Government. But there have been no obstacles to gathering information in
Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Former Marine Sought In Bombings of Clinics

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 183 words


A manhunt is underway for a suspect in connection with the bombings of several
New York City abortion clinics, according to a senior law-enforcement official
involved with the investigation.

The investigator, who asked not to be named, said that more than 100 police
officers and Federal agents are seeking the suspect, 37-year-old Dennis John
Malvasi, who he said is ''armed and dangerous.''

Mr. Malvasi is described as a Marine Corps veteran who served in Vietnam and a
pyrotechnic expert who worked on last year's Statue of Liberty celebration
fireworks display. He is said to have used at least four aliases.

A warrant has been issued for Mr. Malvasi's arrest in connection with the
bombing of the Eastern Women's Center at 38 East 30th Street on Oct. 29, and the
attempted bombing the Margaret Sanger Pavillion of Planned Parenthood at 380
Second Avenue on Dec. 14.

Officials have linked these bombings to the attempted bombing of the Queens
Women's Medical Office at 83-06 Queens Boulevard on Nov. 11 and the Dec. 11
bombing of the Manhattan Women's Center at 115 East 23d Street. set

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'Platoon' Remains No. 1 In Box-Office Earnings

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 32, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 162 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 18


''Platoon,'' Oliver Stone's Vietnam War drama, earned $12.9 million last week to
remain in first place at the box office and more than double the earnings of the
second-place film.

Receipts from the holiday weekend ran 11 percent ahead of last year's box-office
figure, boosted mainly by the popularity of ''Platoon,'' which played in 1,194
theaters and had a per-screen average of $10,785. The film has earned $54.8
million in nine weeks of release.

''Outrageous Fortune,'' the Bette Midler-Shelley Long comedy from Disney,
remained in the No. 2 spot with earnings of $6.3 million in 1,302 theaters.

''Mannequin,'' a film about a mannequin who comes to life as a reincarnated
Egyptian princess, earned $6 million in its debut week for the No. 3 spot.

''Over the Top,'' Sylvester Stallone's arm-wrestling adventure, earned $5.1
million in its first week for fourth place, and ''Black Widow'' dropped from
fourth to fifth place for the week, earning $4.1 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AN ARTIST'S JOURNEY FROM OBSCURITY TO SUCCESS

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS C. McGILL

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 748 words


In the fall of 1981, the artist Ross Bleckner showed his newest paintings at the
Mary Boone gallery in SoHo. They were unusual works -mostly paintings of
vertical stripes that resembled Op Art - and the show was a flop. Not a single
major critic reviewed the show, and only one of the works sold.

Today, in a reversal of fortunes rare in the art world, Mr. Bleckner's ''stripe
paintings'' are among the most sought-after works of any contemporary artist.
Many major collectors of contemporary art own at least one, and several major
contemporary art museums, including the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston and the
Saatchi Collection in London, now own stripe paintings.

In addition, many of today's most successful younger artists, who paint in a
geometric abstract style very different from the Neo-Expressionist style that
held sway in the art world of the early 1980's, say that Mr. Bleckner's stripe
paintings were of seminal importance in the development of the new abstract
style.

''He's one of the most important painters in the emerging generation of American
artists,'' said David Ross, the director of the Institute of Contemporary Art in
Boston, which last year mounted a major exhibition of contemporary American
painting that prominently included Mr. Bleckner's work. ''The early stripe
paintings really opened the area of geometric abstraction to a thorough
reinterpretation by a new generation. A number of artists in this generation,
whether they paint like Ross or not, show an incredible respect for Ross as an
influence and a force.''

Paintings on View

An exhibition of Mr. Bleckner's most recent work, which includes a number of
stripe paintings that derive from the paintings in the 1981 show, is now on view
at the Mary Boone Gallery at 417 West Broadway, through Feb. 28.

The 37-year-old Mr. Bleckner lives and works in a converted industrial loft
building near Chinatown in Manhattan. Well known as a friend and supporter of
other artists, he is a sociable person with an explosive laugh that has become
something of a trademark. His studio is meticulously clean, with cans and tubes
of paint lined up in careful rows, although his dog, Renny, has the run of the
place. (Small bits of canine hair have occasionally been found among the stripes
near the bottom of Mr. Bleckner's paintings.) A native of Hewlitt, L.I., Mr.
Bleckner for a while considered becoming an investigative journalist, but then
decided he would rather shed light literally, in paintings, than through words.

He studied art first at New York University, and then at the California
Institute of the Arts in the early 1970's, where his classmates included a
number of artists who have since become highly successful in New York, including
Eric Fischl and David Salle.

Figure Became Fashionable

Unlike many of his friends, however, Mr. Bleckner leaned toward paintings that
were abstract and geometric. In the late 1970's and early 80's, as
Neo-Expressionist paintings of the human figure became fashionable, Mr. Bleckner
felt frustrated. A whole set of contemporary attitudes and feelings, he thought,
were not being allowed expression in the medium of painting.

His idea in making the stripe paintings, he said, was to to use the essential
form of Op Art - whose enormous popularity was short-lived in the 1960's - and
change it slightly, to make it a painterly metaphor for broader attitudes about
life in the 1970's and 80's.

''I was thinking about the idea of failed dreams,'' Mr. Bleckner said. ''It's
about how this post-Vietnam, post-60's generation doesn't have the same kind of
belief in how technology and science and medicine will deliver a more promising
and prosperous future. I think Op Art reflected those assumptions. I was
interested in taking this failed imagery and investing it with new meaning.''

What Mr. Bleckner did not know, when his stripe paintings were shown at the Mary
Boone Gallery in 1981, was that a number of young artists saw the works and were
greatly affected by them. That influence only gradually became known over the
next three years, as those younger artists began to enjoy some success of their
own.

''Usually shows either happen or they don't happen, at that moment,'' Mr.
Bleckner said. ''To have a show that doesn't happen, and then happens two or
three years later is intensely gratifying. Because the artist himself always
thinks the work is great, but there is always that doubt, the feeling that the
idea is really dumb.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ross Bleckner and his painting 'Infatuation' (NYT/Jack
Manning)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


THE RED WHITE AND BLUE. By John Gregory Dunne. 475 pages. Simon & Schuster.
$18.95.

''THE RED WHITE AND BLUE'' is the third novel among John Gregory Dunne's seven
published books to date. So we've come to know his fiction well enough to say
that one of the purposes it inevitably serves is as an outlet for the jokes and
comic stories that seem to flood his brain from time to time like so much water
overflowing a rain barrel.

For Mr. Dunne cascades gags and funny lines in ''The Red White and Blue,'' just
as he did in his earlier novels, ''True Confessions'' (1977) and ''Dutch Shea,
Jr.'' (1982). There are jokes on virtually every page of the book. They range
from broad to subtle, from sick to ethnic. Their targets are male and female,
rich and poor, radical and conservative, heterosexual and homosexual. Everyone
can take offense, from Jews and Catholics to Mexicans and Chinese. Even nuns and
midgets are made fun of, in a manner of speaking. John Gregory Dunne will stop
at nothing.

Few of Mr. Dunne's gags can be repeated here - except for the Hollywood mother
who specializes in ''theme bar mitzvahs'' (at ''Rancho Sheldon,'' she had ''a
branding iron for table selection''), or a woman so ambitious that she slept
''her way to the middle'' - because they are either too complex or too raunchy.
Many of them are funny enough to make the reader laugh out loud.

But the joking makes you wonder if, like the author's earlier novels, ''The Red
White and Blue'' is going to be a not altogether smooth blend of humor,
cynicism, violence and bad conscience. What, after all, does comedy really have
to do with a Joe Kennedy-like business tycoon whose two sons have disappointed
him by becoming, respectively, a socially connected priest and a Hollywood
screenwriter, although his daughter has succeeded in marrying the brother of the
President and sleeping her way to the top instead of the middle? What is to be
made fun of about Vietnam, assassination, revolution, the grape-worker's strike
or the volatility of Central American politics? What, in short, was funny about
the 1960's?

What was so funny? In ''The Red White and Blue,'' the absurdity of our recent
violent past achieves its apotheosis by being viewed from the perspective of
Hollywood. Mr. Dunne makes his narrator-protagonist, Jack Broderick, a laborer
in the filmyards of the movie industry. ''I am, as you have probably gathered by
now, a screenwriter,'' Broderick explains early on. Later he adds: ''Being as
rich as my father had made me allowed me to nourish a small talent for irony,
irony being the vehicle by which the essentially second rate arrive at some kind
of superiority. Screenwriting is the profession for someone of this temperament.
The pay is good, the responsibility is small, the emotional stake minimal.''

And the form of the novel is essentially the musings of a writer mulling over a
screenplay. ''There is a nun in this story. Below the title. She was buried in a
shallow grave in Chalatenango Province, Cristo Rey, C.A. The man who shot her
was, by all the unofficial accounts, wearing a Mickey Mouse sweatshirt. The gun
he used to shoot her was an Ingram Mac-10 with a flash suppressor. The nun was a
Sister of Mercy and her name was Sister Phyllis and the seven shots from the
Ingram Mac-10 with flash suppressor fired by the man in the Mickey Mouse
sweatshirt had obliterated Sister Phyllis's face.''

This is the technique of comedy pushed to the point of horror. The technique
works here in a variety of ways. We are given an execution by gassing of a
convicted murderer who has just attempted suicide by cutting his throat, the
urgency being to kill him officially before he can die by choice. His half
brother, a hero of the revolutionary left, plans to cash in by publishing his
correspondence to the deceased, even though he never knew him and not once in
his life wrote him a letter.

In Chalatenango Province, Cristo Rey, C.A., where Sister Phyllis dies, Onyx
Leon, the leader of the grape-pickers' strike, also disappears. His missing head
is finally located when an apparently pregnant dead woman, known not to be with
child when she died, is examined more closely. The American Ambassador to Cristo
Rey describes such events as ''regrettable,'' but says they must be seen as
''potentially destructive potholes along the highway to democracy.''

Jack Broderick's version of events might appear to be satirical, were it not set
against the background of the 1960's and 70's, when it was common to take up
murderers as social causes, and people actually did travel to Hanoi and accept
the gifts of rings made out of downed American fighter planes. So Mr. Dunne's
sense of the ridiculous seems wedded to reality here more happily than it ever
has in his fiction before.

Mr. Dunne can also be shocking in the candor with which certain of his
characters treat one another. In particular, there is the case of the narrator's
father, who has slept with his son's wife and isn't the least cowed when Jack
confronts him with the fact. The old man sneers, ''You're a cream puff if you
think you can put me away with that one.'' Yet despite Jack's having been
crippled by his father's treatment, there is something tonic about the old man's
straightforwardness. The real villains of ''The Red White and Blue'' are
hypocrisy and euphemism, and their mortal enemies are brutal honesty and the
calling of a spade a steam shovel. In the conflict between straight talk and
evasiveness lies the real source of the novel's extraordinary energy. And what
makes the story so bitterly funny are the shifts, to one extreme or the other,
in the battle between the truth and the lie.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of John Gregory Dunne (Quintana Roo Dunne)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MOUNTING DRIVE ON SMOKING STIRS TENSIONS IN WORKPLACE

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1405 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Feb. 19


The mounting drive to limit public smoking is complicating many personal
relationships and creating some serious tensions in the nation's workplace.

The immediate effects range from strained friendships to lawsuits, from verbal
confrontations to ostentatious coughing and arm-waving.

Employers are eager to deflate an increasingly emotional issue that links
personal health and civil rights. The antismoking drive has spawned advisers and
experts, who counsel corporate clients that while some lessons can minimize the
distractions and divisiveness, the antismoking movement is inexorable.

Question of Timing Only

''It's just exploded all over the world,'' said Robert Rosner of the Smoking
Policy Institute in Seattle. ''The biggest change in the last five years is that
it's no longer an 'if' question, it's a 'when' question.''

When Myrna Larry began agitating for no-smoking rules at her job in Minnesota, a
few people would not speak to her. She says she got some anonymous late-night
telephone calls. And there was at least one unpleasant hallway confrontation.
But today there is no opposition because there is no smoking in the offices of
that insurance company in St. Paul.

The experiences of Ms. Larry, her employer and her 699 co-workers are being
repeated around the country as concern grows about evidence linking smoke in the
environment to health damage, even for nonsmokers.

Tension Amid Uncertainty

In some cases, the impetus comes from employees' demands that employers restrict
smoking. In others the pressure comes from regulations imposed by state and
local governments.

Ironically, experts note, the worst tensions occur before precise restrictions
are imposed because both smokers and nonsmokers, now estimated at 70 percent of
the work force, are unclear on the rules and their rights.

Already, professionals have drawn other lessons on restrictions. One is to
involve smokers and nonsmokers in drafting company regulations. Another is to be
firm but allow ample time for workers to become accustomed to new limits,
perhaps gradually introducing steps. A third is for employers simultaneously to
offer and promote stop-smoking programs.

Peer Pressure, and Support

Some studies have also shown that while peer pressure is an important element in
antismoking enforcement, peer support for smokers struggling to quit is helpful,
too.

''We should all keep in mind,'' said John Pinney, executive director of the
Institute for the Study of Smoking Behavior and Policy, ''that while smokers are
a decreasing minority, there still are 55 million in this country. Most are
aware of the dangers and would like to quit if they could. It's important not to
be too hard on them. Many of us, including myself, are ex-smokers who began when
smoking was socially and even medically acceptable. Some sympathy, understanding
and encouragement can often go farther than open confrontation.''

Ms. Larry, who smoked 60 to 100 cigarettes a day until 1976, did not seek
confrontation in her office at MSI Insurance Companies in suburban St. Paul.
Three years ago she began a campaign of internal memorandums. In notes
dispatched to virtually every executive, she observed that while they encouraged
policyholders not to smoke, the company in effect encouraged employees to smoke
by allowing cigarette machines on the premises.

Contradictions Discerned

''I pointed out,'' she recalls, ''that the computer's operating manual said not
to smoke nearby. And if smoke isn't good for a machine, it probably isn't too
good for a human.''

Rich Cowles, MSI's communications director, said: ''Myrna became known as a
hard-nosed militant. There were some strained relations for sure. But she gets
the credit for keeping the issue alive around here. It's amazing how in a
corporate setting when the top person says something is going to get done,
everyone quickly falls into line.''

The ''top person'' at MSI was Gordon E. Lundquist, a former smoker who became
president in 1983. He quickly grew tired of managing the smoking conflict and
appointed a committee, including Ms. Larry and some smokers. They recommended
increasing restrictions over six months. Mr. Lundquist made it 15 months. He set
up prize drawings for nonsmokers, new and old. A stop-smoking group held
seminars and those who were able to quit received tuition reimbursements.

A buddy system was also begun. ''It sounds hokey,'' Mr. Cowles concedes, ''but
60 smokers signed up to have a buddy for support during withdrawal.'' The
medical department offered ''survival kits'' of candy.

Smoking Areas Reduced

Smoking areas were gradually reduced to a small room off the cafeteria. The
ventilation system there became overloaded with blue fumes. ''We will not spend
a lot to perpetuate the problem,'' said Mr. Cowles. ''If the new filter works,
fine. If not, we'll give people some time and become a totally smoke-free
building. I think they expect that eventually now anyway.''

In New York, the State Public Health Council has approved regulations to take
effect May 7 that will ban smoking in most public indoor areas and restrict it
on the job and in most restaurants.

The new regulations were a response to what the council described as growing
public awareness to the health risks associated with second-hand smoke and a
growing resentment on the part of nonsmokers of having to breathe
smoke-contaminated air.

The rules will have a major impact on businesses, which will be required to
provide a smoke-free environment to any worker who requests it. Restaurants with
51 or more seats will be required to designate smoke-free areas.

In Lawrence, Kan., the plan is to have a smoker-free Fire Department. Since
October, Chief Jim McSwain has hired only nonsmokers who sign contracts
promising never to smoke.

In Marblehead, Mass., Officer Craig Cole, a nonsmoker, spent six years of
eight-hour shifts in a patrol car with his partner, Arthur Buckley, a smoker.

''He used to roll his window down partway,'' said Officer Cole, a former smoker
from his days in the Vietnam War. ''And I would, too. But inevitably the smoke
would come right across my face and I'd go home smelling like a cigarette.''

When Partners Part

Mr. Cole felt he had to decide between his health or his partner. He asked the
chief, a pipe smoker, for reassignment to a nonsmoking partner. Now Officer Cole
is circulating a petition to ban smoking throughout the 42-member department.

Last month the North Dakota House of Representatives banned smoking while in
session, which pleased Dale Marks but threatens Wade Williams's perfect voting
record. The Representatives sit side by side. Mr. Williams smokes. Mr. Marks
does not. Now, Democratic and Republican smokers gather for legal puffs in the
party leaders' offices just off the House floor. And when a vote is called, they
all come stampeding back to their seats.

''Oh, I understand how nonsmokers feel,'' says Mr. Williams, a 26-year-old
farmer, ''I don't want to bother anybody. When I started smoking, I was alone
out on the tractor.''

When school co-workers ignored Gloria Smith's pleas not to smoke around her, the
New Orleans teacher took to eating in her classroom. ''I put up with all sorts
of ridicule,'' she said. This year Mrs. Smith changed schools. Grumbling
Evaporates In San Francisco, which was among the first cities to enact smoking
restrictions three years ago, the city's enforcement officer, Bruce Tsutsui,
says initial grumbling quickly evaporated. He has had 275 complaints; all were
resolved before a formal hearing.

In Alaska, where all workplaces are considered nonsmoking unless employees and
employers decide otherwise, some smokers still resent having to make special
arrangements. ''It makes you feel like street people,'' said Nicki Ebert, a
shivering City Hall worker, who had to smoke outside.

Many companies have found restrictions that do not appear punitive can help many
smokers quit. ''A lot of people are just looking for an incentive,'' said Mr.
Pinney.

Managers at Atlanta's Superior Insurance Company place a flower on the desk of
every new former smoker. Ms. Larry, the Minnesota antismoking advocate who even
endured remarks about her weight problem, has no hard feelings and finds herself
drawn now to congratulate former smokers.

''Of course, no one ever did or said anything serious to me,'' she says. ''They
know I'd kill 'em.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of police officer Craig Cole, who requested reassignment to
non-smoking partner (NYT/Rick Friedman); Photo of Myrna Larry, who works in a
smoke-free office (NYT/Steve Woit)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'Platoon' Is History

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 133 words


To the Editor:

The notion that the American public is at last willing to face the realities of
the Vietnam War, maintained in your article on the success of the movie
''Platoon'' (Feb. 9), is askew. I believe the message is precisely the opposite.

Time has passed since the event, as you point out, and now the Vietnam War has
faded into the genre of a historical war with pictures and novels able to be
viewed and read as dramatic accounts of American soldiering under duress, much
like those evoking World War II. ''Platoon,'' for all its gritty realism, is
not, I believe, disturbing to the American public precisely because it is no
longer seen as a reality, for all its realism. Now it has the protective coating
of long ago and far away.

DONALD I. FINE
  New York, Feb. 9, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
The Real Threat

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex.


Many estimable people have protested the ABC television network's political soap
opera ''Amerika,'' trying to keep the series off the air. I think they have
missed the point.

Of course ''Amerika'' is preposterous and provocative in its vision of the
United States under Soviet occupation. It is also tedious, wooden and
unconvincing as drama. But what is new about that? Commercial television in this
country remains what Newton Minow called it 25 years ago, a vast wasteland. Few
of its dramatic efforts rise above the level of soap opera.

Nor is it unusual to find a tendentious picture of the Red Menace in American
culture. ''Rambo'' and ''Red Dawn'' are recent examples of paranoia and the
dream of retributive violence. The stock Russian in our popular entertainment
might as well have fangs.

That is the point. When ABC decided to touch the anti-Communist nerve, it hardly
had an original idea. The real problem is in our society. Why do we have this
hysterical strain in us about Communism? Why are we so lacking in confidence
that our free system can hold its own?

The Red Scare has come in waves over the last 70 years, from the Palmer raids
after World War I through the McCarthy period in the 1950's. We still have the
marks of hysteria in our immigration law, which allows the Government to keep
out visitors with dangerous ideas. And we have a President who uses strident
language about the ''evil empire.''

Americans have every reason to oppose the Soviet system, to condemn its
cruelties toward its own people and its barbarism in Afghanistan. But it is not
necessary to dehumanize Russians, to treat the U.S.S.R. as an undifferentiated
conspiratorial mass. It is not necessary to injure our own values by engaging in
Red scares at home.

There is an ironic truth in all this. ''Amerika'' pictures a land that has lost
its freedoms, its constitutional protections, its prosperity. But if we lose
those things, it will not be because of a Soviet occupation. It will be because
of our own mistakes, among them an excess of anti-Communist zealotry.

Think about some things that have done injury to this country in recent years.
First among them was the Vietnam War, with all it did to the American spirit.
Anyone who has forgotten what that war was like, or does not know, should
subject himself to the terrifying truths of the movie ''Platoon.'' I thought I
knew. I did not.

Successive Presidents took the United States into that war on the ground that
there was a single world Communist menace, with China in the vanguard in the Far
East, and we had to draw the line in Vietnam. Even after China broke with the
Soviet Union and approached the United States, we pressed on with the delusion -
making things worse for ourselves and for the people of Southeast Asia.

And now there is the Iran-contra affair. It is in part another product of
anti-Communist zealotry carried beyond rationality. President Reagan's obsession
with Nicaragua will not overthrow the Sandinista Government, as our own military
experts increasingly recognize. It will merely intensify anti-U.S. feelings in
and around Nicaragua.

The American-backed war in Nicaragua is only one example of the Reagan Doctrine
of encouraging guerrilla wars against left-wing governments in the third world.
In Angola as in Nicaragua, the United States is supporting terrorism. By seeing
southern Africa in distorted East-West terms, we are driving Angola and others
in the region toward the Soviet Union and building up a reservoir of hatred for
America.

In order to carry on terrorist wars and other covert actions President Reagan -
or others in his name - set up what amounted to a secret government. White House
aides operated abroad through a network of private agents, avoiding the scrutiny
of Congress and of professionals in government - avoiding the law.

There would be a good subject for a political drama: how a President driven by
fear of Communism and impatient with the checks and balances of freedom took us
away from the Constitution. But that would require television to show political
sophistication, to see through the simplicities of aw-shucks patriotism. It is
easier to make propaganda films about Russian villains.

The United States has survived its self-inflicted wounds so far. The American
public forced an end to the Vietnam obsession. Watergate and the Iran affair
unraveled. But we may not always be lucky.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. FAULTS TEHERAN AND MOSCOW IN REPORT ON RIGHTS ABUSES IN '86

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 886 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


Iran's human rights record last year was marked by ''serious abuses,'' including
political killings, torture and violent repression of religious minorities, the
State Department said today.

In its annual report on human rights around the world, the State Department also
harshly criticized the records of the Soviet Union and many other Communist or
Soviet-backed nations - Albania, North Korea, Vietnam, Cuba, Libya, Syria and
Ethiopia, among others.

The department said that the releases of prominent dissidents from Soviet labor
camps were ''positive developments,'' but that the deaths in prison of several
human rights advocates ''underscored the continuing perilous position'' of
thousands of Soviet dissidents.

The report deplored, in blunt language, Soviet treatment of political prisoners,
the use of psychiatric institutions to confine dissidents, ''persecution'' and
''harassment'' of minorities and ''restrictions'' placed on emigration of Jews.

The report did not take into account the most recent releases of dozens of
political prisoners. Soviet authorities have said the number set free in recent
weeks has grown to 150, with a similar number of cases being reviewed.

Criticism in Congress

The report stirred criticisms today on Capitol Hill and elsewhere. Rep. Gus
Yatron, Democrat of Pennsylvania and chairman of the House Foreign Affairs panel
on human rights and international organizations, said the review ''lacks
credibility because it is disregarded by Administration officials in the
formulation of U.S. foreign policy.''

The document spoke in harsh terms about the Soviet Union - a reflection,
perhaps, of the divisions within the Reagan Administration over how to deal with
the steps taken by Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, to liberalize some
aspects of Soviet society. Some Administration officials view the releases as a
public relations gambit, while others see Mr. Gorbachev's moves as an
opportunity for progress in American-Soviet relations.

Turning to Iran, the report said that ''stories of torture in Iran's prisons are
rampant and cover a wide range of inhuman practices,'' and that believers in
Bahaism, a minority religion, had suffered ''severe persecution.'' #200 Said to
Be Killed ''Approximately 200 have been executed or have died following torture
since the beginning of the revolutionary period,'' said the report, referring to
the period since Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini took control. ''At least three
Bahais were executed during 1986.''

Iran's reported abuses in 1986 took place while the United States engaged in
clandestine talks with the Teheran Government that were intended to open
contacts with Iran and to free American hostages held in Lebanon.

The 1,341-page report, which is mandated by Congress and has been issued
annually since 1977, covers conditions in 167 countries.

In a preface, Richard Schifter, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights
and Humanitarian Affairs, cited the ''spectacular shift to democracy throughout
Latin America'' in the last five years, and positive developments in the
Philippines. On the other hand, he criticized the ''serious regression'' in
human rights in South Africa, and ''the continuation of bleak and stultifying
dictatorial rule in a great many other countries.''

Rightists Are Cited

In some ways, the report sought to tacitly refute the accusation that the Reagan
Administration softens its criticisms of rightist nations, such as South Africa
and Chile.

These were among the nations discussed in the report:

* CHINA. ''The human rights situation in China improved slightly in 1986,'' the
report said, and ''the leadership's policy of opening up to the outside world
has become an integral part of China's evolution toward a less tightly
controlled society.'' But it added that ''extensive regulation of individual and
family life,'' restrictions on travel and limits on speech and press freedoms
also mark the situation.

* SOUTH AFRICA. During 1986, the report said, there was ''a major deterioration
of human rights.'' This included political violence, the use of excessive force
by the police and reports that the police had used torture against detainees,
including the application of electric shocks to hands, feet and genitals. The
report said that in 1986, ''South Africa's largely white-owned press continued,
when possible, to engage in vigorous criticism of the Government and its
policies,'' but press and speech freedoms were also ''seriously circumscribed''
by Parliament.

* EL SALVADOR. Despite the civil war, the State Department said, ''the rights of
free speech, press, association and assembly are respected by the Government.''
It said the ''conduct of the military and security forces has improved
steadily,'' and ''the infamous death squads, which used to advertise their
murders, made no claims of any killings in 1986, and there was no indication
that they are still operating.''

* NICARAGUA. The report said that ''major human rights abuses in 1986 included
mass arrests of civilians on vague charges of counterrevolutionary activity;
torture and abuse of prisoners; disappearances, summary executions of civilians
and prisoners of war; the continuing involvuntary relocation of rural
residents'' and the closing of opposition newspapers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: POLITICS;
Bush, Bullets Hot, Recalls the Alamo

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


When Vice President Bush said last week that ''there might be a little bit of
friction'' in the future between some of his policies and those of the Reagan
Administration, some who take an interest in such political affairs saw it as
the equivalent of fleeing the Alamo just as the bullets started flying.

Aides to Mr. Bush have another explanation.

They say the Vice President would never sever the political umbilical cord that
has attached him to President Reagan, especially in the midst of Mr. Reagan's
current difficulties over the Iran scandal. But, they say, after six years of
being Mr. Reagan's Mr. Bush, the Vice President is soon to present the American
voters Mr. Bush's Mr. Bush.

''If you look at the polls, the No. 1 job the American people want for their
Vice President is to support the President,'' said one top adviser to Mr. Bush.
''So far, he has a grade of A-plus.''

''Now, he's got to audition to the American people for another job, that of
President, and he has got to go around the country to explain his own vision.''

His aides say the ''little bit of friction'' that Mr. Bush mentioned is one of
several developments that will take place in coming months, developments that,
taken together, could have a major impact on whether Mr. Bush returns to the
White House in 1988 or finds employment elsewhere.

Today, in another of those developments, Mr. Bush announced the creation of the
George Bush for President Committee, which he said would begin preparing for his
''likely campaign for President in 1988.'' It was the first time that he has
used ''likely'' to describe what has long been obvious in Washington political
circles.

A Large Number of Supporters

The committee is to be managed by Lee Atwater, a former White House political
adviser who also directed Mr. Bush's political action committee last year. In
addition, it will have as senior advisers the core of supporters who have long
been close to the Vice President, including Nicholas F. Brady, former Republican
Senator from New Jersy; Dean Burch, former chairman of the Republican National
Committee, and Robert M. Teeter, president of Market Opinion Research, Mr.
Bush's pollster.

The committee is also sprinkled with political strategists and supporters of Mr.
Reagan, including Holmes Tuttle, a Los Angeles businessman who is a longtime
Reagan intimate. Mr. Tuttle will serve in a largely symbolic role as national
finance co-chairman. At the same time, Robert Mosbacher, a Texas businessman who
was active in Mr. Bush's unsuccessful 1980 campaign for the Presidency, will
again serve as top financial adviser.

By announcing such a large number of supporters so early before the primary
season begins next winter, Mr. Bush could be trying, in effect, to tell other
potential Republican Presidential hopefuls, ''Why bother?''

But one key adviser denied such a strategy. ''There is no magic or secret
strategy or giant masterplan,'' he said. ''It's just common sense.''

The aides acknowledge that other moves must be made soon if Mr. Bush is to
escape the political curse that has dogged the Presidential ambitions of Vice
Presidents and prevented the election of one as President since Martin Van Buren
in 1836.

In coming weeks, they say, Mr. Bush will begin enunicating his own policy
positions in eight or so speeches that he plans to deliver around the nation.
Mr. Bush, whose ties to the Washington establishment run strong, will also begin
to ''look outside Washington'' for ideas, the aides say, as he develops
positions on such issues as how to ease the nation's farm crisis.

'As Much Input as Possible'

''In any issue area, you want to get as much input as possible from people
outside Washington,'' said a top adviser.

Mr. Bush's advisers are also searching for a suitable trip abroad that could
highlight his frequently touted expertise in foreign affairs, which he developed
as the chief United States delegate to the United Nations and as chief United
States liaison officer to China. One plan under consideration is to have Mr.
Bush travel to Europe to discuss the Administration's arms control policies with
United States allies.

Mr. Bush issued his friction prediction at a news conference in Springfield,
Ill., last week. Aides said he wanted to alert the White House to forthcoming
statements that might be construed as criticism of Administration policy. Mr.
Bush said at the news conference that the President, at least, would understand.

One close Bush associate said that although the remarks might suggest an
impending schism, the Vice President's relationship with Mr. Reagan was such
that he would adamantly resist breaking with the President on any substantive
matter. The associate said that would continue to be true even if Mr. Bush came
to believe his election was in jeopardy. ''It really is a character and loyalty
thing with the Vice President,'' the associate explained.

The aide said there was no guarantee that a Vice President who ran for President
by running away from the policies of the sitting chief executive would succeed
in being elected. He noted that Hubert H. Humphrey broke with President Johnson
on the Vietnam War and still lost, much as Walter F. Mondale opposed some
policies of President Carter and still lost his bid for President.

Much of Mr. Bush's strategy has long been fashioned on the belief that his best
chance of gaining the nomination is through the support of conservative party
activists loyal to Mr. Reagan. Aides also believe he would profit in the general
election by cultivating his image as a less ideological conservative than some
of his Republican rivals for the nomination.

Mr. Bush's closeness to Mr. Reagan will make it easy for him to claim that he is
a logical heir, his aides say. But they expect Representative Jack F. Kemp of
upstate New York also to try to convince voters that he is the natural
ideological heir to Mr. Reagan. And Senator Bob Dole of Kansas is expected to
argue that, as Senate majority leader, he did much to assure the enactment of
Reagan policies.

On the Iran Affair

Mr. Bush said recently that he had voiced ''certain reservations'' about how Mr.
Reagan's arms-for-hostages policy toward Iran was developing, although he and
his aides have refused to indicate to whom Mr. Bush related such concerns.

Aides say Mr. Bush believes he will not suffer policital damage from the Iran
affair and that it will fade as an issue long before the 1988 campaign begins in
earnest.

''To the extent that it hurts George Bush in 1988, it will hurt the Republican
Party in general,'' one aide said.

Mr. Bush made no mention of the Iran scandal in the statement today announcing
his Presidential committee. But he did say, ''Americans deserve the best from
their leaders and their governments, and that's what I hope to give them as we
discuss the critical issues of this decade and the next.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vice President Bush with Prime Minister Shamir (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THEATER;
LONETTE MCKEE ON BECOMING LADY DAY

BYLINE: By E. R. SHIPP

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1594 words


When Lonette McKee first picked up the script of ''Lady Day at Emerson's Bar &
Grill,'' she ''got scared of it.''

''With 15 songs, and you're out there by yourself for an hour and a half, the
physical work and all that, I said no,'' she recalled. ''Then a few minutes
later, I went back and picked the script up and said, 'You fool.' I started
going through it again and I got all excited. I kept reading and thinking, 'I'm
going to do this. Nobody loves Billie like me.' ''

In ''Lady Day'' - a sparse ''drama in the form of a cabaret act,'' as its
playwright, Lanie Robertson, describes it - Miss McKee, a willowy, strikingly
beautiful woman, plays Billie Holiday, the jazz singer whose tragic life ended
in July 1959, when she was 44 years old.

Set in a seedy South Philadelphia bar about four months before Miss Holiday's
death, the 90-minute, essentially one-woman show allows the main character to
weave stories about her life - from being raped at age 10 to going to work as a
maid in a bordello at age 16 to the triumphs and disappointments of her singing
career to the men in her life and her heroin addiction - between 15 songs. These
range from the sassy and upbeat, like Bessie Smith's ''Gimme a Pigfoot'' to the
more haunting Holiday standards, including ''Strange Fruit,'' ''God Bless the
Child'' and ''Don't Explain.''

As the Holiday character chats with her audience - represented on stage by
mannequins in indifferent poses at two tables - it becomes clear, through her
fits of anger and uncertainty induced by her dependence on drugs, that she has
sunk pretty low to have ended up here. She says early on: ''I used to say, 'When
I die I don't care if I go to heaven or hell, as long as it ain't in Philly' ''
-where she had been arrested for possession of narcotics and sentenced to
prison.

Miss McKee, who is 31, had admired Miss Holiday's songs for years, and had
studied her style during her own voice classes. But after she was cast, she
found that idolizing Miss Holiday made it difficult in some ways to prepare for
the role, to go beyond ''the suffering, doom and gloom,'' as Mr. Robertson put
it.

''For three weeks, every time I sang 'God Bless the Child,' I could not get
through the song,'' she said during an interview in her Brooklyn apartment. ''I
was thinking about why she wrote it, thinking about her, thinking about her
mother, thinking about her life, about those lyrics. Even selfishly you start
thinking about your own life, your own suffering.''

Andre Ernotte, the director of ''Lady Day,'' saw that as a necessary first step,
a ''grieving process.''

''The emotional had to be dealt with first. Then afterward you get the
essence,'' said Mr. Ernotte, who is now directing Colleen Dewhurst in Barbara
Gelb's one-woman show, ''My Gene'' at the Public Theater.

''Every day was therapy, and I thank God that Andre was so sensitive and so
gentle with me and with her, the whole subject,'' Miss McKee said. ''He handled
this project like it was an egg, like a bird's egg that any minute could be
broken.''

Miss McKee was cast in ''Lady Day'' shortly after she returned from Paris and
the filming of Bertrand Tavernier's '' 'Round Midnight,'' which stars Dexter
Gordon, the saxophonist. Miss McKee plays his sometime love interest, Darcy Lee,
a character who is patterned on Billie Holiday.

But, she said, the preparation for that role was entirely different.

''I'm a very instinctive actress. In film you have to be ready to go in
unprepared. I let the situation and the vibes I got from Dexter, as well as the
director, kind of guide me in setting up my mood and tone in the film.''

On the face of it, Lonette McKee -a vegetarian who eschews drugs, a woman who
just celebrated five years of marriage, an actress with a promising career -
would seem to have little in common with Miss Holiday. But Miss McKee said that
she, too, has suffered and that the reliving of her own painful experiences
helps her transform herself into Miss Holiday on stage.

The source of that suffering, Miss McKee explained, has been racism -felt first
when she was a child in Detroit, the second daughter of a black man and his
white wife. Miss McKee still recalls the racial slurs as if they had happened
yesterday.

That experience did not deter Miss McKee from herself marrying a white man,
however. ''I really do believe that love is colorblind,'' she said. ''As long as
I know I'm black and I know who I am, the interracial issue is not important to
me or to him.''

In 1976, when she was cast in her first role, in the film ''Sparkle,'' about the
rise of a black singing group loosely based on the Supremes, Miss McKee thought
of herself as not black, not white, but a mulatto to whom doors would be opened
that were normally closed to either whites or blacks.

''I had little knowledge at that time of how difficult it would be to find roles
for somebody like me. I came in on a high like 'Sparkle' and then turned around
and had years of no work after that.''

''I kept questioning: Why aren't you people letting me work? I can sing. I can
dance. I write music. I do all these things. I look O.K. How come I'm not
working?''

The answer, she concluded, was the same that Lena Horne and other light-skinned
black actresses had been hearing for decades: She was too light to fit
Hollywood's image of blacks, but too black to play white roles.

''They've been telling us that for years,'' she said, angrily. ''I thought:
'Didn't I hear this before? Isn't this supposed to be over by now?' Well, it's
not. I can testify that it is not.''

She said some doors have opened to women like herself, including the actresses
Jennifer Beals and Rae Dawn Chong. But, she added, ''When the doors open now for
me and black folks like me, it's a fluke. I don't think my record of steady work
is the norm.''

The industry as a whole, she said, is reluctant to take a chance on black actors
and actresses.

That brought a chuckle from Miss McKee as she remembered the Houston Grand
Opera's 1983 revival of ''Show Boat,'' where, she said, ''I was the first
mulatto to play Julie.'' She received a Tony nomination for her portrayal. The
character, Julie, is of mixed race, an octoroon, and is married to a white man.
When the 1951 film ''Show Boat'' was being made, Lena Horne was first cast as
Julie, then removed from the part when the producers thought it would be too
controversial. She was replaced by Ava Gardner.

It was while she was on tour with ''Show Boat'' in San Francisco that Miss McKee
met Leo Compton, her husband, who was working part-time as the backstage
doorman. Mr. Compton, who, like Miss McKee, is from Detroit, works for the New
York City Youth Bureau.

Since ''Show Boat,'' Lonette McKee, who dropped out of high school at age 14 and
went to seek her fortune in Los Angeles at 15, has rarely been out of work.

She did a nightclub act, which led to her being cast by Francis Coppola in
''Cotton Club'' and his upcoming film ''Gardens of Stone,'' a Vietnam War-era
film starring Angelica Huston and James Caan. It is Miss McKee's sixth film
role.

It was after the first of two films she did with Richard Pryor -''Which Way Is
Up'' in 1977 and ''Brewster's Millions'' in 1985 - that she went through a
personal transformation.

She said that David Franklin, Mr. Pryor's manager, told her: '' 'You've got to
stop thinking of yourself as a mulatto. Everybody else is looking at you as a
black woman, so if you don't look at yourself as that, what have you got? Where
are you?' He was right. There's no two ways about it. He was right.'' She said
Mr. Franklin was also right to insist that she take voice lessons, her first
formal training.

Now she is writing a musical, which she describes as ''a drama with music that's
based on a fairy tale.''

There is also talk of a musical with Gregory Hines, and she said, Mr. Ernotte
wants to cast her as Ingrid Bergman in a comedy film that he has in mind.

''Well, we as black folks have been complaining that because of the color of our
skins, we're not allowed to play roles that we are qualified for,'' she said,
laughing. ''This is my chance.''

''Lady Day'' marks Miss McKee's third outing on the New York stage. Her debut
came in 1981 in the short-lived musical, ''The First,'' based on the life of
Jackie Robinson, who in 1947 broke the color barrier in professional baseball.
Though the show flopped, Miss McKee received good notices.

Critics have marveled at her controlled performance in ''Lady Day,'' where she
is accompanied only by a jazz trio led by Danny Holgate, the show's musical
director, who also plays the role of Jimmy Powers, Miss Holiday's pianist. Jimmy
coaxes Miss Holiday to go on with a performance that is ragged and frequently
interrupted by drug-induced anxieties.

Mr. Ernotte and Mr. Robertson said Miss McKee has grown ''enormously'' since
''Lady Day'' opened in June at the tiny 65-seat Vineyard Theater on East 26th
Street for a four-week run. When the show reopened in September at the 245-seat
Westside Arts Theater on West 43d Street, Miss McKee's performance became a
fuller one, Mr. Ernotte and Mr. Robertson agree.

Mr. Ernotte said, ''She has more pizazz, more elan and more versatility in her
expression.''

And, Mr. Robertson added, she has developed more of the humor in the play.

Miss McKee's contract, which expires March 15, is now being renegotiated. But
whether she remains in the show beyond that date or not, she said: ''I think it
will be a long time coming before I have another vehicle like this. I don't take
it lightly.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
EDITORS' NOTE

An article in the Arts and Leisure section today, ''Lonette McKee on Becoming
Lady Day,'' discusses the actress's role as Billie Holiday in ''Lady Day at
Emerson's Bar & Grill'' at the Westside Arts Theater. After the section went to
press, Miss McKee's agent announced that she had withdrawn because of throat
problems. Her understudy, S. Epatha Merkerson, is playing the role while the
producers negotiate with another actress to take the part.

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lonette McKee (Martha Swope)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
OSCARS SEEN IN A CRYSTAL BALL

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2262 words


It's that time of winter - the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Science's
Oscar season, which, like Christmas, seems to get longer every year. Some
general observations before going out on a slim limb to make predictions:

More than anything else, this year's nominations, announced 11 days ago, give
the impression that there's a new paucity in first-rate roles for women. Though
the nominations in most of the other major categories make emotional sense, even
when they aren't supportable by reason, the 1986 performances for which
actresses have been nominated appear to celebrate exceptional competence over
exceptional achievement - Jane Fonda's (''The Morning After''), Marlee Matlin's
(''Children of a Lesser God''), Sissy Spacek's (''Crimes of the Heart''),
Kathleen Turner's (''Peggy Sue Got Married'') and Sigourney Weaver's (for
''Aliens'').

They're all fine actresses, but none of these performances is anybody's finest
moment. It needn't have been this way. There wasn't exactly an avalanche of
great women's roles last year, but there were at least five other noteworthy
performances, any one of which could have spruced up this list of best-actress
nominees.

Inexplicably overlooked were Bette Midler, whose full-frontal grossness gave
priceless point to the farce of ''Ruthless People,'' and Glenda Jackson, in one
of the most exhilarating high-comedy performances of the decade as the
sea-turtle emancipator in Harold Pinter's ''Turtle Diary.'' These are
performances to remember.

So, too, are those of Laura Dern, who gave the year's most haunted performance
as the tall, gawky, fragile teen-ager in ''Smooth Talk,'' Helena Bonham Carter
playing the pretty, deceptively steely center of the otherwise celebrated ''A
Room With a View,'' and Marie Riviere, the maddeningly indecisive, stubbornly
romantic heroine of Eric Rohmer's ''Summer.''

The nominations for the Oscar as the year's best foreign language film are no
better or worse than they've ever been. However, because of the rules by which
the nominees are selected, the suggestion that the winner actually is the best
foreign film isn't very persuasive. The five films in this categorgy are chosen
by an academy committee from a list of candidates submitted by the country of
origin (one film per country), limiting the potential nominees to those films
that, for one (possibly political) reason or another, are in favor at home.

These nominees are then voted on only by those academy members who can prove
they've seen all five films, which tends to dampen enthusiasm and to limit the
voters to those members with time on their hands.

By chance, four of this year's five nominees have already been released here:
the French-Canadian talk-comedy, ''Decline of the American Empire,'' which
opened to good reviews (and, reportedly, may be remade as an American film);
France's ''Betty Blue,'' directed by Jean-Jacques Bei-neix (''Diva,'' ''Moon in
the Gutter''), which received mostly poor reviews; Jiri Menzel's bucolic,
utterly painless Czechoslovak comedy, ''My Sweet Little Village; and ''The
Assault,'' from the Netherlands, a remembering-the-war movie that has received
mixed reviews. The fifth film is an unknown quantity - the Austrian ''38.''

Ineligible to compete in this category are all other foreign-language films,
even France's highly praised ''Menage'' and ''Summer,'' which, however, are
eligible to compete for the main, best-picture Oscar since they were released in
this country during 1986. Yet the chances that a foreign-language film could win
the best-picture Oscar over any domestic or English-language nominee are nil.
(Well, if not nil, then only slightly better than the chances that George C.
Scott and Marlon Brando will co-host next year's Oscar telecast.) Now for some
predictions about how the voting will go in the 10 principal categories, plus
reasons why the voting should go this way even if it doesn't, which, if past
experience holds, is more than likely.

Best Picture. The nominees are ''Children of a Lesser God,'' ''Hannah and Her
Sisters,'' ''The Mission,'' ''Platoon'' and ''A Room With a View.''

The academy members, having already done their duty on behalf of good clean,
upbeat entertainment by nominating ''Children of a Lesser God,'' will not vote
for it. ''The Mission'' represents the kind of intellectually worthy, expensive
and elaborate costume drama that Hollywood likes to favor, but it hasn't been
wildly successful at the box office. Until ''Platoon'' opened in December, the
front-runners were ''Hannah and Her Sisters'' and ''A Room With a View.'' Now,
however, it would seem to be a race between ''Hannah'' and ''Platoon.''

My preference would be ''Hannah.'' The winner will be ''Platoon,'' unless
''Hannah'' and ''Platoon'' split the vote, which will give the Oscar to ''A Room
With a View.'' Any one of the three would be an honorable winner. ''Platoon''
would seem to have the emotional edge with the voters. It certifies the
writer-director Oliver Stone as a major new film maker. The film is going great
guns at the box office, and it acknowledges, without equivocation, a kind of
harrowing truth about the Vietnam war previously dealt with obliquely by
American movies.

Best Actress. Of the five nominees listed above, my preference would be Kathleen
Turner in ''Peggy Sue Got Married.'' The movie is not great, but you'd never
know it from her rich, funny performance. The winner will be Kathleen Turner.
The academy will feel that it's about time she received something, as I do.

Miss Fonda is excellent in an equally lightweight film, ''The Morning After,''
but she's won two Oscars and that, for the moment, seems enough. The academy
voters admire Sissy Spacek, but she, too, already has an Oscar (for ''Coal
Miner's Daughter'') and the voters, having nominated her over her ''Crimes''
co-stars, Diane Keaton and Jessica Lange, will leave well enough alone.

However, it's also possible that the academy will take note that Miss Spacek
also did creditable work last year in '' 'Night, Mother,'' a box-office flop,
and will decide, in effect, to honor her persistence by honoring the performance
in ''Crimes.'' A dark horse: Marlee Matlin, the pretty, deaf heroine of
''Children of a Lesser God.'' It depends on how noble the academy members are
feeling when they fill in their ballots.

Best actor. The nominees are Dexter Gordon, '' 'Round Midnight''; Bob Hoskins,
''Mona Lisa''; William Hurt, ''Children of a Lesser God''; Paul Newman, ''The
Color of Money''; James Woods, ''Salvador.''

The jazz saxophonist Dexter Gordon is wonderful in '' 'Round Midnight,'' and, as
my colleague Janet Maslin has correctly observed, no actor could do what he does
in this film.

Yet his Oscar nomination is really the academy's annual Chief Dan George
citation, which I've named for the Indian chief who was nominated for his heroic
appearance in ''Little Big Man'' (1970). The academy loves to hail people who
are, in effect, so born to their roles that acting hasn't as much to do with
their work as how they're handled.

Should professional actors have to compete with nonactors? I don't know, but it
doesn't seem entirely fair - nonactors, like babies and animals, are notoriously
ruthless scene stealers. It's a bit as if the dog and Roddy McDowall had to
compete for the same award in ''Lassie Come Home.''

As fine as Mr. Gordon is, his seems to be a performance that was ''discovered''
by Bertrand Tavernier, the film's director, much in the way that Arthur Penn
discovered Chief Dan George's performance in ''Little Big Man.''

Mr. Hurt, having won an Oscar last year for his far more complex work in ''Kiss
of the Spider Woman,'' is not a serious possibility this year, nor is Mr. Woods,
not because his performance isn't good, but because the film has been a loser.
The main contenders in this category are Mr. Hoskins and Mr. Newman, both of
whom are equally deserving. My preference is Mr. Newman, whose work in ''The
Color of Money'' is the accumulation of everything he's learned in a long,
reliable career. The winner will be Mr. Newman, unless the academy feels that
his honorary Oscar last year is quite enough recognition, in which case it will
be hands-across-the-sea to Mr. Hoskins.

Best supporting actress. The nominees are Tess Harper, ''Crimes of the Heart'';
Piper Laurie, ''Children of a Lesser God''; Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio, ''The
Color of Money''; Maggie Smith, ''A Room With a View''; Dianne Wiest, ''Hannah
and Her Sisters.''

This would seem to be a three-way race among Miss Mastrantonio, Miss Smith and
Miss Wiest. As much as I admire Miss Wiest, I can't understand how she could be
nominated without nominations also going to her ''Hannah'' co-supporting stars
(if that's what they are), Mia Farrow and Barbara Hershey. (And if Miss Wiest is
to be classified as a supporting actress instead of a star of ''Hannah,'' what
would you call the remarkable Maureen O'Sullivan in the same film - a supporting
supporting actress?) Miss Smith, already the winner of a best-actress Oscar
(''The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie'') and one as best supporting actress
(''California Suite''), is certainly deserving, as is Miss Wiest. If, by chance,
''Hannah'' wins the best picture Oscar, Miss Smith will be given her award for
''Room'' - voters like to spread their cheer around. If it's the other way
around and ''Room'' wins as best picture, Miss Wiest will get it for ''Hannah.''

My preference is Miss Mastrantonio for the sheer force of her new screen
presence in ''The Color of Money.'' The winner will be Miss Smith.

Best supporting actor. The nominees are Tom Berenger, ''Platoon''; Michael
Caine, ''Hannah and Her Sisters''; William Dafoe, ''Platoon''; Denholm Elliott,
''A Room with a View''; Dennis Hopper, ''Hoosiers.''

Mr. Berenger and Mr. Dafoe are both terrific, but the votes each receives will
cancel the other's. Then, too, they're members of a platoonlike, ensemble
performance that can't be dismantled with a clear conscience.

Having not yet seen ''Hoosiers,'' I can't be sure where Mr. Hopper stands in
this particular competition, which, I suspect, will be between Mr. Elliott and
Mr. Caine. My preference is Mr. Elliott. The winner will be Michael Caine. To
whichever of the two it goes, it will be another ''it's about time'' award to a
first-time winner who has earned it.

Best director. The nominees are David Lynch, ''Blue Velvet''; Woody Allen,
''Hannah and Her Sisters''; Roland Joffe, ''The Mission''; James Ivory, ''A Room
With a View''; Oliver Stone, ''Platoon.''

In the way Hollywood thinks, the idiosyncratic Mr. Lynch and the sincerely
responsible Mr. Joffe have received their rewards in being nominated. Thus we
have another three-way contest. My preference is Woody Allen, the major artist
with a proven record. Yet it's also about time that Mr. Ivory's excellent,
continuing body of work (of which ''Room'' is the best to date) were recognized.
''Room'' is the kind of elegantly composed, prestige film that Hollyood adores.
If Hollywood splits its ticket, which I doubt this year, Mr. Ivory will get it.
The winner will be Oliver Stone.

Best original screenplay. The nominees are Paul Hogan, Ken Shadie and John
Cornell, ''Crocodile Dundee''; Woody Allen, ''Hannah and Her Sisters''; Hanif
Kureishi, ''My Beautiful Laundrette''; Oliver Stone, ''Platoon''; Oliver Stone
and Richard Boyle, ''Salvador.''

If ''Platoon'' has made a clean sweep of all of the awards for which it has been
nominated so far, the screenplay award will go to ''Hannah and Her Sisters.'' If
''Hannah'' has swept the votes so far, this Oscar will go to ''Platoon.'' If the
votes in the other catgories have been somehow split between ''Hannah'' and
''Platoon,'' then the writing award will go to ''My Beautiful Laundrette.'' My
preference: ''Hannah.'' The winner will be ''Platoon.'' Best screenplay adapted
from another medium. The nominees are Hesper Anderson and Mark Medoff,
''Children of a Lesser God''; Richard Price, ''The Color of Money''; Beth
Henley, ''Crimes of the Heart''; Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, ''A Room With a View'';
Raynold Gideon and Bruce A. Evans, ''Stand by Me.''

My preference: Mrs. Jhabvala's extraordinarily complete, witty, faithful
adaptation of E. M. Forster's ''Room with a View.'' The winner will be ''Room,''
unless there's a sentimental urge to give something to either ''Children of a
Lesser God'' or ''Stand by Me.''

Best foreign film. Picking a winner from the nominees in this category (listed
above) is like pinning a tail on the donkey. There's no way to predict the
academy's voting in this area. My preference: ''The Decline of the American
Empire.'' The winner will be ''The Decline of the American Empire''. There also
the chance that the voters feel like rediscovering Mr. Menzel (who won the same
Oscar for his ''Closely Watched Trains'' of 1967) by honoring ''My Sweet Little
Village,'' and thus shining a small beam of Hollywood sunlight into
Czechoslovakia. An even darker horse is the Austrian ''38.'' Best
cinematography. The nominees are ''The Mission,'' ''Peggy Sue Got Married,''
''Platoon,'' ''A Room With a View,'' ''Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home.'' My first
preference: Robby Muller for his breathtaking (though not nominated)
black-and-white photography for ''Down by Law.'' The contest seems to be a
toss-up between ''Platoon'' and ''Room.'' The winner will be ''Room,'' though
there's an outside chance ''The Mission'' will edge out both of the
front-runners.

The envelopes, please - and a one-way ticket to Costa Rica.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TELEVISION;
SOVIET VIEWERS ARE SEEING MORE, INCLUDING NEWS OF THE U.S.

BYLINE: Ellen Mickiewicz, professor of political science at Emory University, is
writing a book, ''Split Signals: The Television Revolution in the Soviet
Union.''

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2392 words


The televising of ''Amerika,''

ABC-TV's mini-series about a fictionalized Soviet takeover of the United States
that concludes this evening, has been a story closely covered on Soviet
newscasts for several months. Last Monday, ''Vremya,'' the Soviet nightly
newscast, noting that the weeklong presentation had begun, showed film of
protesters picketing outside ABC's New York studios. The anchorperson said that
similar demonstrations had taken place at Yale University and in Chicago and
other American cities.

The unusually intense interest in this event is representative of Soviet
television's near-obsession with the United States; it also is the latest
reflection of changes that have swept Soviet television, especially in the last
year and a half. The look of the programming - through computerized graphics and
snappier pacing - has become more contemporary. But, more significantly, there
is a willingness to report on previously off-bounds subjects, as well as a new
openness to multiple points of view and frank on-air debate. Nonetheless, much
anti-American programming persists.

Mikhail Gorbachev has seized on the medium of television to help persuade his
people to work more energetically and, as he put it last fall, ''to feel at home
in society.'' Indeed, Mr. Gorbachev and his close adviser and propaganda chief
Alexander Yakovlev clearly believe that television, the first truly mass medium
in Soviet history, may be the instrument to break through the ossified deposits
of bureaucratic power that this new Soviet leadership has found so resistant to
change.

Yet, to accomplish these aims, television in the U.S.S.R. is going to have to be
more credible and pay closer attention to what concerns viewers than it has in
the past. As the Soviet leadership has said, to be effective, the official media
will have to disseminate their version of news first, preempting the widespread
penetration of Western radio broadcasts. Mr. Gorbachev told his fellow
countrymen last fall that he is counting on a more ''mature'' (that is,
better-informed) public and much more subtle and effective news commentators and
Government spokesmen (that is, propagandists).

''Glasnost,'' Mr. Gorbachev's campaign for openness in the media, applies
directly to the domestic scene, where the tempo of change has been very rapid.
In little more than a year, a variety of new television programs have made their
debut. The most successful has been ''12th Floor,'' a monthly series enlisting
the participation of teen-agers throughout the country via remote hook-ups.
Lively discussions are interspliced with a rapidly paced music-video kind of
format that features quick cuts, overlapping sound tracks and loud music with a
strong beat.

Last May, a group of high schoolers on ''12th Floor'' deplored many of the
shortcomings in the educational system, to the chagrin of the Deputy Minister of
Education, who was obliged to respond on camera. The students argued that most
of what the official youth organization did to develop extracurricular
activities was ''absolutely meaningless.'' They asked, ''why are things decided
on top and not here?'' and observed that they had been complaining on this score
for two months and that nothing was being done.

The mood of change was dramatically captured last month in the television
presentation of a newspaper article by Fedor Burlatsky, an increasingly
influential journalist. A departing regional party chief, one appointed during
the Brezhnev era, was remonstrated by his successor -a Gorbachev appointee - who
made it clear that the old ways would no longer be tolerated by the more
efficient, honest and, most of all, responsible new officials. It was an early
indication of what Mr. Gorbachev subsequently made explicit in his address to
the Party plenum.

The very look of Soviet television has changed, too. Portable video equipment is
being distributed to foreign correspondents, helping to shorten the lead time
for fast-breaking stories. Last spring, computer graphics were introduced, as
was ''Studio 20,'' a five-to seven-minute segment inserted from time to time
into the nightly newscast; during it, a Moscow anchorman brings in live via
remote pick-up the news division's bureau chiefs in a number of the world's
capitals to discuss reaction to a significant event (such as an American nuclear
test). More live programming is planned.

There is no doubt that the human costs of the war in Afghanistan are being felt,
and Soviet television has been enlisted in an attempt to convert profound
concerns into patriotism. Battlefield coverage is now frequent, and last summer
a prime-time satellite linkup joined a Moscow audience of families with their
soldier sons in a studio in Kabul.

Disaster coverage, which had started during the Tadzhik earthquake in October
1985, months before the nuclear accident at Chernobyl, is now largely routine,
though it provides nowhere near the visual and verbal detail of Western coverage
of similar events; sometimes an anchor will read only a brief statement.
Coverage of the Chernobyl incident was an early test of the new policy in Soviet
television. Although there was an initial uncertainty and hesitation in covering
the event - for nearly two days after the explosion, there was silence, followed
by only the sketchiest of announcements - eventually, pictures and increasingly
detailed reportage were carried daily.

The viewing audience in the U.S.S.R. is huge: 93 percent of the entire
population of roughly 280 million spread over 11 time zones watches television;
the audience for the nightly news, shown during prime time, is 150 million. The
percentage of the adult population that watches the nightly news in the U.S.S.R.
is more than twice the combined audience for all three broadcast networks'
evening newscasts in the United States. On average, Soviet newscasts devote more
than triple the air time to the United States than our network newscasts give to
the U.S.S.R.

The way Americans are depicted to the Soviet viewing public is changing rapidly.
In contrast to the unvaryingly negative reportage of the past, there is now
evidence of a more positive thrust in certain kinds of coverage. Even more
startling was the decision made about a year ago to give Americans who do not
agree with Soviet policies real opportunities - and time - to argue their
positions on prime time. Still, there continue to be often strongly
anti-American programs as well. (Some of these programs are received and
monitored daily at a number of American universities. At Emory University a
specially designed satellite-reception dish enables a research team to watch
''First Program,'' the Soviet Union's most important and far-reaching television
network, with a viewership of more than twice that of the other national
network.) The more positive coverage of the United States was kicked off last
fall with a report on the fast-food chain McDonald's by Vladimir Dunaev, Moscow
television's Washington correspondent, a veteran television hand who often
brings a fresh approach to his reportage. Not long afterward, it was announced
that fast-food outlets - of Italian and Swedish origin -would open in Moscow.

A month ago, Moscow's television correspondent in New York did a piece on
automobiles - critical of the cost and chaos in the city, but very complimentary
of the interstate highway system and the use of tolls to pay for maintenance and
construction.

These examples strongly suggest that there'll be more coverage of those features
of American life that can be transplanted to help Mr. Gorbachev's policy of
perestroika - the restructuring of the economy.

The decision to permit Americans to disagree with Soviet positions in prime time
was evidenced a year ago in a lengthy and candid televised interview conducted
by Vladimir Posner, a Soviet commentator, with Serge Schmemann, then chief of
The New York Times Moscow bureau. Mr. Schmemann tellingly counterposed Western
journalistic values to Soviet ones. This was not the 30-second sound bite so
often seen in the past, but a real debate that lasted close to 7 minutes.

Just in the last six months, Soviet viewers have heard from Gen. David C. Jones,
retired, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; Jack Matlock, at the
time the National Security Council's expert on the Soviet Union; Clark M.
Clifford, former Secretary of Defense; Harold H. Saunders, former Assistant
Secretary of State for the Near East and South Asia; Ben Wattenberg, editor of
Public Opinion; Helmut Sonnenfeldt, a former official of the National Security
Council; Sam Donaldson, ABC-TV's White House correspondent, and James Jackson,
Time magazine's Moscow bureau chief.

Some of these Americans have adopted markedly adversarial stances: Messrs.
Matlock, Sonnenfeldt and Wattenberg were allotted the longest exposure during an
hourlong special culled from footage of last fall's weeklong
Chautauqua-sponsored ''town meeting'' in the Soviet resort of Jurmala. They were
also the most critical of Soviet policies at home and abroad - making pointed
comments about Soviet involvement in Angola, Afghanistan and Nicaragua. Their
thrusts were parried by a new crop of well-prepared and media-conscious Soviet
Government spokesmen, relaxed and self-confident in tweed jackets and crewneck
sweaters.

Then, too, there have been the two ''citizens' summit'' programs, satellite
linkups that permitted an American audience, with Phil Donahue as its host, to
speak directly - and sometimes argue heatedly - with a Soviet one that had Mr.
Posner as its host.

And in a most unusual move, the Soviets recently televised two American-made
programs in their entirety. One was an hourlong ''Donahue'' show, with its
American audience talking by satellite with Dr. Arnold Lockshin, the American
cancer researcher who, claiming persecution by the U. S. Government, quit his
job in Texas and took his family last fall to live in the Soviet Union. The
American studio audience warned Dr. Lockshin on the air that the K.G.B., the
Soviet security police, would constrict his activities and freedom of speech and
that his standard of living would fall dramatically. (The recent weeklong
broadcasts on NBC of ''The Donahue Show'' that originated in the U.S.S.R. are
expected to be shown on Soviet television at a later date.) The other was a PBS
''Frontline'' program, first seen in the United States in 1983. Although the
hourlong show was presented in its entirety, Soviet television added its own
wrap-around, suggesting ''Zionist'' complicity in the death of the series
moderator. The program was an examination mainly of the problems of recent
Soviet emigrees now living in the Brighton Beach section of New York City. When
it was originally broadcast here, emigree groups protested what they felt to be
an unfair emphasis on the inability of recent emigrees to adjust to life in this
country.

The program was shown on Soviet television twice last fall, both times with
advance notice and previews. At the end of each of the Soviet presentations, a
commentator, Genrikh Borovik, told viewers that when this program was broadcast
in the United States, ''American Zionist circles'' objected to it for not being
sufficiently critical of the Soviet Union and that shortly thereafter the
moderator of the series, television journalist Jessica Savitch, died ''under
mysterious circumstances.''

Although the accidental nature of Ms. Savitch's death had been amply described
in the American media, Mr. Borovik chose to give a conspiratorial interpretation
without any supporting evidence.

There are other ways in which America is portrayed in a negative light to Soviet
viewers. For example, last September a program called ''The Insatiability of the
Devil,'' about chemical and biological warfare, was shown on Soviet television.
In it, the United States was accused of permitting toxic ''yellow rain'' to fall
on its own land; mounting a secret biological-weapons attack on Cuba that left
344,000 ill; causing an epidemic in El Salvador; allowing leaks from a military
base in Spain that resulted in 21 deaths, and helping the South African
Government to develop chemical weapons.

In another recent Soviet-made documentary, ''Afghanistan: Truth and Lies About
Islam,'' photographs of President Reagan and Vice President Bush and the
aftermath of American bomber raids on Libya were intercut with scenes of women
and children killed by Afghan rebels, the bombing of holy places and a child
swearing vengeance on the grave of his father. Americans were charged with being
guilty of arming the guerrilla fighters responsible for these acts.

A recent travelogue about the American desert was the occasion for critical
commentary on the cult of violence in Western movies. Admiration for the beauty
of the desert and the development of the electronics industry was overshadowed
by critical judgments about the ''military occupation'' of the desert - toxic
weapons production in Tucson, the crash of a Stealth plane and nuclear testing.
Comments about poverty, unemployment and the futile chase after the American
dream in Las Vegas completed the story.

But perhaps the most vivid example of virulent anti-American propaganda is the
documentary called ''Babi Yar: Lessons of History.'' This film depicts America
as the continuation of Nazism, with horrific scenes of Nazi atrocities and mass
deaths intercut with footage of American neo-Nazis, members of the Ku Klux Klan
and battlefield footage from the Vietnam War. ''Babi Yar'' was televised late
last September when the Iceland summit had already been agreed upon by the
United States and the Soviet Union.

The most evident of Mr. Gorbachev's reforms has occurred in the television
system. This suggests that the Soviet leader is relying on the persuasive powers
of television to prepare the way for his larger social and economic reforms,
which are verbally ambitious but have yet to overhaul the existing structures.
The gnawing dilemma is that in order to use the medium more effectively, he will
have to satisfy his countrymen's increasing desire for information.

There is a risk in raising expectations and enlisting participation. Hopes and
demands may outrun whatever changes the Government is willing to initiate;
radical reform can be a delicate balancing act.>

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Soviet TV commentator (Orbita Technologies Inc.)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WITHOUT WATERGATE?

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 395 words


To the Editor:

As do other writings on the events in and about Vietnam from late 1972 to the
fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975, George McT. Kahin's review of ''The Palace
File'' by Nguyen Tien Hung and Jerrold L. Schecter (Jan. 18) contains an
implicit assumption that the 1975 North Vietnamese offensive was somehow a
preordained event quite unrelated to the political situation in the United
States. That is not so.

Hanoi's decision to undertake the 1975 offensive and its preliminaries at the
end of 1974 was reached after much discussion. The key element was the regime's
correct appraisal that the Watergate-induced political situation in Washington
would all but insure that the United States in effect abandon South Vietnam.
Although our intelligence on the decision-making process in Hanoi was
fragmentary, it was clear to us at the Embassy in Saigon in mid-1974 (I was
Deputy Chief of Mission there in 1974 and 1975) that the North Vietnamese
leadership's assessment of the political situation in the United States figured
decisively in their deliberations, and we so advised Washington in August 1974.
That this judgment was correct has since been confirmed, notably by the North
Vietnamese general, Van Tien Dung, in his book ''Our Great Spring Victory: An
Account of the Liberation of South Vietnam.''

President Nixon began his second term in 1973 fresh from an election in which
Vietnam policy was a -if not the - major issue. If the Presidency had not been
emasculated by Watergate, Hanoi would not have gone for broke as it did in
September 1974, and the scenario certainly would have been different.

It would be foolish to assert that, were it not for Watergate, there would today
be a viable Republic of Vietnam. It is also wrong to claim, as Mr. Kahin does,
that regardless of Watergate and the growing impotence of the Presidency from
mid-1973 onward, the eventual outcome would have been the same because of
alleged inadequacies of the Thieu Government; these always figured more
prominently in the American psyche than they did on the ground, and were also
vastly overstated by those in this country determined to advance their own
agenda in regard to Vietnam. The truth is that we simply do not know how the
pieces of the kaleidoscope would have fit together, had there never been a
Watergate.
  - WOLF LEHMANN
  - Rockville, Md.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AS CATHOLICS MEET CONTROVERSY, CONTRASTING STYLES EMERGE

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


WHEN Bishop Francis J. Mugavero of Brooklyn told his priests earlier this month
that they could no longer hold special masses for Dignity, a Catholic homosexual
group, he seemed to be stepping uncharacteristically out in front of John
Cardinal O'Connor of New York. After all, although Cardinal O'Connor said last
Sunday that he agreed with the Bishop's decision, a church in the Cardinal's
archdiocese was continuing to hold masses for the group.

A closer look revealed, however, that Bishop Mugavero had gone no further in his
diocese, which comprises Brooklyn and Queens, than had Cardinal O'Connor in his
archdiocese, which comprises Manhattan, the Bronx, Staten Island and
Westchester, Dutchess, Orange, Rockland, Ulster, Sullivan and Putnam Counties.
St. Francis Xavier, the Greenwich Village church that permits Dignity to hold
its own masses, is run by the Jesuit order; the Cardinal's authority over it is
not total, but subject to negotiation with the Jesuit provincial.

Moreover, Bishop Mugavero had not acted until some months after a Vatican
document last October instructed bishops to withdraw support from homosexual
groups that do not follow the teachings of the church.

Nonetheless, it came as a surprise to many in the church that it was the Bishop
and not the Cardinal who made headlines by barring groups that condone
homosexual activity. Bishop Mugavero has been regarded as somewhat more liberal
and less confrontational than Cardinal O'Connor in matters relating to social
issues, and this contrast reflects underlying differences between the two
prelates in personality, experience and governing style and also the differences
in tradition and relative prominence of the dioceses they lead.

The contrast was made evident in recent months when a Federal court agreement
required foster care agencies to provide children with birth control and
abortion counseling. The Cardinal warned in a speech and in a newspaper column
that he might discontinue some of the church's group-home programs rather than
comply. Such a decision would affect about 2,400 children living in Archdiocesan
group homes. Bishop Mugavero just quietly let city officials know that he, too,
disliked the agreement; he now is planning a meeting in April to counsel
Brooklyn's independent Catholic foster care agencies, which will decide on their
own how to respond.

Similarly, when two Roman Catholic politicians from Queens, Governor Cuomo and
Vice-Presidential candidate Geraldine Ferraro, said they would not object to
Medicaid financing for abortions, it was Cardinal O'Connor - not their own
Bishop - who publicly challenged them.

One school of thought traces the contrast between the Brooklyn and New York
prelates to the fact that Cardinal O'Connor, 67 years old and Archbishop for
only three years, was shaped by more than 30 years in the military chaplaincy;
Bishop Mugavero, 72 years old and Bishop since 1968, spent 25 years of his
priesthood working in Catholic Charities and other social services.

Bishop Mugavero is ''a very quiet, personal, very self-effacing person,'' said
Msgr. Joseph P. Bynon, pastor of Resurrection Ascension Church in Queens and a
former diocesan superintendent of schools. ''He doesn't get involved in these
very controversial things.'' By contrast, Cardinal O'Connor often seems to bask
in media attention. Some priests say that in Cardinal O'Connor's place, Bishop
Mugavero would never have caused the turmoil that surrounded the Cardinal's
recent trip to the Middle East, with his controversial statements about
Palestinian self-determination and the Holocaust.

''I think Cardinal O'Connor is a natural communicator and he uses every means at
his disposal to express these views,'' said Msgr. Edwin F. O'Brien, rector of
St. Joseph's Seminary in Yonkers. ''For years he observed the scene and saw a
lot of confusion on what the church teaches and he found that somewhat
frustrating. And now that he has the opportunity to present the church's
position on things, he feels obliged to do so.''

Indeed, Monsignor O'Brien suggested that Cardinal O'Connor, as head of an
archdiocese in a world business and media center, must play that role. The
archdiocese ''is seen as the flagship of the church of this part of the
country,'' Monsignor O'Brien said.

Francis Cardinal Spellman, the New York Archbishop from 1939 to 1967, involved
himself in public policy to such a degree that he became identified with support
for the Vietnam War at a time when popular support was fading. However, his
successor and Cardinal O'Connor's predecessor, Terence Cardinal Cooke,
Archbishop until 1983, was said to feel uncomfortable in the limelight.

Brooklyn has long been known as the more liberal of the two dioceses. Msgr.
Harry J. Byrne, a former co-chancellor (one of two chief administrators) of the
New York Archdiocese, said, for example, that Brooklyn's diocesan marriage
tribunal had been known ''for a more open and a more liberal approach'' in
annulling marriages. ''The same sort of spirit and gutsiness that made such
ardent fans of the Brooklyn Dodgers is reflected in the life of Brooklyn and
affects the church,'' said the Rev. James Hinchey, co-pastor of St. James
Cathedral in Brooklyn.

Peter Steinfels, editor of Commonweal magazine, the Catholic review, said it is
his impression that ''the Brooklyn diocese believes that a greater amount of
compromise and accommodation is still within the bounds of Catholic teaching.''
He added that in the political arena ''there may be some feeling in the New York
Archdiocese that they have lost political clout over the years, and simply to
defend their own institutional interests they needed to become more assertive.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John Cardinal O'Connor (NYT/Jim Wilson); Photo of Bishop
Francis J. Mugavero (NYT/Ruby Washington)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: February 22, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1430 words

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List FICTION
1           1      3  WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                     (Morrow, $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences
                     that befall a woman and her family after her
                     appointment as Ambassador to Rumania.
2           2      4  THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                     (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                     king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.
3           3     30  RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                     $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians.
4           4      6  NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon &
                     Schuster, $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans
                     from being discovered by the Germans.
5           5     24  IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                     horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in
                     a small Maine town.
6           6      5  THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday,
                     $17.95.) A financial wizard undertakes to defuse the
                     crisis besetting the American economy.
7           7     16  WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                     Iran during the month following the Shah's
                     departure.
8           9     17  FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts.
                     (Naval Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                     Vietnam.
9          10     21  THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.
                     (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family
                     relationships in South Carolina and New York City.
10          8      6  BANDITS, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House,
                     $17.95.) A gang of three plots to heist millions being
                     sent to the contras in Nicaragua.
11                 1  OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $17.95.)
                     Tracking down a mysterious disease that strikes
                     only physicians and their patients.
12                 2  SHAN, by Eric Van Lustbader. (Random House,
                     $18.95.) A Chinese-American attempts to realize
                     his father's dreams for Asia.
13 *       12      3  PATIENCE OF A SAINT, by Andrew M. Greeley.
                     (Geis/Warner, $18.95.) A hard-bitten
                     newspaperman learns a lot about his family and
                     decency while on the trail of a wily politician.
14         13      5  THE COUNTERLIFE, by Philip Roth. (Farrar,
                     Straus & Giroux, $18.95.) More about the ambitions
                     and anxieties of Nathan Zuckerman.
15 *               1  DREAMS ARE NOT ENOUGH, by Jacqueline
                     Briskin. (Putnam, $18.95.) A California family
                     dynasty out to conquer the world.
16 *       14      2  WATCHERS, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $17.95.)
                     Two creatures - one good, one evil - emerge from
                     a secret government laboratory.
               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List NONFICTION
1           1      8  A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
                     (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season
                     spent with the coach Bob Knight and his Indiana
                     University basketball team.
2           2     42  FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                     Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations
                     from the television star and father of five.
3           3      2  THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                     $24.95.) Australia from penal colony to its gradual
                     emergence as a flourishing nation.
4           4     50  YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss.
                     (Random House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden
                     Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme.
5          15      2  ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
                     Wambaugh. (Morrow, $18.95.) A case involving the
                     murder of a Pennsylvania high school teacher and
                     the disappearance of her two children.
6           6      6  THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT
                     LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE, by Jane Wagner.
                     (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb observations on life
                     today; script of the show starring Lily Tomlin.
7                  1  THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by
                     Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
                     From the Boston slums of Irish immigrants to the
                     White House: three generations of a family.
8           7     20  THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam.
                     (Morrow, $19.95.) The crisis in the American
                     automobile industry and Japan's role in it.
9          11      6  MARILYN, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, $24.95.) A
                     biography of Marilyn Monroe, with many
                     photographs by her friend George Barris.
10          9     35  NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst. (Simon &
                     Schuster, $17.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
                     author argues, and we must confront them to grow.
11          5     20  HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.) From
                     Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized
                     biography of Frank Sinatra.
12 *        8      3  REAGAN'S AMERICA: Innocents at Home, by
                     Garry Wills. (Doubleday, $19.95.) The 40th
                     President as the product and embodiment of an
                     American mythology.
13         10     40  JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James
                     Herriot. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a
                     Yorkshire veterinarian about his favorite animal.
14         14      8  ACROSS CHINA, by Peter Jenkins. (Morrow,
                     $18.95.) The author of ''A Walk Across America''
                     takes his wanderlust to Asia.
15                 2  THE MORNING AFTER, by George F. Will. (Free
                     Press, $19.95.) Columns on matters political and
                     personal, written by a conservative journalist
                     between 1981 and 1986.
               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List ADVICE, HOW-TO AND MISCELLANEOUS
1           1     17  THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                     by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                     prepared at moderate cost.
2           3     36  THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn.
                     (Norton, $15.95.) A regimen based on the
                     Vanderbilt University Weight Management
                     Program.
3           2     20  MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO
                     LOVE THEM, by Susan Forward and Joan Torres.
                     (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with overbearing
                     men.
4           4     76  WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                     DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                     standard reference work in a 1983 revision.
5           5     54  THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.
                     (Morrow, $14.95.) A television chef's inexpensive
                     dishes.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

* An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

A CLIENT CALLED NOAH: A Family Journey Continued, by Josh Greenfeld. (Holt,
$18.95.) Mr. Greenfeld's third book about his brain-damaged son takes us through
his 20th year; it's an eloquent report of struggle and final concession to a
hopeless situation.

THE AGELESS SELF: Sources of Meaning in Late Life, by Sharon R. Kaufman.
(University of Wisconsin, $22.50.) This careful, dignified study by a medical
anthropologist finds age a phase of the body but not the mind, which carries on
the same as ever it did.

THE LAST SONG OF MANUEL SENDERO, by Ariel Dorfman. (Viking, $18.95.) The
political exile's dilemma is incarnated in this Chilean writer's novel by a
cosmic joke, a revolt of the unborn, who refuse to come out until the grown-ups
end their oppression.

ANOTHER DAY OF LIFE, by Ryszard Kapuscinski. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) The collapse of Portuguese rule in Angola in 1974, as
seen by a journalist with a novelist's eye - anecdotal, idiosyncratic, fixed in
memory.

DEEP BLACK: Space Espionage and National Security, by William E. Burrows.
(Random House, $19.95.) Those satellites really work, says Mr. Burrows, who
tells us how in surprising detail and shows us the implications, some of them
disturbing, for arms control.

ZERO DB: And Other Stories, by Madison Smartt Bell. (Ticknor & Fields, $15.95.)
Short fiction in a dazzling range of voices, from the raw and dramatic through
the wistful and hilarious.

THE MAKING OF THE ATOMIC BOMB, by Richard Rhodes. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
Short on heroes and villains, long on drama and suspense, this book offers both
a close-up look at nuclear scientists and an overview of the century's pivotal
event.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DAVID SUSSKIND, TALK-SHOW HOST, DIES AT 66

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1440 words


David Susskind, the television producer and one of the country's earliest and
best-known television talk-show hosts, was found dead, apparently of natural
causes, yesterday afternoon in his hotel suite in midtown Manhattan. He was 66
years old.  Although Mr. Susskind had given up ''The David Susskind Show'' last
September after nearly 30 years on the air, he was still active and had produced
four television specials in the last year. Two of them, on Winston Churchill and
Dwight D. Eisenhower, were shown last year, and the others, on Lyndon B. Johnson
and Pope John XXIII, are to be broadcast this year.

According to the police, Mr. Susskind had been under a doctor's care for a heart
ailment and had been scheduled to enter Lenox Hill Hospital today.

Unable to reach Mr. Susskind by telephone yesterday, a friend called his hotel,
the Wyndham, at 42 West 58th Street, about 1:20 P.M., and a maid and a security
guard entered his suite and found him face up on the floor of the bedroom, the
police said.

A police spokesman, Sgt. Raymond O'Donnell, said Mr. Susskind's body was
examined by an assistant medical examiner, who said that there was no evidence
of foul play and that death was apparently from natural causes.

In a career that spanned more than 40 years and touched Hollywood, Broadway and
a nation of television viewers, Mr. Susskind was a press agent, a talent scout,
an impresario and a producer of films, plays and television programs ranging
from classic drama and discussion shows to entertainment spectaculars.

He put five shows on Broadway, including ''Rashomon,'' in 1959, and made 13
films, including ''Raisin in the Sun'' and ''Requiem for a Heavyweight'' in
1961. He also won many Emmy Awards and other honors for television productions,
which included ''Look Homeward Angel'' in 1972 and ''Eleanor and Franklin'' in
1976.

But it was as the earnestly combative moderator of his own talk shows -''Open
End,'' a forum that sometimes ran for hours, which began in 1958; and of its
successor, ''The David Susskind Show,'' after 1967 - that he became best-known
to American audiences.

Short, silver-haired, sincere, with a mellifluous baritone voice that sometimes
rambled in its painstaking search for the right words, he interviewed thousands
of guests over the years: Presidents and paupers, glittering stars and forgotten
people, advocates and opponents of all kinds of controversial issues.

Often, he engaged up to a dozen guests at a time, usually divided into two or
more opposing camps, and he strived with probing questions and sometimes
not-too-subtle suggestions, to accentuate differences and to illuminate areas of
common ground.

The Issues of the Times

His subjects seemed to chronicle the issues of the times - civil rights, war,
abortion, terrorism, drugs, crime, exotic life styles - and his subjects were as
wide-ranging as his guests, who included Harry S. Truman, Nikita S. Khrushchev,
Richard M. Nixon, Robert F. Kennedy, Vietnam veterans, a ski-masked professional
killer and hosts of others.

Many in his audiences found him an appealing quiz master, probing for telling
details of his guests' lives, opinions and ideas, undaunted by their rebukes or
his own lack of detailed knowledge about subjects under discussion.

Others found his questions and comments naive, narrow, sophomoric or intrusive,
especially when interviewing intellectuals or other people of great stature, and
sometimes even when he was interviewing rather unextraordinary guests.

Talking with four Roman Catholic nuns, for example, he referred to them as
''good sisters,'' noted that they were the first nuns he had ever met and said
he liked to see nuns on airplanes and that he always admired their dedication.
He also said he thought all nuns were beautiful and did not show their age. Much
of the program was devoted to correcting his stereotypes.

''There's no truth to the rumor that David Susskind will be our next Secretary
of State,'' the columnist Hy Gardner said after Mr. Susskind interviewed
Khrushchev. And Jack O'Brian, the critic, observed after the encounter that Mr.
Susskind had gone ''unarmed into the battle of wits.''

Admirers of Mr. Susskind were quick to note, though, that he often raised
stereotypes deliberately to have them knocked them down, and that his views,
even if occsionally off the mark, reflected widespread notions that at least
gained exposure and were openly challenged on his program.

After an association of nearly three decades with Channel 5 in New York, the
former WNEW-TV, which is now WNYW-TV, Mr. Susskind stopped producing the program
last September because of its late-night time slot, from 1:30 to 3:30 A.M.
Sunday nights, according to his daughter and fellow producer, Diana Laptook.

David Howard Susskind was born in New York City on Dec. 19, 1920, the son of
Benjamin and Frances Lear Susskind, and was raised in Brookline, Mass. After two
years at the University of Wisconsin, where he married the former Phyllis
Briskin in 1939, he enrolled in Harvard and graduated with honors in 1942.

The 'Most Dynamic' Field

He served in the Navy, saw action at Iwo Jima and Okinawa and was discharged in
1946. He then turned to show business, ''the most dynamic and interesting field
I could get into,'' he recalled later.

After a time as a press agent, he and Alfred Levy, a talent agent, formed Talent
Associates Ltd. The new agency packaged programs for the young television
industry and represented writers, directors and other creative personnel, rather
than actors.

The agency sold the ''Philco Television Playhouse,'' and within a year the Music
Corporation of America hired Mr. Susskind as producer of the Philco program. He
quickly developed a skill and an enthusiasm for the craft and produced the
''Kaiser Aluminum Hour,'' the ''Armstrong Circle Theater'' and others.

He then expanded his production efforts to Hollywood and Broadway. His Broadway
stage offerings included ''A Very Special Baby'' (1956), ''Kelly''(1965), ''All
in Good Time'' (1965) and ''Brief Lives''(1967). His films included ''Edge of
the City'' (1957), ''All the Way Home'' (1963), ''Lovers and Other Strangers''
(1969), ''Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore'' (1974), ''Loving Couples'' (1980),
''Fort Apache, The Bronx'' (1981).

His television plays included ''The Bridge of San Luis Rey,'' ''The Glass
Menagerie'' (1973), ''Caesar and Cleopatra'' (1976), ''Truman at Potsdam''
(1976). In the late 1950's, he was producing more live shows than the three
television networks combined.

Behind the credits was a hard-driving man with close-cropped wavy hair, a boyish
smile and an irrepressible self-confidence.

Despite his television success, he was one of the medium's most outspoken
critics. But his critics accused him of deploring mediocrity while offering
nothing better and of presenting safe, well-established successes rather than
untried original scripts.

In 1958, Mr. Susskind launched ''Open End,'' a late-night, New York City talk
show without set time limits. The host and his guests simply talked until the
subject - and the viewer, some critics said - was exhausted.

In 1967, the open-ended format gave way to its two-hour successor, ''The David
Susskind Show.'' Other talk shows veered to entertainment, but his kept the
emphasis on serious matters, and it succeeded, eventually reaching more than a
million viewers through 100 stations.

Colleagues said he loved the clash of ideas, the effort to come to grips with
issues, crises and human problems, and they praised his ability to attract
outstanding guests and to draw them out.

Over the years, his views on television evolved. ''I've grown up,'' he said in a
1978 interview after 20 years as host of his own show.

''I once idealized television,'' he said. ''I thought television could be much
more of an illuminating beacon - informing, instructing, educating, taking the
public by the hand and leading it. But American television was never that. I was
a younger and more idealistic David Susskind. I am not a cynic today. I am
simply pragmatic.''

Mr. Susskind's marriage to Phyllis Briskin ended in divorce many years ago. He
married the former Joyce Davidson in 1966; they were divorced last year. Mr.
Susskind is survived by a son, Andrew, of Los Angeles; three daughters, Diana
Laptook of Fort Lee, N.J., and Pamela Schaenen and Samantha Susskind of New York
City; a sister, Dorothy Barron, of New York City, and a brother, Murray, of
California, and five grandchildren.

No funeral is planned. Burial will be private and a memorial service will be
held at a date to be announced.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David Susskind

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EHTHIOPIANS OFFICIALLY JOINING RANKS OF COMMUNIST NATIONS

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 503 words

DATELINE: ADDIS ABABA, Ethiopia, Feb. 22


Thirteen years after military officers overthrew Emperor Haile Selassie, this
country today became the People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, with a
Marxist party as the ''guiding force of the state.''

The changes went into effect as Ethiopia's leader, Lieut. Col. Mengistu Haile
Mariam, announced that 81 percent of voters who took part in a national
referendum on Feb. 1 had approved a Constitution providing for civilian rule.

Colonel Mengistu said that 18 percent of the voters voted against the
Constitution and that 1 percent of the ballots were spoiled.

He said 96 percent of Ethiopia's electorate of 14 million took part in the
referendum, the first of its kind in Ethiopia's 2,500-year history.

In Conformity With Moscow

The Constitution enshrines the Marxist ideals of Ethiopia's military
revolutionaries and puts this East African nation of 44 million people in
ideological conformity with the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, Cuba and Vietnam,
Marxist theoreticians here have said.

''This Constitution only takes them further down the Marxist road to a people's
republic,'' a prominent Western aid official said today.

A series of upheavals in Ethiopia delayed conversion of the provisional military
Government into an orthodox Communist civilian government.

Shortly after the violent overthrow of Ethiopia's monarchy in 1974, this capital
was convulsed by two years of factional fighting.

In 1977 and 1978, Ethiopia fought back an attempt by neighboring Somalia to
seize control of the Ogaden region. In 1984 and 1985, much of Ethiopia's
interior was racked by drought and famine, and it is estimated that one million
people died.

Throughout this period, the central Government fought secessionist movements in
Eritrea and Tigre Provinces.

After the famine eased last year, Ethiopia's ruling Provisional Military
Administrative Council printed a million copies of the new Constitution and sent
them to 25,000 locations for debate.

A Change on Polygamy

The only major change that came from the nationwide debate was a decision to
drop a clause outlawing polygamy. About 40 percent of Ethiopia's population is
Moslem, and the remainder is largely orthodox Christian.

The new Constitution states that religious freedom ''may not be exercised in a
manner contrary to the interest of the state and the revolution.''

The new Constitution is unlikely to appease Ethiopia's rebellious minorities.
The document makes vague promises of self-rule within the confines of a
''unitary state.''

In this one-party state, the Workers Party of Ethiopia, which has 50,000
members, is to serve as a ''vanguard party.'' Later this year, candidates
approved by the party are to run for office in the Shengo, which will be the
first elected national assembly since the 1974 revolution dissolved the Imperial
Parliament.

The Shengo will elect a president of the republic for a five-year term. Colonel
Mengistu, who is general secretary of the party's central committee, is expected
to be elected.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COLUMN ONE: METRO MATTERS;
Urban Delays Continue On Bus Shelters

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 808 words


Anybody waiting for a bus at certain stops on Union Turnpike in Queens or the
Grand Concourse in the Bronx might be wondering why, 12 years after the first
modern bus shelters were built in Manhattan, so many riders in the other
boroughs have been left out in the cold.

The delays are, to some degree, the legacy of an earlier scandal and, in part, a
consequence of reform. Also, they represent a delicate balance of political and
economic exigencies in the way New York City does business.

The battle over bus-stop shelters is, in terms of duration and recrimination,
New York's equivalent of the Vietnam War.

Complaints that the city's original contract for nearly 500 shelters - almost
all of them in Manhattan - was subject to favoritism prompted demands a decade
ago for competitive bidding. Then, as a result of similar concerns, the contract
was bid and bid again. Finally, an agreement with Miller Signs Associates began
in May 1985.

Now, in the latest twist, city officials are taking steps to cancel the
franchise because, they said, the company neglected to properly maintain many of
the 772 shelters that it was required to install in all five boroughs within one
year and has built only a handful of the 1,120 called for in the second year.

Generally, the company concedes that it has not dotted every i and crossed every
t, but says that, nonetheless, most of the i's and the t's are where they're
supposed to be. It has dutifully maintained its shelters, the company said, even
those that have been vandalized repeatedly. Yet Miller Signs also has said that
some repairs had to be postponed because glass was in short supply and that a
dispute with the company that makes the steel frames delayed all but a few dozen
of the second year's 1,100 shelters.

All of this was complicated because of unexpected competition from
advertisements that sprouted on sidewalk pay telephones - which, with
compensation to the city, appear likely to proliferate by the thousands. Miller
Signs sells advertising space on its shelters, including the most profitable
original 500 shelters in Manhattan, and splits the revenue with the city.

''We gave them a cash register,'' said Morris Tarshis, the city's Director of
Franchises. ''They want an absolute monopoly.'' The issue is more complex. There
is the question of whether the shelters should be considered primarily a source
of municipal revenue or a service to riders that, the city acknowledged, in
effect, it was incapable of providing itself.

Another problem, which also explains delays in expanding cable television beyond
Manhattan, concerns purchasing power. It is arguable whether bus shelters in
poor neighborhoods generate enough revenue to justify maintaining them there.

''The problem is maintenance,'' said Lewis Watkins, the district manager of
Community Board 3 in Brooklyn's Bedford-Stuyvesant. ''They're vandalized,
they're dirty, and nobody shovels the snow.''

Mr. Tarshis is driving a hard bargain with Miller Signs, although some riders
might wonder why the city waited even this long to revoke a contract for bus
shelters that were not being built. Company spokesmen say the city would rather
own the shelters anyway and hire someone to maintain them. City officials hint
that some shelters are deliberately being allowed to deteriorate to bolster the
company's case for abandoning them.

In any case, few public officials nowadays are willing to risk giving the
benefit of the doubt to anyone doing business with the city.

''Mr. Tarshis is obviously trying to protect himself against criticism, but he
is going about it in an entirely heavy-handed and arbitary manner,'' said Howard
M. Squadron, the lawyer for Miller Signs. ''The net effect, if he is permitted
to get away with this, will be to confiscate about $10 million of tangible
benefit to the City of New York, leaving my client with no recourse.''

If negotiations fail, of course, Miller Signs can go to court. But if Miller's
contract is canceled, the city may have to decide whether it wants to build more
shelters itself or begin the bidding process all over again. Last time, Miller
was the only qualified bidder.

The bus shelters, said Mr. Tarshis, are demanded most by elderly and handicapped
riders.

''The general public couldn't care less,'' he said, and then corrected himself.
''Once they've had a taste of it,'' Mr. Tarshis said, ''they like it.''

After 12 years, with the wait for many buses getting longer, the taste is
turning bitter.

''It's very discouraging,'' said Annabelle Glasser, the district manager of
Community Board 8, which includes Fresh Meadows and Kew Gardens Hills in Queens.
''I don't know whether it's that the city really doesn't leave the contractors
enough room or if it's just that the contractors are so greedy. I only see what
happens here on the street.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 24, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDWARD LANSDALE DIES AT 79; ADVISER ON GUERRILLA WARFARE

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1113 words


Edward G. Lansdale, an Air Force officer whose influential theories of
counterinsurgent warfare proved successful in the Philippines after World War II
but failed to bring victory in South Vietnam, died yesterday at his home in
McLean, Va. He was 79 years old and had a heart ailment.

A dashing Californian, Mr. Lansdale is widely thought to have been the model for
characters in two novels involving guerrilla warfare in Southeast Asia: ''The
Quiet American'' by Graham Greene and ''The Ugly American'' by Eugene Burdick
and William J. Lederer. He retired from the Air Force as a major general in
1963.

As an adviser in the newly independent Philippines in the late 1940's and early
1950's the future general came to wield great influence in operations by the
Philippine leader Ramon Magsaysay against the Communist-dominated Hukbalahap
rebellion. Under the leadership of Mr. Magsaysay, who was elected President
while the struggle was going on, the operations succeeded.

It was in the Philippines that General Lansdale framed his basic theory, that
Communist revolution was best confronted by democratic revolution. He came to
advocate a four-sided campaign, with social, economic and political aspects as
well as purely military operations. He put much emphasis on what came to be
called civic-action programs to undermine Filipinos' backing for the Huks.

Looking back on what he learned in Asia, he once said: ''The Communists strive
to split the people away from the Government and gain control over a decisive
number of the population. The sure defense against this strategy is to have the
citizenry and the Government so closely bound together that they are
unsplittable.''

With that victory behind him, General Lansdale initially commanded great respect
in the 1960's as an adviser to South Vietnamese and United States military
leaders, and to Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge.

But his efforts to generate popular support for the embattled Saigon Government,
at a time when the United States military role in Vietnam remained limited,
failed to forestall an escalation of the insurgency to full-scale conventional
warfare.

Intellectual Direction

Early in the war, General Lansdale was considered to be the individual who
provided the intellectual direction to the counterinsurgency and nation-building
efforts. But he became less significant when the conflict left the
counterinsurgency phase and became a more conventional war.

Edward G. Lansdale was born Feb. 6, 1908, in Detroit, the son of Henry Lansdale
and the former Sarah Frances Phillips. He attended the University of California
at Los Angeles and later became an advertising executive.

He joined the Army as a captain in 1943 and rose to major by 1947, when he left
the Army. During World War II he also served in the Office of Strategic
Services. He joined the Air Force as a captain the same year.

After the Philippines victory, by then an Air Force Colonel, he went to Vietnam
in 1954 as a Central Intelligence Agency operative and helped in setting up the
South Vietnamese Government of President Ngo Dinh Diem, who was overthrown and
killed in a coup in 1963.

In that era he also championed the idea of forming and deploying a
counterinsurgency force, rather than conventional armed forces, in opposing
insurgents in South Vietnam.

Early in his Vietnam service, Colonel Lansdale was head of a team of agents that
carried out undercover operations against North Vietnam. The team turned in a
vivid report of its actions shortly before pulling out of Hanoi in October 1954
after the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu. The team's report, later included
among the Pentagon Papers, said it ''spent the last days of Hanoi in
contaminating the oil supply of the bus company for a gradual wreckage of
engines in the buses,'' and ''in taking actions for delayed sabotage of the
railroad.''

'Dizzy and Weak-Kneed'

''The team had a bad moment when contaminating the oil,'' it went on. ''They had
to work quickly at night in an enclosed storage room. Fumes from the contaminant
came close to knocking them out. Dizzy and weak-kneed, they masked their faces
with handkerchiefs and completed the job.''

He was posted to the Pentagon in 1956 and there, by some accounts, assisted in
the formation of the Special Forces, which had the special patronage of
President Kennedy.

After retiring from the Air Force, Mr. Lansdale served from 1965 to 1968 as a
special assistant to Ambassador Lodge and as a United States representative to a
committee of the South Vietnamese Government intended to win support in the
countryside for the Government. His activities were varied, ranging from liaison
functions between the United States Embassy and Vietnamese leaders to efforts at
what was called ''rural reconstruction'' as a way of turning the tide against
the insurgents.

With advice from General Lansdale, South Vietnam's Premier, Air Vice Marshal
Nguyen Cao Ky, declared early in 1966 that his Government would concentrate on a
''rural reconstruction'' program to pacify the countryside, putting thousands of
newly trained ''cadres'' into the field to attempt to reassert Government
control, enhance the peasants' life and extirpate the Vietcong.

He also served as the director of the Central Intelligence Agency's undercover
operations in Indochina.

In a 1977 book, ''In the Midst of Wars: An American's Mission to Southeast
Asia,'' General Lansdale argued that the United States could still prevail in
remote third-world nations by exporting ''the American way'' through a blend of
economic aid and efforts at ''winning the hearts and the minds of the people.''

Stanley Karnow, in his 1983 book ''Vietnam: a History,'' said that in the novel
''The Ugly American'' General Lansdale was glorified as Col. Edwin Hillendale,
''who captured 'hearts and minds' with his harmonica.'' Mr. Karnow also said
that in ''The Quiet American'' General Lansdale was depicted as Alden Pyle,
''the naive U.S. official who believed that Vietnamese peasants instilled with
the precepts of town hall democracy would resist Communism.''

General Lansdale said that in 1961 he was told by the Kennedy Administration to
draft a contingency plan to overthrow President Fidel Castro of Cuba. But he
said years later that the idea had not been viable because it depended on
recruiting Cuban exiles to generate an uprising in Cuba, and he had not formed
that team.

General Lansdale's first wife, the former Helen Batcheller, died in 1972. He is
survived by his second wife, the former Patrocinio Yapcinco; by two sons by his
first marriage, Edward, of Garden City, L.I., and Peter, of Oakton, Va., and
five grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Edward G. Lansdale (AP)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 24, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Film Director Is Questioned on Key Meeting

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 609 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 23


The prosecutor in a manslaughter trial involving the filming of ''Twilight Zone:
The Movie'' sharply questioned the film's director, John Landis, today about a
key meeting that he contends took place before a fatal helicopter crash in which
three actors were killed.

Mr. Landis had testified under direct examination in Los Angeles Superior Court
last week that he had met with the movie's special effects coordinator, Paul
Stewart, and the helicopter pilot, Dorcey Wingo, to resolve the difficulties
that had arisen in a sequence that was filmed about three hours before the crash
and the deaths, nearly five years ago.

But Deputy District Attorney Lea Purwin D'Agostino, in questioning in which she
quoted extensively from Mr. Landis's testimony in the Los Angeles County Grand
Jury investigation that led to the director's indictment, suggested that such a
meeting never took place.

'Caught in Inconsistencies'

Allegations of a lack of coordination on the movie set constitute a key issue in
the case against Mr. Landis. ''It is apparent that he has been caught in quite a
few inconsistencies,'' Mrs. D'Agostino said of Mr. Landis.

But the director's chief attorney, James F. Neal, disagreed, telling reporters
the prosecutor's was trying to impeach Mr. Landis' credibilty.

''You can't shake a man when he's telling the truth, and that's what's going on
here,'' the lawyer said.

Mr. Landis, Mr. Stewart and Mr. Wingo are defendants in the case along with
George Folsey Jr., the associate producer and Dan Allingham, the unit production
manager.

The actors, Vic Morrow, 53 years old, Myca Dinh Le, 7, and Renee Shinn Chen, 6,
were killed shortly after 2:20 A.M. July 23, 1982. The helicopter crashed during
the filming of a Vietnam War scene in which special effects explosives were
used.

Testimony About Meeting

In his testimony last week, Mr. Landis said that in July 1982 he conducted a
meeting with Mr. Wingo, Mr. Stewart and others after an 11:30 P.M. scene in
which the helicopter was buffeted by special effects blasts and the pilot
complained that his face was slightly burned by the explosions.

Mrs. D'Agostino read from Mr. Landis's 1983 statement to the grand jury in which
the director said he told Mr. Stewart to discuss the explosions to be used later
with Mr. Wingo. Mrs. D'Agostino implied that no such meeting had been held. Mr.
Landis's tesimoney before the grand jury does not indicate that he took part in
their conversation. The fatal crash came during the filming of the later scene.

''When I say to someone, 'Go speak to him,' I don't take him by the hand over
there,'' Mr. Landis was quoted as saying in his statement to the grand jury.

Asked whether he had taken Mr. Wingo by the hand, he testified,''No, I didn't.''


Contradiction Is Denied

Mr. Landis added, in his grand jury examination: ''I certainly asked if
everything was ready, and if I'm told everything's ready, I assume they
communicated . . . I can't conceive of them not doing so.'' Mr. Landis denied
under questioning by Mrs. D'Agostino today that his grand jury testimony
contradicts his statements last week that he did, in fact, meet with Mr. Stewart
and Mr. Wingo.

He said he saw the two men walking on the rural, outdoor set before the fatal
scene, but that he could only ''assume'' what they talked about together because
''I discussed it with them'' individually later.

But he said that in conversations he had later with Mr. Stewart and Mr. Wingo
before the crash, ''I did not specifically'' ask them what they talked about.

''I spoke to both of them,'' Landis said today. ''I can't say what they said to
each other.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 24, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH-SCHOOL MARIJUANA USE STILL DECLINING, U.S. SURVEY SHOWS

BYLINE: By PETER KERR

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 655 words


Marijuana-smoking declined among high school seniors in the United States in
1986, but the number of these students who smoked cocaine increased, a national
study reported yesterday.

At the same time, the report found, the number of seniors who smoke cigarettes
has remained about the same since 1980.

The findings, given in the 12th annual national survey of 130 high schools by
the University of Michigan's Institute for Social Research, generally supported
reports of trends from Government officials and social scientists in the last
year: that young people are turning away from illegal drugs with the exception
of cocaine and its derivatives.

''To some degree the fad quality of drugs has worn off, it is no longer quite as
new and outrageous,'' said Lloyd D. Johnston, the project director of the
institute. ''The fact that we have moved past the Vietnam era is an important
element. And enough time has passed where we have accumulated evidence of the
risks of these drugs, marijuana in particular.''

It Forms Major Data Pool

The annual survey, conducted for the National Institute on Drug Abuse, is one of
the major sources of such data in the United States. Other major national
studies are based on information from hospital emergency rooms, medical
examiners' officers and drug treatment centers.

In 1986, the study of 15,200 students found the proportion of high school
seniors who had tried marijuana in the previous month dropped from 25.7 percent
in 1985 to 23.4 percent last year. Marijuana use peaked in 1978, the survey
found, when 37.1 percent of seniors said they used it in the previous 30 days.

Daily marijuana use was down from 5 percent in 1985 to 4 percent in 1986, well
below its peak of 11 percent in 1978.

The proportion of students who said they currently used any illegal drug fell
from 39 percent in 1979 to 27 percent in 1986. Last year, the use of other
illegal drugs declined modestly or remained the generally the same, including
the use of tranquilizers, stimulants, opiates and hallucinogens.

Various Increases on Cocaine

The big exception, the study found, was cocaine. While the proportion of high
school students using cocaine has not changed greatly since 1980, the number of
frequent users and students who cannot stop using has increased significantly
since 1983. Expert link the increase in the frequent users to the rise in the
smoking of cocaine, including the smoking of the particularly potent form of the
drug, crack, which is considered more quickly addicting and more damaging to
users.

Of the 15,200 students interviewed, 16.9 percent said they had tried cocaine at
least once, 12.7 percent had used it in the past year and 6.2 percent had taken
it in 30 days.

The group of daily cocaine users doubled from 1983 to 1986 from 0.2 to 0.4
percent of the seniors, and the students who said they had at some time been
unable to stop rose from 0.4 in 1983 to 0.8 percent, or 25,000 students
nationwide, the study said.

The proportion of students who said they smoked - rather than simply took -
cocaine in the last year rose from 2.5 percent in 1983 to 6 percent in 1986. In
its first survey of crack use, the study found 4.1 percent of the seniors last
year had smoked cocaine in this form.

'Very Disturbing Figure'

''That is quite a large number if you consider that is one of 16 kids,'' Dr.
Johnston said. ''Considering how dangerous it was, even 4 percent is very
disturbing figure.''

The total of students who said they had smoked cigarettes in the previous 30
days was nearly 30 percent, a figure that has remained constant since 1980. In
the preceeding five years, from 1975 to 1980, the number of smokers had declined
dramatically. ''Basically this says that a signifigant proportion of this
generation has become cigeratte-addicted,'' Dr. Johnston said. ''It means they
will develop all the diseases we know are associated the habit.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 25, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NORTH FILES SUIT THAT CHALLENGES IRAN PROSECUTOR

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1454 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North filed suit today against the special prosecutor in
the Iran-contra affair and Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d, challenging the
constitutionality of the Federal law permitting appointment of a special
prosecutor.

The suit, filed in Federal District Court here, was seen by law-enforcement
officials as an attempt to delay and confuse the investigation by the
court-appointed special prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh.

Effect of Suit Not Clear

The colonel is at the center of Mr. Walsh's investigation of the Iran-contra
arms sales. He was dismissed from the National Security Council staff in
November after the first disclosures that the United States Government had sold
arms to Iran and that profits from those sales had been diverted to the
Nicaraguan rebels, or contras.

It was unclear whether the suit would have an immediate effect on Mr. Walsh's
investigation or on Colonel North's refusal to talk to investigators.

It was also not clear what would happen to the investigation of the Iran-contra
affair should the statute be found unconstitutional. Justice Department
officials said they believed that in such an event the case would be returned to
them for prosecution.

Justice Department officials said privately that it appeared Colonel North might
have a reasonable legal argument in challenging the statute, known as the Ethics
in Government Act, which was enacted in 1978.

The Reagan Administration itself has questioned the constitutionality of the
statute, arguing that the law violates the Constitution's principle of
separation of powers by turning over prosecutorial powers to the courts.

Other legal scholars, however, disagree and say that the Supreme Court is
unlikely to overturn the law.

Lawyers for Colonel North said the 1978 law violated the Constitution by
infringing on the prosecutorial responsibilities of the executive branch.

The suit asks that Mr. Walsh be enjoined from continuing his investigation into
the sale of American weapons to Iran and the subsequent diversion of profits to
the contras.

When Mr. Walsh was appointed in December as an independent counsel, a
three-judge panel offered him jursidiction to investigate several Reagan
Administration officials. The panel, however, named only one specific target:
Colonel North.

Colonel Refuses to Testify

The suit was filed three days after news reports disclosed that Colonel North's
secretary had been granted immunity and had told investigators that she and the
colonel had destroyed and altered National Security Council documents regarding
the Iran arms sale. Colonel North himself has refused to testify about the
matter before various investigative bodies, citing his Fifth Amendment right not
to incriminate himself.

The legal papers were signed by the colonel's chief defense lawyer, Brendan V.
Sullivan Jr. of Washington. Mr. Sullivan has in the past repeatedly declined to
discuss the investigation.

Mr. Sullivan is a member of the prominent Washington law firm of Williams &
Connolly. He is described as a protege of the firm's founder, Edward Bennett
Williams, and has served as defense counsel in several important cases.

In the early 1970's, he defended Brig. Gen. Samuel Koster of the Army, who was
accused of failing to investigate the My Lai massacre in Vietnam. Although
General Koster was demoted from major general, court-martial charges against him
were dropped.

The lawsuit today was, in effect, the first substantive public comment on the
case by either Mr. Sullivan or the colonel.

Although the Justice Department had no formal comment on the lawsuit, department
officials said Colonel North's action could hinder Mr. Walsh's investigation by,
among other things, raising questions about his authority to grant immunity to
witnesses.

Walsh Defends His Role

Mr. Walsh, who is formally known as an independent counsel, issued a statement
today that said, ''The independent counsel statute has received extensive and
careful study, and we are satisfied of its constitutionality.''

''We shall of course oppose the action,'' he said of the suit.

In a 70-page legal brief, lawyers for Colonel North said that ''this is a case
in which the President and the Attorney General are divested of virtually all
control over the exercise of power in an area of government that is
constitutonally entrusted to them.''

''Mr. Walsh surely exercises the power of an executive officer,'' the brief
said, ''but he is neither appointed nor held accountable as an officer with such
power should be.''

''The Constitution,'' it added, ''entrusted the execution of the laws to the
President, and with him it must lie. The Ethics in Government Act's
rearrangement of the powers of Government is unconstitutional, and the actions
of Mr. Walsh thereunder are consequently void.''

Previous Challenge to Law

The law had been challenged at least once before. In 1980, attorneys for Tim
Kraft, a former campaign official for President Carter who was the subject of a
special prosecutor's investigation, filed a Federal lawsuit charging that the
statute was unconstitutional.

Mr. Kraft was eventually cleared of charges that he used cocaine, and the suit
was dismissed the next year.

Mr. Kraft's reasoning was nearly identical to that used by Colonel North, whose
brief today said that under the Constitution, ''the function of prosecuting
offenses against the United States belongs exclusive to the executive.''

Under the 1978 law, the Attorney General is required to seek appointment of an
independent prosecutor when credible allegations of wrongdoing are made against
senior Government officials. The statute was approved by Congress as a result of
the Watergate scandal.

The Attorney General's application is made to a special Federal court, made up
of three appeals court judges. They select the prosecutor and outline the scope
of the investigation.

The Justice Department under Mr. Reagan has repeatedly argued that the law may
violate the Constitution by infringing on the President's right to enforce
Federal criminal laws.

'Serious Reservations'

In a letter to the Senate in 1981, William French Smith, who was then Attorney
General, expressed ''serious reservations concerning the constitutionality'' of
the statute, arguing that it lodged prosecutorial powers ''in an officer who is
not appointed by, accountable to or, save in extraordinary circumstances,
removable by the Attorney General or the President.''

The letter was a result of the investigation of Mr. Kraft. Mr. Smith was
responding to Senate inquiries about the Justice Department's stand on the
lawsuit brought by Mr. Kraft that challenged the special prosecutor law.

More recently, the department's Assistant Attorney General for Legal Counsel,
Charles J. Cooper, has been quoted as questioning the statute's
constitutionality.

In an interview published last month in the newspaper Legal Times, Mr. Cooper
was quoted as saying that if the statute was ''appropriately'' challenged in the
courts, the department would join in a lawsuit to overturn it.

Matter of Executive Rights

The lawsuit filed today said the special prosecutor might also violate the
constitutional right of the executive branch to direct foreign policy.

''Mr. Walsh's jurisdiction necessitates investigations on foreign soil, of
foreign nationals, and of matters implicating international diplomacy,'' the
legal brief said. ''And yet Mr. Walsh rather than the executive is making these
decisions.''

The brief made note of recent news reports that investigators from Mr. Walsh's
staff had traveled to an airport in France to search a plane owned by Adnan M.
Khashoggi, a Saudi arms dealer who has been tied to the Iran arms sale.

Colonel North's lawsuit poses a problem for Attorney General Meese, since the
Attorney General is, in effect, being asked to defend a statute that his own
department has repeatedly attacked. A Justice Department official said Mr. Meese
would have no immediate comment on the suit.

'He'll Just Plow On'

Department officials said they were unsure whether Mr. Walsh's inquiry would be
significantly hampered by the suit. ''My guess is that he'll just plow on with
the investigation,'' one official said. ''This could really gum up the works,
though.''

The lawsuit today also asked that investigations by special prosecutors in at
least three other cases be halted.

Two of those inquiries are focused on the activities of Michael K. Deaver and
Lyn Nofziger, two former White House aides, and their lobbying activities after
resigning from the Administration. The other investigation involves accusations
of false statements by former Justice Department officials.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             February 25, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. TO REPLACE TOP NATO COMMANDER

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 704 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 24


Defense Department officials said today that General Bernard W. Rogers would
retire in June as Supreme Allied Commander of NATO forces in Europe and would be
replaced by General John R. Galvin, now commander of United States forces in
Latin America.

The two generals stand in marked contrast to one another in careers and public
posture, General Rogers being the outspoken but polished staff officer while
General Galvin is a commander who has spent much of his career with troops.

General Rogers, who is 65 years old, has endeared himself to European leaders by
resisting suggestions that United States forces there be reduced and irritated
those same leaders by criticizing their defense efforts as inadequate.

General Galvin, who is fluent in Spanish and German, has spent the last two
years supervising United States military efforts in Central and South America,
including the war against drug traffickers. Earlier in his career, he served as
a division and corps commander in Europe.

European leaders, having heard in Brussels that General Rogers was to be
replaced, expressed regret at his pending departure. Peter Corterier, the
secretary general of the North Atlantic Assembly, said that ''there was always a
lot of admiration in Europe for how he made the European point of view his
own.''

In Charge of Libyan Raids

During the last seven years that he has served as commander of both European and
American forces in Europe, the largest military command in the Western world,
General Rogers has dealt with issues that have ranged from the bombing of Libya
to allied military spending.

The Navy and then the Air Force and Navy planes that attacked Libya across the
Gulf of Sidra twice last spring were under his operational control as were the
Navy planes that attacked Syrian positions in Lebanon in 1984.

In 1983, General Rogers took responsibility in testimony before Congress for the
failure of security around the Marines in Beirut, Lebanon, when they were
attacked by a truck bomb with the loss of 241 American lives.

''I am responsible,'' he told the Senate Armed Services Committee. ''Anything
that happens or fails to happen in that theater is my responsibility.''

A commission appointed by Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was later
critical of General Rogers and his subordinates for not having ordered better
security for the Marines.

In Europe, General Rogers succeeded in deploying Pershing 2 medium-range
ballistic missiles and ground-launched cruise missiles that were requested by
allied governments, but drew protests from some groups.

General Rogers has accused the Europeans for not spending more money for
conventional, non-nuclear weapons and particularly for skimping on ammunition
and supplies that would enable their forces to sustain prolonged combat against
Soviet forces.

The general has said that in the absence of a build-up of conventional weapons,
the NATO commander, in the event of hostilities, might have to ask the President
in a matter of days for permission to use nuclear weapons.

Opposed U.S. Troop Cuts

General Rogers has opposed any suggestion that the United States reduce its
forces in Europe to force the Europeans to contribute more to the common
defense.

''If we're going to convince the Western Europeans to do more,'' he told
Congress in 1985, ''you can't do it by threatening to withdraw our troops.''

General Rogers, who graduated from West Point in 1943 but did not see action in
World War II, fought in both the Korean and Vietnam wars and was decorated in
each. He was Chief of Staff of the Army from 1976 until 1979 when he was
appointed to his post in Europe.

Like General Rogers, General Galvin is a graduate of West Point, class of 1954.
Among his first assignments was three years as an exchange officer with rangers
in Colombia. He later won combat decorations in Vietnam.

General Galvin, who is 58, was in Washington Monday and today to testify before
Congress and to give a news conference; in both cases, he urged that United
States render sustained support for insurgents opposed to the leftist Sandinista
government in Nicaragua. He had nothing to say about reports of his appointment
to the European post.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE WHITE HOUSE CRISIS;
Men Behind the Report: 3 Wise in the Capital's Ways

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 933 words



JOHN G. TOWER

As a Republican Senator from Texas for 24 years and chairman of the Armed
Services Committee, John G. Tower gained a reputation on Capitol Hill as an
articulate conservative and a staunch ally of the Reagan Administration's
military buildup. He retired from the Senate in 1985 and served until early 1986
as the United States negotiator on long-range missiles at nuclear arms talks at
Geneva.

During the investigation of the National Security Council, Mr. Tower was known
to be deeply disturbed about the plight of Robert C. McFarlane, the former
national security adviser who swallowed an overdose of Valium in a suicide
attempt. Mr. Tower had hired Mr. McFarlane in the 1970's as a staff aide on the
Armed Services Committee.

From the outset of the investigation, Mr. Tower made it plain that, although
handpicked by the President for the job, he would not flinch from criticizing
the White House.

The 61-year-old Mr. Tower works as a consultant, serves on various corporate
boards and lectures at Southern Methodist University. He often jokes about his
relatively diminutive 5-feet 5 1/2-inch stature. ''My name is Tower, but you can
see I don't,'' says the Houston-born son of a Methodist minister.

In World War II, Mr. Tower served in the Pacific for three years in a
landing-craft outfit. He received a master's degree in political science at
Southern Methodist and did additional postgraduate work at the London School of
Economics, where he also did research for Britain's Conservative Party.

Mr. Tower is conservative in dress as well as in politics - he favors
three-button suits, regimental striped ties, a breast-pocket handkerchief and
sometimes a fedora. There is, however, a bit of a maverick about him. He drives
a 1972 Dodge Charger - he calls it The Green Bullet - and once played the Peter
Lorre role in a Dallas Press Club production of ''Casablanca.''

EDMUND S. MUSKIE

Mr. Muskie was a Democratic Senator from Maine from 1959 to 1980, when he
resigned to become Secretary of State.

A highly popular figure within the party, Mr. Muskie was a political centrist;
he backed President Johnson's policy in Vietnam without being labeled a hawk,
then challenged President Nixon's policy without being called a dove.

Mr. Muskie, who is 72, had actively supported liberal social causes but spent
his final years in the Senate seeking to hold down Government spending.

During his two terms as Governor of Maine and his years in the Senate, and as
the Democratic Party's Vice-Presidential nominee in 1968, Mr. Muskie made few
enemies despite a temper that was legendary on Capitol Hill.

His best-known outburst occurred in February 1972 in New Hampshire and led to
the collapse of his campaign for the Presidency. Mr. Muskie, who later said he
was exhausted and ''choked up,'' wept in front of reporters over a series of
attacks on him and his wife, Jane, in The Manchester Union-Leader.

In recent years, Mr. Muskie has worked as a lawyer in Washington and
concentrated on foreign policy.

As Secretary of State, he replaced Cyrus R. Vance, who resigned over the failed
effort to rescue American hostages in Iran. Mr. Muskie himself spent nine months
trying to win the release of the hostages.

Mr. Muskie, the son of an immigrant Polish tailor, graduated from Bates College
in Lewiston, Me., and Cornell Law School. He was a Navy officer in World War II
and entered politics in 1947 by serving in the Maine House of Representatives.

After agreeing to serve on the panel investigating the N.S.C., Mr. Muskie
insisted, ''I don't approach this in terms of a partisan responsibility.''

He told a reporter, ''My curiousity is as great as yours as to what's going to
happen.''

BRENT SCOWCROFT

National security adviser to President Ford from 1975-77, Brent Scowcroft has
gained a reputation as an expert on foreign and defense issues.

One of his strengths, associates say, is that, despite this background, he does
not push his ideas at the expense of others.

''I don't think I'm a shy, shrinking violet,'' the balding and slender former
Air Force general once remarked. ''I think 'quiet,' describes me O.K. And
'comfortable out of the limelight.' I'm more interested in the substance than
the atmospherics.''

General Scowcroft, who is vice chairman of Kissinger Associates, a consulting
firm headed by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, spent 25 years in
the Air Force, rising to lieutenant general. He gained a reputation as a
''military intellectual'' who earned M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in international
relations from Columbia University. He speaks Russian and Serbian.

General Scowcroft, who is 61, is a Mormon who neither smokes nor drinks. In the
Air Force, he rose through the ranks in a series of diplomatic, administrative
and academic jobs, including stints teaching Russian history at West Point and
as a military attache at the United States Embassy in Belgrade.

As a colonel, he was assigned to the White House in 1972 as military assistant
to President Nixon. That same year, he was promoted to brigadier general. In
1973, General Scowcroft replaced Alexander M. Haig Jr. - a classmate at West
Point - as deputy assistant to the President for national security affairs and
picked up his second star. In 1974, a month after Gerald R. Ford moved into the
White House, he was given his third star.

In recent years, General Scowcroft has served on an array of Presidential
commissions, including President Carter's general advisory committee on arms
control and President Reagan's commissions on strategic forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Sen. John G. Tower, Edmund S. Muskie and Brent Scowcroft
leaving Old Executive Office Building (NYT/Marilynn K. Yee)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ TO ARRIVE IN CHINA TOMORROW FOR TALKS ON TRADE AND HUMAN RIGHTS

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 921 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Feb. 27


In an effort to reinforce an improving relationship with China, Secretary of
State George P. Shultz begins a five-day visit Sunday to five Chinese cities,
including Dalian, the center of an economic development zone.

The trip is expected to give the Administration a fresh reading of Beijing's
campaign for economic change and its recent crackdown on intellectual
dissidence.

Mr. Shultz, who arrived in Hong Kong today, was last in China when he
accompanied President Reagan in 1984. He is scheduled to meet with Deng
Xiaoping, the paramount Chinese leader, and other officials to discuss trade,
American business investment, the Soviet presence in Afghanistan, the Vietnamese
occupation of Cambodia, the treatment of American journalists and other issues.


Human Rights on Agenda

Mr. Shultz told reporters on his plane that he would raise human rights issues
with the Chinese, particularly the expulsion and withdrawal of visas from two
reporters, John F. Burns of The New York Times, who was detained and then
expelled last year, and Lawrence MacDonald, an American working for Agence
France-Presse, whose visa was revoked when he was out of the country.

''I think that is a matter always of concern to us, given our views about the
importance of freedom of the press,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''I spoke about that when
some Chinese journalists called on me the other day in Washington.''

American officials traveling with the Secretary said, however, that in his
public and private remarks, he wanted to find language that would stress his
concern without offending the Chinese.

Trade and cultural relations have mushroomed in recent years, with 19,000
Chinese students now studying in the United States and more than $8 billion in
Chinese-American trade in 1986. But Administration officials say that some
American executives, watching the recent dismissals of dissidents from their
jobs and Communist Party positions, are wondering whether the economic openness
is permanent and whether the incentives to foreign inestment are there to stay.
Chinese officials insist that they are.

The Balance of Trade

There is some uneasiness in the trade relations as each side - depending on its
own calculations - sees itself in a balance of payments deficit with the other.
China does not count exports that go to the United States through Hong Kong. But
the United States does, coming up with $5.241 billion in imports from China in
1986, as opposed to $3.105 billion in American exports, which include some radar
equipment and other military goods considered ''defensive.''

Forty-six percent of the imports from China were in textiles, according to the
State Department, and the Chinese are worried about protectionist sentiment in
Congress. If tariffs or quotas are inhibit textile sales to the United States,
Chinese officials say, China will buy less from the United States.

Mr. Shultz's visit also comes during shifts in the triangular relationship among
China, the Soviet Union and the United States.

American analysts see the Chinese as nervous about Soviet activities in Asia,
particularly the war in Afghanistan, the large Soviet military deployment along
the Mongolian and Soviet borders with China, Moscow's support of the Vietnamese
Army in Cambodia and the close Soviet ties with North Korea.

U.S. Seen as 'Counterweight'

''They want the United States to maintain a very strong position in the Asian
region,'' a senior Administration official said of the Chinese. ''They want us
there as a counterweight to the Soviets.''

The potential for Chinese-Soviet reconciliation exists, however, as Mikhail S.
Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, makes overtures to the Chinese meant to improve
ties and restore relations between the two Communist parties.

Moscow has announced the withdrawal this spring of one of its military divisions
from Mongolia. The Chinese minimize the significance of that step, however,
arguing that six divisions will remain, supplemented by large-scale deployment
on the Soviet side of the Chinese frontier.

Obstacles Defined

China defines this as one of three obstacles to Chinese-Soviet reconiciliation,
the other two being the situations in Afghanistan and Cambodia. Mr. Shultz noted
the parallels between American and Chinese positions on these issues and said
that an improvement in Chinese-Soviet relations that resolved these problems
would be in Washington's interest.

''Ask yourself how we would feel about it in the United States if the three
obstacles were resolved,'' Mr. Shultz said, ''that is, if the Soviet threat and
presence on the Chinese border were eased substantially, including the threat of
Soviet missiles pointed at China.''

He continued: ''If the Soviet Union got out of Afghanistan and the regime in
Afghanistan is one produced by the people of Afghanistan, and if Vietnam gets
out of Cambodia and turns its attention to its own very large internal needs and
stops being an aggressor in the neighborhood, how does that affect our
interests? I think it would affect them in a very positive way.''

The state of affairs in the capitals of the United States and China is expected
to be a topic of interest to both sides, one American official said. ''They will
say that everything is under control in Beijing, and we will say that everything
is under control in Washington,'' he quipped.

Then, in analyzing Mr. Shultz's remarks afterward, he predicted with a grin, the
Chinese officials will say to each other, ''What did he mean by that?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Chinese-Vietnamese Clash

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 53 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 27


Hanoi has charged that Chinese soldiers killed and wounded dozens of Vietnamese
civilians by ambushing them inside Vietnam or sniping at them as they worked
along the tense frontier. The Hanoi radio, in a broadcast monitored here, said
Vietnamese troops retaliated by killing a large number of Chinese soldiers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              February 28, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
Where The Buck Stops

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 723 words


What happened to Ronald Reagan? How did a commanding President who stood tall
with the public and could work his will with Congress allow his Administration
to lapse into the evident ''chaos'' certified by the Tower commission?

Here is a bemused observer's speculation as to the causative chain of events and
circumstances: 1. The Reagan ''Management Style.'' That's what the commission
rather charitably called it - at best, the President's broad-stroke leadership
that delegated most responsibility to subordinates; at worst, his inattention to
detail and ignorance of facts. To borrow from the ''Peter Principle,'' this
style reached its level of incompetence in the Iran-contra affair; as a result,
Mr. Reagan seems neither to have understood the implications of what he wanted
to do nor to have known the operational details of what his National Security
Council actually was doing.

There had been warnings aplenty, from the most penetrating press observers, from
David Stockman's insider revelations - but most sharply in events. The misuse of
the Marines in Lebanon, the Bitburg cemetery visit, the ill-prepared summit
dealings in Iceland, to name only three, all foretold a story of disaster
waiting to happen. 2. The Reaction to the Landslide. Recent landslides -
especially for re-election - have been more threatening to Presidents than colon
surgery; witness Franklin Roosevelt and the court-packing scheme, Lyndon Johnson
and the war in Vietnam, Richard Nixon and the Watergate ''stonewall,'' now
Ronald Rea-gan and Iran. Landslides seem to suggest to mortal Presidents that
perhaps they are something more. They can carry out schemes they would have
avoided in more modest circumstances, they have won something approaching
absolute power; above all, they needn't be too scrupulous about strict adherence
to bothersome laws.

Pray for the next President, whoever he or she may be, to win by 51 percent of
the vote. That sometimes teaches humility. Landslides never do. 3. The Chief of
Staff. Donald Regan should not bear full blame for the Iran fiasco, nor will his
departure restore the President's standing. But it seems inarguable that after
Mr. Regan took over the White House staff following the landslide of 1984,
things began to deteriorate; and that one strong reason was the chief of staff's
watertight control of access to and instruction from the President.

Under that system - congenial to but disastrous for Mr. Reagan's ''management
style'' - the President was kept from hearing sufficient argument, dissent,
advice and warning coming up from lower but expert levels; and his often
ill-informed instincts and desires - to free American hostages, for example -
took on the force of commands coming down from on high. Aside from
responsibility for the Iran mess, chief of staff Regan's system obviously failed
a President desperately in need of good advice and expert help, rather than
imperial isolation. 4. Secret Operations. No President can conduct foreign
policy entirely in the open; but any President who had studied the C.I.A.
hearings of the 1970's should have been wary of ''covert operations.'' Such
derring-do seldom if ever has proved worth the risks involved (not in Guatemala,
at the Bay of Pigs, in Laos or even in Iran).

Instead, Mr. Reagan let himself be guided by the freewheeling William Casey, a
veteran of the O.S.S. in World War II. They plunged once again into the
deceptively alluring world of secret operations - mining Nicaraguan harbors,
selling arms to the Ayatollah Khomeini's forces -that had been discredited a
decade ago.

For at least two reasons, such secret operations are dangerous and usually
unproductive. In the nature of the case they do not allow for adequate
consultations, discussions and planning; the more closely held a project, the
more it tends to be hare-brained and badly prepared. Again in the nature of the
case, secret operations are likely to cause Presidents to lie - not just to
foreigners but to Americans; then, if caught in the lie, as is all too likely,
they may think they have to protect themselves and ''the Presidency'' with more
lies.

For all of the above - as for such other important factors as his succession of
second-rate national security advisers - Ronald Reagan ultimately has no one to
blame but himself. The buck stops there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIANS IN VIETNAM: U.S. SEES A THREAT

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 916 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28


The commander in chief of the United States Pacific Fleet says the Soviet Union
has quadrupled the size of a former United States base in South Vietnam and is
using Russian forces there to intimidate the Philippines and other Pacific
nations.

The Pacific fleet commander, Adm. James A. Lyons, first raised the issue during
a visit to Australia earlier this month. Soviet and Vietnamese officials
responded by saying that there were no Soviet military forces in Vietnam.

But Admiral Lyons, in a telephone interview Thursday, called the Soviet and
Vietnamese denial ''pure hogwash.''

The base in question, Cam Ranh Bay, on the coast of Vietnam, was originally
built by the United States during the Vietnam war and turned over to South
Vietnamese forces before North Vietnam conquered the country in 1975.

Photos of Soviet Presence

Admiral Lyons, during his Australian visit Feb. 9, gave details of the Soviet
buildup and displayed formerly classified aerial photos taken as recently as
December. The photos, he said, showed the extent of Soviet presence at Cam Ranh
Bay.

The Admiral said outside the Soviet Union, only Afghanistan had more Soviet
troops than Vietnam.

''The Soviets have quadrupled the facilities at Cam Ranh and are using it as a
major operating base to threaten stability in the region,'' said Admiral Lyons
in a telephone interview. He went on to say that Soviet ships and planes based
at Cam Ranh Bay are in a position to disrupt ocean-going commerce as far as the
Indian Ocean and can strike as far south as Australia and New Zealand.

Frequently, according to the United States fleet commander, Soviet bombers make
mock attacks in the direction of the Philippines, where the United States has
two major military installations, the Subic Bay naval base and Clark Air Base.
These mock attacks, the Admiral said, are intended by Moscow to warn the Aquino
Government that American military presence will invite attacks on the
Philippines in the event of war between the United States and the Soviet Union.

Denial in Soviet Letter

The Soviet denial that it has a base at Cam Ranh Bay, according to a Reuters
report, came in a letter to an Australian newspaper from a Soviet Embassy
official, Valery Zemskov, a minister-counselor who labeled the American
assertion ''fantastic.''

''There has never been such a base and never will it be established there,'' Mr.
Zemskov said.  The Vietnamese Embassy in Canberra was also quoted as saying
there were ''definitely no Soviet bases in Vietnam and no Soviet troops or
aircraft stationed in the country.''

When asked about the denials, Admiral Lyons said: ''That's pure hogwash. They're
a bunch of liars.'' Refers to Photographs Admiral Lyons said the photographs of
Cam Ranh Bay proved his claim. He said the photos showed bombers adjacent to an
airfield runway as well as warships and submarines alongside piers. ''When we
left Vietnam,'' he said, ''there were two piers at Cam Ranh. Now there are
seven, plus floating drydocks. Those modern ships and planes aren't part of
Hanoi's inventory, and we didn't leave them there.''

Military analysts have identified the aircraft as 5 TU-95 long range
reconnaissane aircraft and 15 TU-16 bombers. The ships include a diesel attack
submaine and a nuclear-powered cruise missile attack submarine. Also shown are a
frigate and a destroyer.

Pentagon intelligence sources say the Soviet Union has been strengthening its
Pacific fleet both quantitatively and in quality since the end of the Vietnam
war. It consists of about 500 ships, including 130 submarines and their most
advanced missile carrying vessels, such as the nuclear cruiser Kirov.

The Soviet Pacific fleet operates primarily from the Russian ports of
Petropavlosk and Vladivostok. Neither is ideal from a naval standpoint because
of winter icing at Petropavlask and the need for Soviet warships at Vladivostok
to pass though narrow straits to reach open sea. Thus the warm-water port at Cam
Ranh Bay with its relatively free access to the southern Pacific is very useful.


Value Called Questionable

Military analysts, however, say Cam Ranh Bay's value to Moscow in wartime is
questionable. Despite the increase in size of the Soviet fleet, it is no match
for the United States Pacific fleet. Cam Ranh Bay, they point out, is a long way
from the Soviet Union and vulnerable to attack by the American Seventh Fleet in
the event of war. ''If shooting started,'' one senior naval officer said, ''the
first thing the Soviets at Cam Ranh would do is get out of there.''

Naval analysts say that regardless of of its wartime value, the Soviet Union
made good use of its Navy for political purposes. ''Cam Ranh Bay is a great
place to base some ships and planes if you want to conduct some gunboat
diplomacy,'' said Harlan Ullman, a naval specialist at the Center for Strategic
and International Studies in Washington. ''They can fly and sail around the
southern waters of the Pacific to remind everyone out there that the United
States is not the only one with a fleet. It is also a signal to Beijing that the
Soviets can protect their shipping to and from the Indian Ocean.''

Intelligence sources say they do not believe the Vietnamese are happy with the
Soviet presence at Cam Ranh Bay, but view it as a useful counter to a hostile
China to the north. Granting Soviet base rights is probably also considered by
Hanoi the price it must pay for the economic assistance it receives from the
Soviet Union.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Vietnam showing location of Cam Ranh Bay (NYT)

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET AIDE STARTING ASIAN-PACIFIC TOUR WITH THAILAND VISIT

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 231 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Feb. 28


The Soviet Union, capping more than a year of overtures to Southeast Asia and
the Pacific, is sending Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze on a tour of the
region beginning Monday.

The visit is the first by a Soviet Foreign Minister to non-Communist Southeast
Asia. Regional officials say they welcome the chance to talk about trade
prospects. They also want to discuss the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia,
which the Soviet Union backs.

Mr. Shevardnadze, who is also a member of the policy-making Politburo, will
begin his tour here and visit Australia and Indonesia before going on to
Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

Mr. Shevardnadze will be the highest-ranking Soviet official to visit Indonesia
since the suppression of a 1965 coup attempt for which Communists were widely
blamed. Indonesian military leaders have been saying that the leftist threat is
still real, and that Soviet-bloc agents may be behind it.

In Australia, Mr. Shevardnadze is expected to face concerns about the growth of
Soviet military power in the Pacific and attempts to gain access to ports and
airfields in small island nations through fishing agreements.

Mr. Shevardnadze's visit to Moscow's three Indochinese allies will be also
watched with interest.

Vietnam, caught up in party and Government changes as it tries to revive a
faltering economy, has been echoing calls in Moscow for renewal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
MOVIE BLOODLINES LEAD TO RAMBO'S CHILDREN

BYLINE: Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1433 words


Films may not have the bloodlines that race horses do, but a hit has a way of
leaving a trail. Its descendants are liable to be indirect, thanks to the
singularity that makes it a hit in the first place, and to the riskiness of
exact cloning (since the authorized clone is almost always a letdown, and the
clone without the ''II'' in its title seldom stands a chance). So anyone who
sets out deliberately to copy a hit will soon discover the elusive brilliance of
the original, whether it's ''E.T.'' or ''Top Gun'' or a $100 million-grossing
dance movie. But that doesn't mean that the hit isn't, in its own way, able to
spawn.

Once a film is installed in the pantheon of popular culture, as ''Rambo'' surely
has been, its influence will be felt in a variety of ways. Yes, there is a
''Rambo III'' in the works, but that's almost beside the point; it's the oblique
influence that is more telling. Very soon after the original release of
''Rambo,'' another film showed a thin, bald man with a rag tied around his head,
dressing up as Rambo for a costume party. It also became possible to send a
Rambogram to a friend as a practical joke, delivered by some shirtless he-man
with a knife in his teeth. At that point, the Rambo ripple effect had begun. And
it continues. One of the few lonely jokes in the recent comedy ''Mannequin'' has
to do with a security guard who has made ''Rambo'' the name of his bulldog.

Even in loftier circles, the aftereffects are still being felt. As was reported
last week in these pages, academics across the nation are willing to examine
Rambo's speech patterns, his body language, his politics and his resemblance to
the President in an entirely serious manner. Someone has even taken the trouble
to count the number of lines that Sylvester Stallone so laboriously mutters
during the course of the film. Most of them aren't much longer than ''Yup'' or
''Nope,'' and even the aphorisms are conspicuously terse (''To survive a war,
you gotta become a war''), but altogether, there are 163.

Of course, ''Rambo''-generated fallout can also be found on the screen. The
hit's influence can easily be detected in ''Death Before Dishonor,'' which has a
Marine hero and a Middle Eastern setting but still employs the Rambo
one-man-band approach to foreign policy problem-solving. And the success of
''Rambo'' also colors ''Over the Top,'' Mr. Stallone's new saga of a triumphant
arm-wrestler, even if the chief function of ''Rambo'' in this case is to cast a
long shadow.

The ''Rambo'' influence can even been seen as playing some role in the
box-office success of ''Platoon,'' though Oliver Stone's view of events in
Vietnam could not be more different from Mr. Stallone's. Yes, ''Rambo'' was an
action film of almost cartoonlike simplicity, whereas ''Platoon'' is a
thoughtful, visceral work that leaves its audiences devastated. But ''Rambo''
may have helped pave the way, if not for the making of ''Platoon,'' then for its
wide-scale acceptance.

Had ''Platoon'' arrived in the pre-''Rambo'' era, it would certainly have been
admired and respected, but it might well have been relegated to art-house
status. ''Rambo,'' the first down-to-earth Vietnam blockbuster aimed directly at
the solar plexus, may have helped convince the widest possible audience that the
memory of Vietnam and the prospect of an exciting hit film were not mutually
exclusive. And if the two films' caliber or attitudes are in no way comparable,
they don't have to be. Just as ''Kramer vs. Kramer'' may have helped pave the
way for the very different ''Terms of Endearment'' by making audiences receptive
to emotionally wrenching parent-child subject matter, ''Rambo'' helped to create
the climate in which ''Platoon'' currently thrives.

In that case, the effect is purely circumstantial, but no one could regard the
overlapping of ''Death Before Dishonor'' with ''Rambo'' as a happy accident.
Actually, the lineage of ''Death Before Dishonor'' is slightly more complicated,
since it owes something to the ''Dirty Harry'' films as well, namely the specter
of a tough-looking vigilante operating outside the law, supposedly for the sake
of the community. But this established formula has been updated, thanks to
''Rambo,'' and given a more militaristic angle. So Gunnery Sgt. Jack Burns (Fred
Dryer), assigned to the fictitious Arab nation of Jemal, sits still for the
American-hating antics of local terrorists only briefly before striking out on
his own.

The incendiary trailer for ''Death Before Dishonor'' fits more flying bodies
(mostly in Arab headgear) into two minutes' time than most films pack into two
hours. But the finished film is surprisingly tame. Although Burns does launch a
one-man war, grudgingly teaming up with Israeli anti-terrorist operatives but
still doing most of the dirty work himself, he somehow lacks gusto. Mr. Dryer's
characterization is just as cold, nasty and humorless as any ''Rambo'' fan could
wish, but there's an extra dimension that the character lacks. The greased
biceps? The flaming bazookas? The special ''surivival'' knife (Rambo's
ugly-looking instrument guaranteed to endanger the survival of anyone in its
path)? Burns just doesn't have enough of a gimmick, and he doesn't have the
crusading craziness that put Rambo on the map. Primitive as it was, ''Rambo''
had an intensity and personality that aren't easily matched.

That may well have occurred to Mr. Stallone himself in the wake of ''Over the
Top,'' his latest stab at creating a new character, and a film apparently not
destined (on the evidence of its so-so opening grosses) for box-office
immortality. As Mr. Stallone knows better than anyone, ''Rambo'' is a tough act
to follow. And as he must also know, in watching the ''Rocky'' saga as it wanes,
a character like either Rocky or Rambo has a limited life span in the public
consciousness, especially if the character's story can be told in its entirety
the first time around. So Mr. Stallone continues to devise new vehicles for
himself. And ''Over the Top'' is one of his strangest.

Directed by Menahem Golan, the Cannon Films executive who must himself be
somewhat mindful of ''Rambo'' (Mr. Golan also directed ''The Delta Force,'' with
Chuck Norris as more of a nice-guy vigilante), ''Over the Top'' is a film whose
subtext is much more interesting than its surface. It presents the ever more
glamorous, prosperous-looking Mr. Stallone - no wonder, since he was reportedly
paid $12 million to do this - as a poor, humble truck driver named Lincoln Hawk.
His two interests in life are his 12-year-old son Michael (David Mendenhall),
who has been turned against his father by his mother's wealthy family, and the
fine art of arm-wrestling. The film alternates bizarrely between arm-wrestling
bouts and Mr. Stallone's own variation on ''Kramer vs. Kramer.'' It's never
clear which of these is meant to be the real lure.

In his paternal capacity, Mr. Stallone is forced to do a lot more talking than
Rambo does (a big mistake) and to play teacher and mentor. He instructs the boy
that winning isn't everything, which is not the lesson of earlier Stallone
films, and tells him he can win arm-wrestling bouts just by trying harder than
his adversary. (Luckily, the film does not follow Michael's efforts to get
through later life with that maxim.) Hawk also teaches his son how to drive his
enormous truck illegally, which seems to be some small nod to the vigilante
spirit. And he rails against his rich father-in-law in a heated custody battle.
Finally, not because he seeks glory but because he needs money for a new truck,
Hawk enters an arm-wrestling contest that pits him against the finest
arm-wrestlers in the world. Since ''Over the Top'' is Mr. Stallone's baby,
there's no need to guess whether the story ends in yet another triumph.

What's notable about ''Over the Top'' is the absence of Mr. Stallone's
hit-making acumen, on which even some of his least attractive efforts have been
able to trade. Poor trucker fights the establishment? An arm-wrestler claws his
way to the top? A father fights for the love of his boy? It's all simple enough,
but Mr. Stallone at his shrewdest has been even simpler. In the end, ''Rambo''
may be best remembered for such crude ingredients as its savage weaponry,
bare-chested chic, primitive politics and tongue-tied understatement (''Do we
get to win this time?''). It may be sooner rather than later that the sight of
an oily, raging Rambo comes to look as sadly outmoded as a white-suited disco
dancer on Saturday night. But for the moment, he continues to cast a very long
shadow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PALME OBSESSION;
The Murder Sweden Can't Forget -- Or Solve

BYLINE: By Richard Reeves; Richard Reeves's most recent book is ''The Reagan
Detour.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4617 words


EARLY ON THE MORNING OF Jan. 20, 200 Swedish policemen surrounded a number of
houses in Stockholm and rounded up 20 men. ''Three of those arrested,'' the
police announced, ''have been informed of the suspicion of being accessories to
the murder of Olof Palme.''

The arrests climaxed an 11-month, $6 million effort by a 300-member task force
investigating the killing of the man who had dominated his country's politics
for 20 years. Prime Minister Palme had led his Social Democrats to victory in
three elections and was the most important Swede in the world. But he had also
led the party to its only two defeats in 56 years and, because he was a
political animal who honed his words to wound, he was hated by many of his
countrymen.

Ten hours after the early-morning arrests, the head of the investigation,
Stockholm's police commissioner, Hans Holmer, and the chief prosecutor, Claes
Zeime, appeared together before 250 reporters from 12 countries and announced to
their stunned audience that the suspects had been released for lack of evidence.
After that press conference, I walked from police headquarters around the corner
to Zeime's office.

''Do you know who killed Olof Palme?'' I asked.

''We haven't the faintest idea,'' he answered.

''Do you know what kind of person did it?''

''No.''

''Do you know where he came from?''

''No.''

''Do you know why he did it?''

''No. The answer to all those questions is 'No.' ''

Weeks later, as the first anniversary of the murder approached, the answers were
still ''No.'' The only change was the removal of Holmer as chief of the task
force.

The details of Palme's assassination remain fresh in the memories of Sweden's
8.3 million people. At 11:21 on the night of Feb. 28, 1986, a gunman stepped out
of the shadows onto Sveavagen, a busy street in central Stockholm, fired two
shots, then escaped. It took police more than 15 minutes to identify the victim
as the Prime Minister, even though Lisbeth Palme, his wife, was screaming:
''Don't you see who it is? They've shot my Olof!''

In the year since then, Sweden has been traumatized by the murder it can neither
forget nor solve.* As Swedes continue to come each day to lay roses on the site
where Palme fell, half the country's law enforcement establishment is accusing
the other half of arrogant bungling. The assassination and its fumbling,
quarreling aftermath have shattered the prosperous little nation's self-image as
a land of peace and decency, reason and competence.

The truth may be far worse than the Swedish people know now - or will ever know,
if some high officials succeed in an apparent attempt to block certain lines of
investigation. A month-long inquiry by this reporter, involving more than 100
interviews in Sweden and four other countries, produced strong evidence that
police and prosecutors may have been restrained and perhaps misled by their own
Government, particularly the Foreign Ministry.

While the police were chasing right-wing pamphleteers and a violent little gang
of Kurdish Communists, some Swedish authorities - including Cabinet members -
were coming to a more dangerous conclusion: that Palme died because of his
clumsy involvement as a mediator in the Iran-Iraq war at the same time that
Swedish arms makers were illegally shipping weapons to one side, Iran.

The complicated and secret weapons dealings in many ways paralleled the
controversial American transactions with Iran, and have raised the same kinds of
questions about who in government knew what, and when. Regardless of who knew in
Sweden, secret service agencies of other countries have offered the Swedish
Government information indicating that Palme's murder might be traced to his
decision to block arms deliveries to Iran after illegal sales of surface-to-air
missiles, howitzers and gunpowder became public in late 1985. Beyond that, some
members of the Cabinet have concluded that the subsequent death of a second
Swedish official - recorded as an accident by the police - was probably a murder
linked to the Palme investigation and the same arms transactions.

That official was the Foreign Ministry officer responsible for approving all
materiel exports, a former admiral named Carl-Fredrik Algernon, who fell or was
pushed in front of a subway train in Stockholm's Central Station on Jan. 15 -
six days before he was to testify before a special prosecutor investigating the
illegal arms shipments.

''We were so naive,'' said one important Swedish official, who said his career
could be ruined if it were known that we were meeting. ''We thought we could
interfere anywhere in the world without taking sides. Palme decided to take a
higher profile, and now we are paying the price.''

''The truth about the murder?'' said another Swedish official familiar with
Cabinet discussions, who also insisted on anonymity. ''Most of the people in the
Government don't want it. It would be disastrous for the Foreign Ministry if
people knew how stupid we have been in the [Persian] Gulf. The roots of the
killing go back to Iran and Iraq. It is hard to say which one. Both had reasons.
But the feeling is definitely not to find out.''

I. CHAOS IN STOCKHOLM

Hans Holmer, like everyone else in Sweden, can remember exactly where he was
when he learned Olof Palme was dead. He was on his way to a national ski race,
staying at a small hotel 200 miles from Stockholm. He went downstairs for coffee
just after 7 A.M. on March 1 to find a surprised clerk, who asked why he wasn't
in the city. It took Holmer five hours to get to Sveavagen, where Palme had been
walking after seeing a movie, with his wife but without bodyguards. Holmer
returned to chaos.

The police had not thought to close the bridges of Stockholm, which is a city of
islands. Trains from the nearby Central Station were not stopped until 12:40
A.M. - an hour and 19 minutes after Palme was killed by a bullet that passed
from his back through his upper chest. The order to ''watch'' roads out of the
city was issued after 12:50 A.M. - and even then, no reason was given. Airports
weren't closed down until 2:05 A.M. It was sometime after 1 A.M. before the
commander of Sweden's armed forces was located and informed.

The first piece of physical evidence, a bullet that had grazed Mrs. Palme, was
found the next morning - on the sidewalk more than 100 feet from the few square
yards that had been cordoned off by police - by an Indian journalist who said he
was in a trance.

The second bullet, the one that killed Palme, was found on March 2 by a woman,
one of thousands of Swedes bringing roses to the murder site. She picked it up
beside a wastebasket, less than 30 feet from where Palme had fallen 37 hours
before.

Chief Holmer, though, was a reassuring figure. A rugged-looking man whom the
press liked to compare to Clint Eastwood, he is the son of the country's
best-known athletic figure, the Olympic track coach Gosta Holmer, and he had
served as chief of SAPO, the national security police, before taking over the
4,000-man Stockholm department in 1976. He personally took charge of the
investigation, operating from a heavily guarded ''Palme Room'' in police
headquarters - and quickly produced a composite drawing of the suspected killer
from the accounts of Mrs. Palme and 38 other witnesses.

Holmer held daily press conferences, announcing on one day that the murder
weapon must be a Smith & Wesson .357 Magnum, and on another that a
partial-license-plate sighting had narrowed the search for a getaway car down to
200 vehicles.

But within a week there were questions. The police said the killer had made his
escape by running up a set of stairs and down three dark blocks before losing
himself in the Friday night crowd on another main street. He could have made it
in two minutes, they said. (I was able to walk it in three.) But the key
witness, an art student who did the rough sketch for the composite portrait, had
seen the man she drew at least 15 minutes after the murder.

Holmer himself, waving two .357 Magnums before television cameras, said that
''the lead-tipped, copper-sheathed'' bullets were unique, probably handmade. But
the bullets actually were copper-tipped and lead-sheathed, and reporters bought
boxes of them at a sporting-goods store two blocks from police headquarters.

Then, on March 12, less than two weeks after the killing, police arrested a
32-year-old man named Ake Gunnarsson, a loudmouthed, pamphlet-distributing
follower of the American extremist Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr. The charge was
''complicity in the murder of Olof Palme.''

It seemed possible. Right-wingers in Sweden despised Palme. Some thought of him
as a traitor to his class, a rich businessman's son who had become a socialist.
Others - Gunnarsson vocal among them - thought Palme was selling out Sweden to
the Soviet Union. Still, there was no real evidence against Gunnarsson, and the
then-prosecutor, K. G. Svensson, ordered him released within a week.

Not for the last time, Holmer's task force started all over again. On March 29,
Swedish Air Force jets screamed back and forth all day 1,000 feet above
Sveavagen, taking aerial photographs in search of the murder weapon. They were
back the next day because there had been no film in one of the cameras. Then the
investigators announced a plan to round up the 4,000 .357 Magnums in the country
for extensive ballistic tests - giving up the idea only when West German experts
said that the complex tests would take 10 years to complete.

On May 6, the police arrested Gunnarsson again. ''There is no evidence against
this man,'' Svensson said. Svensson ordered Gunnarsson released, and then,
because of his numerous disputes with Holmer, asked to be removed from the case.

That's when Claes Zeime, Svensson's superior in the prosecutor's office,
assigned himself to the case. Swedish criminal law is heavily weighted toward
defendants' rights, and the police can hold individuals no longer than 12 hours
without a certification of ''reasonable suspicion'' by a prosecutor. In
practice, then, prosecutor and police are often adversaries, with the prosecutor
responsible for protecting the rights of suspects - a situation that in this
case would lead to a struggle between Holmer and Zeime that divided much of the
nation.

Moreover, in Sweden, almost all officials are totally autonomous. Laws against
''ministerial influence'' go back to the 17th century; not even the Prime
Minister has the power to give direct orders to police or prosecutors. So, when
Ingvar Carlsson, Palme's successor and former deputy, made his first comment on
the investigation - that he was disappointed - no one was particularly surprised
when, on July 8, Holmer went on television to respond: ''We don't need praise,
but we don't need to be rocketed, either. It seems ungrateful.'' The Prime
Minister did not offer his opinion in public again for more than six months.

But no Swede could be blamed for wondering what was going on. The news was
sometimes distressing, sometimes comic. The security police, SAPO, had been
investigating tips that Stockholm policemen were behind the murder - without
ever informing Holmer. The national police had let a bank robber out of prison
because he said he could lead them to Palme's killers; within an hour the
prisoner had escaped from them and, soon enough, was robbing banks again.

II. A KURDISH CONNECTION?

At the end of July, Hans Holmer was back on television, announcing ''progress of
great importance.'' Leaks from headquarters produced newspaper reports that the
police knew the motive and the murderer. There are a lot of news leaks in
Sweden, where freedom-of-the-press laws make it a crime for officials or
employers to try to find the source of leaked information.

''Holmer: 'He Gave the Order to Kill' '' and ''Police Accuse: 'You Are the
Killer' '' were two of the headlines that appeared. The press was following what
Holmer was calling the ''main trail'': the theory that Palme had been killed by
members of the secretive Kurdish Workers' Party (called by its Kurdish initials,
P.K.K.), a violent band of refugees from eastern Turkey who had been invited to
settle in Sweden because of the country's official encouragement of ''national
liberation movements.''

Kurds began coming to Sweden in the 1960's, politi-cal refugees complaining of
suppression by the governments of Turkey, Iran and Iraq. There are about 18
million Kurds in all, concentrated in the mountain area called Kurdistan, where
Turkey, Iran, Iraq, the So-viet Union and Syria border one another. For one year
at the end of World War II, they had their own autonomous republic. Most of it
has since become part of Turkey, and the Turks assert that there are no such
people as Kurds, just ''mountain Turks.''

The Marxist-Leninist P.K.K. may have as few as 16 actual members among the 7,000
or so Kurds living in Sweden. The P.K.K.'s presence among the ''svartskallars''
- the derogatory Swedish term for all unblond, un-Nordic immigrants that means,
literally, ''black heads'' - became politically visible in 1983, when Sweden
denied an entry visa to the group's leader, Abdullah Ocalan, who was living in
Damascus, Syria. Not long after that, two former P.K.K. members were murdered in
Stockholm and Uppsala, and the Swedish Government officially designated the
group a terrorist organization. Nine P.K.K. members were officially expelled
from Sweden, but that order was immediately set aside because sending them back
to Turkey would be tantamount to executing them. Two Kurds have been
subsequently convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment for the Stockholm and
Uppsala murders.

According to police, within these events are to be found the motivation for and
some of the people involved in the murder of Olof Palme.

Although the circumstantial evidence against the P.K.K. has not been released,
the Holmer team claimed to me that this is what they know:

* Wiretaps on P.K.K. telephones in the weeks before the murder revealed plans
for a ''wedding'' - code for ''killing'' - but there was no indication of who
the victim would be.

* The murder weapon (which has never been found) was purchased by a petty
narcotics dealer and then transferred to a member of the P.K.K.

* The man who pulled the trigger came to Sweden from Belgium and was waiting in
a P.K.K. bookstore and cafe two blocks from Sveavagen when word came that the
Palmes were walking along the street. That man, police believe, is probably now
in Damascus.

One of the more interesting things about the police theory is that two of the
alleged plotters were actually in jail at the time of the Palme killing - one
for murder and one for narcotics dealing. But most Swedish prisoners get days
off on weekends, and police say the two men handled the weapons transactions on
a Saturday, Feb. 15, 1986.

That's what Holmer concluded in late July. He still believes it, even after his
removal from the investigation. Through it all he was extremely popular,
receiving from appreciative citizens dozens of bouquets and pounds of chocolate
every day. Swedish Television named him ''Man of the Year.'' A popular magazine
voted him one of the 10 sexiest men in Sweden.

With Huseyin Yildirim, a lawyer who spoke for the P.K.K., taunting him daily in
the newspapers, Holmer stuck doggedly to the ''main trail,'' basically ignoring
other leads. Tips involving military officers or other right-wingers were
avoided after the Gunnarsson embarrassment.

When I asked police whether they had considered the possibility that Palme had
been killed for something that had nothing to do with official duties, I was
told it was ''a Nordic ethic'' to stay away from a man's ''private zone,'' meant
as a euphemism for other women. The press, sensationalistic as it was on other
subjects, followed that ethic as well, refusing to print the name of Emma
Rothschild, a British scholar and writer whose close friendship with Palme has
been the subject of speculation in British and American newspapers.

Claes Zeime, the chief prosecutor, called the P.K.K. theory ''police
disinformation.'' But he encouraged Holmer to test the theory, which led to the
arrests of Yildirim and 19 other men (most of them Kurds) on the morning of Jan.
20. With the release of all 20 later that day, Zeime had, in effect, brought
down Sweden's man of the year.

Prime Minister Carlsson, facing calls from the opposition for Parliamentary
inquiries into the investigation, finally mustered enough ''ministerial
influence'' - or was finally comfortable enough with the hypocrisy of breaking
law and tradition -to replace Holmer on Feb. 4 with Holger Romander, the chief
of the national police. Romander then pledged to follow ''all leads,'' not one
main theory to the exclusion of others.

III. A NATIONAL TRAUMA

So, a year after Palme's death, the nation is back on Sveavagen. ''They are
still coming to lay roses on the spot where he fell, aren't they?'' said Dieter
Strand, a popular newspaper columnist and author of a biography of Palme.
''Americans tend to compare this with John Kennedy's assassination: The end of
innocence. But the real comparison is Pearl Harbor. It was the end of our
isolation. They reached us here in the Far North.''

It was not that Palme was so popular. He evoked both the love and the hate that
characterize a dominant public figure. ''Swedish politics for 20 years was
pro-Palme, anti-Palme or just Palme,'' said Carl Bildt, the leader of the
opposition Moderate Party.

''If any man was going be shot, it was him,'' said Strand. ''He divided people.
Found their differences and exploited them. There are men who can make
thoroughbreds nervous so they run their best. Olof did that to other men.''

''Olof was un-Swedish,'' said one of his closest friends, Harry Schein, who fled
Austria in 1938 and made a life as one of Sweden's richest men, president of the
national Investment Bank and chairman of the Swedish Broadcasting Corporation.
''He was too international, too fast. And he was in love with his own language,
which made him go too far.

''The hate added to the trauma,'' Schein continued. ''So many people hated him,
and they thought the killing must have come from their hate. The guilt. The
guilt.''

''In America, we knew the great Palme, the generous Palme, the world figure,''
said Krister Stendahl, the Bishop of Stockholm of the Church of Sweden, who came
home in 1984 after 35 years in the United States, 10 of them as Dean of
Harvard's School of Divinity. ''He was diminished at home. Small, sardonic,
irritating. Shrunk in the straitjacket of Swedish bloc politics.

''But whatever Swedes think of any individual,'' Bishop Stendahl went on, ''they
have always trusted power and the authorities. They expect things to work.
Expectations are much higher than in the United States. When they don't work, as
they haven't spectacularly in this case, there is a real danger of erosion of
the foundations of Swedish life. This is a very frightening time for people
here.''

Learning the truth about what happened could be even more frightening. Many
Swedes don't want to know -for them it's over. There seems to be no thirst for
or need of revenge. That may be the ultimate Swedish decency. Prime Minister
Ingvar Carlsson, an unobtrusive party and government functionary his whole life,
has united most of the country -or calmed it. According to one poll, the Social
Democrats have gone up 10 points in popularity since Palme's death.

Neither are the friends of Olof Palme driven by a desire for revenge or
vindication. ''His story is over,'' said Dieter Strand, his biographer. I heard
similar lines elsewhere. ''I could never be quoted on this, but I hope they
never find the murderer,'' said a friend in the current Government. ''It would
trivialize Olof's life, vulgarize it. He would have to share history with a
crazed assassin.''

IV. FOREIGN INTRIGUE

Then there is the powerful group, few and highly placed, including some in the
Foreign Ministry and members of the current Cabinet, who do not believe the
assassin was crazy at all. Such people obviously would not speak for the record,
but a half-dozen in high positions expressed the belief - and the fear - that
the truth might destroy confidence in both the Government and the Social
Democratic Party. They believe Olof Palme - and Adm. Carl-Fredrik Algernon, too
- were murdered because of Sweden's official and unofficial, well-meaning and
profit-seeking, meddling in the Persian Gulf war.

The Foreign Ministry, acting officially, stood between the police and any
investigation that might have international implications. When approached by the
police about information from foreign intelligence sources on an Iranian
connection, the Foreign Ministry responded, ''That is not plausible to this
office.'' When other foreign sources pointed to Iraq, the police inquiry was
limited to a search of hotel records to determine whether anyone holding an
Iraqi passport had registered during the week before the murder.

The trail of events that was effectively closed to investigators began in
November 1980. Olof Palme, who had been defeated in the 1976 election, was bored
and irritable as opposition leader. He missed the world spotlight that had
played on him as a vehement opponent of the Vietnam War. He jumped when United
Nations Secretary General Kurt Waldheim asked him to try to mediate the bloody
war between Iran and Iraq, then a year old.

Until 1983, the year after he won re-election as Prime Minister, Palme continued
to make trips to Iran and Iraq, shuttling between Teheran and Baghdad with an
entourage from the Swedish Foreign Ministry. Many of those diplomats stayed on
in the warring capitals. Their presence led to the later suspicion that the
Government must have known of weapons shipments to Iran by Sweden's great arms
manufacturer, the Bofors Group of Nobel Industries.

Swedish law prohibits sales by Bofors and other private arms companies in ''war
zones,'' which by Swedish definition includes much of the world, certainly the
Persian Gulf and the entire Middle East.

But Sweden is also a country that maintains its high standard of living (per
capita income is 25 percent higher than in the United States) through foreign
trade. Arms sales are part of that prosperity. Weapons may account for 5 percent
or more of Sweden's annual exports of about $45 billion, which is more than a
third of its gross national product. The Government has been known to look the
other way on weapons sales, liberally granting export permits that certified
that materiel was not headed for war zones.

Singapore was the favored shipping point for Bofors equipment, especially its
highly regarded RBS-70 surface-to-air antiaircraft missile launcher. From that
port, the RBS-70's were sent on to - among other places -Iran, being
transshipped a second time from Dubai or Bahrain.

Then someone inside Bofors blew the whistle, leaking information on the deals to
peace groups on the left wing of Palme's Social Democrats. Details began to leak
out about a series of shipments between October of 1984 and May of 1985,
apparently all headed toward Iran. Trainloads of Bofors gunpowder had been
seized by customs officers in West Germany and Italy; other trainloads and
perhaps naval cannons had gotten through by way of Austria, Yugoslavia and
Singapore. Two hundred RBS-70's had been delivered to Iran, part of an order for
400 placed by the Iranian Government. An additional 800 to 1,200 RBS-70's could
not quite be accounted for, although they were known to have passed through
Dubai and Bahrain. Directors of Bofors have insisted that the company has done
nothing that was illegal - or that was not known to the Government.

Palme, facing re-election in 1985, appointed a special prosecutor to investigate
the sales. And he stopped the shipments - at least for a time. Specifically, he
blocked the 200 additional RBS-70's that Iran had ordered. Also, according to
sources in the French Foreign Ministry, the Swedish Prime Minister ordered a
ship loaded with 155-millimeter howitzers stopped as it was leaving the port of
Malmo bound for Dubai and then, it is believed, Iran.

An Iranian military delegation came to Stockholm to protest the stopping of
deliveries. That was on Feb. 4, 1986, three weeks before Palme's murder.

The Iraqis, of course, had protested the sales when they became public. They
were also enraged by a program that the Swedes considered an act of humanitarian
neutrality: Iranian war wounded were being treated in Swedish hospitals for what
the Iranians said were the effects of poison-gas attacks launched by Iraq.

The arms investigation continued after Palme's assassination and eventually
centered on the Inspector of War Materiel, Admiral Algernon. His testimony was
scheduled for Jan. 21. He was working on it Jan. 15. His death that day was big
news - police initially said there were witnesses who had seen a man with his
hands on Algernon's chest - but only one newspaper bothered to speculate on its
possible connection with Palme's killing. Dagens Nyheter, the independent
morning daily, said (Continued on Page 82) in an editorial three days later, on
Sunday: ''In less than a year, both the country's Prime Minister and the
official responsible for weapons export control have suffered violent deaths. .
. . There has been speculation about illegal arms transfers to Iran. Events in
the United States have shown that a shadow world does exist and that what made
Palme vulnerable should not be ruled out of any investigation.'' The next day,
the police announced that witnesses -there were at least two -who said that
Algernon was pushed in front of the train were ''mistaken.'' The case was
closed. Algernon's name disappeared from the press.

But it did not disappear from Cabinet concerns. Ministers were relieved by the
police finding, but many did not believe it. The ''murder'' - and that was the
word used by Ministers - was discussed by the Cabinet. The concern there is that
it was part of a continuing threat to the nation that must be resolved. Not
solved, but resolved.

''We have had two political murders in a year,'' I was told after that meeting.
''The question now is whether they were linked. And which man or woman among us
might be next.''

A political assassination is, after all, a political event, a circumstance to be
managed by politicians. The men and women who succeed in that business are the
ones most skilled in handling and shaping public perceptions of the events of
the day. After Feb. 28, 1986, Olof Palme's murder was yesterday's event. The
Prime Minister was dead, and there was nothing his staff, one of whom became his
successor, could do about that.

One of those men, sitting in his office in Rosenbad, the seat of Sweden's
Government, looked out over Stockholm one recent morning and put it this way:
''We know at this point that there is less than a 10 percent chance to solve the
murder. That is not our problem. Our problem is what the people of Sweden
believe happened and how they deal with that.'' That leader does not know who
pulled the trigger that ended Olof Palme's life. I could find no one who does.
What I did find in Rosenbad, and in other Government offices, was national
leadership determined to protect Sweden's critical international relationships
and trade, as well as the standing of the Government with its own people.
Politically, solving yesterday's murder might not be worth the trouble it would
cause today. ''All we want now is for this to be over with, one way or
another,'' said the man in Rosenbad. ''We must get it behind us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of roses piled up at the spot where Palem was assasinated
(Vincent Leloup/Collectif/J.B. Pictures) (page 20); Photo of March l986 memorial
service in Stockholm for Olaf Palme (Sygma) (page 20-21); Photo of Palme meeting
with with Iraqi President Saddam Hussein in Baghdad, 1980 (AP) (page 22); Photo
of Bofors RBS 70 anti-aircraft missile system being demonstrated by Swedish
soldiers (Ped

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE HISTORY'S KALEIDOSCOPE

BYLINE: By Anne Tyler; Anne Tyler's most recent novel is ''The Accidental
Tourist.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1636 words


THE RED WHITE AND BLUE By John Gregory Dunne. 475 pp. New York: Simon &
Schuster. $18.95.

CRACKLING dialogue, gritty characters, a fierce, unblinking stare at acts of
brutality -these elements mark the novels of John Gregory Dunne. These and one
other, perhaps the most important: a fascination with the invisible web that
links certain disparate people and events. In ''True Confessions,'' the murder
of a prostitute dovetailed with the unrelated wheelings and dealings of the
local Catholic church. In ''Dutch Shea, Jr.,'' small-time hoodlums and legal
bigwigs and (again) various representatives of the Catholic Church entwined
about the hero.

''The Red White and Blue'' examines the most complicated web yet, a vast network
extending halfway around the globe and across the past 20 years or so to
encompass left-wing politics, big business, Hollywood and (yes, once again) a
few figures in the Catholic Church. Its story line, if one may call it that, is
a rambling rumination upon the career of a radical lawyer named Leah Kaye. Its
real story is history's habit of ensnaring us in its meshes - even if we're
apolitical, even if we're as uninvolved and wryly ironic as Jack Broderick, the
narrator.

Jack is Leah Kaye's ex-husband, a reporter turned Hollywood screenwriter. He
first meets Leah during his newspaper days, and between her various sit-ins they
somehow manage a courtship (or at least a physical relationship, for Leah is a
no-nonsense kind of woman) and eventually a brief marriage. Then Leah goes off
to play midwife to yet another revolution, and Jack drifts into screenwriting.
They remain friendly, however, until her assassination at an anti-apartheid
rally.

But to summarize the plot so baldly is to overlook the point. First of all,
nowhere on these pages does B follow A. Part One opens with ''When the trial
began, we left the country.'' That's not the start of the story but the finish;
in order to understand the reason for the trial and the identity of the ''we,''
you'll have to read the whole book. Time is deliberately muddled here. It's not
just reversed - that would be too neat - but stirred with a stick. Jack's
narrative begins at the end, draws back for an overall view, and then touches
down on his first meeting with Leah. When that leads into their second meeting,
you think you might have this thing by the tail. Sometimes he offers a mighty
summing-up and sometimes his chronological rearrangements occur in miniature -
in a ''Later I was to realize'' sort of aside.

The effect is to make us conscious of the complexity of the web - the confusion
of historical events ricocheting off each other. And it puts us squarely inside
Jack's frame of reference. This story is something he's looking back on, after
all. He's dwelling on it, circling it obsessively, asking Why? and When did it
all begin? Of course he wouldn't travel from A to B. It might be easier for
readers if he did, but then it wouldn't be nearly so lively or so convincing.

Second, the story isn't merely Jack's and Leah's. They are surrounded by a great
messy wealth of other people, all dazzlingly vocal. On Leah's side are the
foul-mouthed, menacing criminals she defends and the dedicated reformers - Onyx
Leon the migrant fruit-picker and Sister Phyllis who ends up raped and murdered
in Latin America. On Jack's side are his California billionaire father who
slings insults indiscriminately at every known ethnic group; his brother the
celebrity priest who is said to credit camera flashbulbs for keeping his tan so
even; a Vietnam veteran campaigning against ''social deviates'' in a San
Francisco election; and enough faddish, wisecracking Hollywood types to leave
the average Eastern reader in a daze. These people's lives cross and recross.
When Jack's latest movie associate decamps, it's because Onyx Leon's chopped-off
head has turned up in an unmarked grave. When Leah is gunned down, so is Jack's
brother the priest, who happens to be standing next to her. And that last event
is what Jack finds shattering; for if you trace its roots back far enough, you
could say that it was set in motion by Jack himself. Pieces of his past have
combined in ways he never foretold. ''I was, it turned out, the trigger of my
misfortune,'' he concludes. As are we all, is the implication. This is not a
very likable book. For one thing, it goes out of its way to focus on the
unpleasant, always detecting ''the zit on her chin that the No. 10 pancake
makeup did not quite conceal.'' And the characters are universally unkind. Leah
seems motivated not by concern for the downtrodden but by an urge to outrage,
and Jack's feelings for her look more like strong curiosity than love. When she
dies, therefore, it's just another minor jog in the narrative.

Then too, there's an unsettling echo here that keeps us at a distance. We can't
sink all the way into the story because we're too busy trying to figure out if a
certain fictional character is truly intended to stand in for a certain real one
- that left-wing movie actress who travels to Hanoi, for instance, or that
ice-cold, ambitious anchorwoman named Wendy Chan, or the President who shared
his mistresses with his brother, or that Hollywood comedian sweating heavily on
television to raise funds for the disease victims he calls ''my gang.''

But probably it wasn't meant to be a likable book, or the type one sinks into,
either. It's meant, I think, as a more vivid sort of history text - a graphic
re-enactment of this country's recent past. When Leah's activist career begins,
young people everywhere are running mimeograph machines for S.D.S. and stamping
envelopes for S.N.C.C. Then the political climate grows harsher and more
violent; Leah's F.B.I. file fattens with news (some true, some false) of arrests
and acts of treason and drug violations and desecrations of the flag. By the
time she's killed, however, most of her fellow soldiers have dropped out of the
battle. As one man puts it, describing the guests he expects to find at her
funeral: ''The men've got bald spots now and they see a proctologist and a
nutritionist . . . and everyone'll be wearing hundred-dollar Nikes and
two-hundred-dollar jogging suits and they'll be rapping about how great it was
at Selma and comparing their times at the Honolulu Marathon last year.'' WHAT
makes the history come alive are the voices, which are recorded so faithfully
and so unforgivingly that the speakers, if they were real, would wince to read
their own remarks. And then there's that sense of abundance lent by the prose
style - multitudes of pungent phrases strung together, rich descriptions
tumbling over one another. A long-ago summer morning is recalled purely by
reporting what was broadcast on the radio that day - ''Early morning cloudiness
burning off by noon'' and ''Lindy McDaniel picking up his fourth save after El
Senor ran out of gas with one out and two on in the visitors' ninth. . . .'' A
particular brand of Catholicism is summed up in a glorious rush, ''the
Catholicism of novenas and mite boxes and cake sales in the parish hall and
diocesan tours of the Emerald Isle and the funny thing that happened to Onions
Galliher, him with the walleye in the Department of Parks, when he goes out to
the ball game at Candlestick there with Father Edso Kiley and the Mercy nuns
from over to Holy Sepulchre.''

Jack Broderick, recalling his newspaper days, tells us that he was ''the perfect
sidebar reporter, the kind who wrote about the deaf old woman and her fourteen
cats who lived in the Haight across the street from the family of nine killed in
the fire set by their son-in-law, recently released from the state mental
facility in Napa. I gave the names of all fourteen cats and described the smell
of the kitty litter as the deaf old woman rambled on about the son-in-law from
across the street, such a nice boy, really, quiet, don't you know, we used to
talk about what to feed the cats, he was partial to the 9 Lives, I like the
Tender Vittles myself, the tuna chunks, that's my favorite, and the liver,
that's a nice treat, too, he liked the finicky eater's menu, I guess it takes
all kinds. . . .''

What makes the perfect sidebar reporter works equally well for the novelist.
''The Red White and Blue'' is a slice of America on a plate. This particular
slice may not be your own America, and it may not always be one you're proud to
recognize, but it exists, and John Gregory Dunne has captured it.

CUT TO THE SINCERITY

On-screen Buddy Seville was staring directly at the camera. ''You know
something? I love you all . . .''

''His sincere look,'' Diana Caro said. ''He's going to undo his tie now.''

''. . . you know that,'' Buddy Seville said, untying his black bow tie. ''But I
got to be . . .''

'' '. . . serious for a minute,' '' Diana Caro said, mouthing the words along
with him.

''I get criticism,'' Buddy Seville said. His face filled the television screen.
''Seriously, ladies and gentlemen. Hard to believe, but true. A lot of people .
. .''

'' '. . . don't want to believe all the love that's up on this stage,' '' Diana
Caro mimicked in perfect lip sync.

''They're cynical . . .'' Buddy Seville's forehead was beaded with sweat. ''But
one thing Buddy Seville will never be . . .''

'' '. . . and that's cynical . . .' ''

''. . . no matter what you do in this world . . .''

'' '. . . no matter how much love you've got to give . . .' '' It was like
listening to a simultaneous translation.

''. . . there's always somebody out there to carp . . .''

'' '. . . somebody who wants to find fault . . .' '' ''. . . somebody who's
looking for the mud . . .'' '' '. . . when you're looking for the stars.' ''
Diana Caro patted her breasts as if to make sure they were still there.    -
From ''The Red White and Blue.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: March 1, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1462 words

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List FICTION
 1          1      4  WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                     (Morrow, $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences
                     that befall a woman and her family after her
                     appointment as Ambassador to Rumania.

 2          2      5  THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                     (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                     king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.

 3          3     31  RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                     $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
                     World War III.

 4          4      7  NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon &
                     Schuster, $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans
                     from being discovered by the Germans.

 5          5     25  IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                     horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in
                     a small Maine town.

 6          6      6  THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday,
                     $17.95.) A financial wizard undertakes to defuse the
                     crisis besetting Wall Street and the American
                     economy.

 7          8     18  FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts.
                     (Naval Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                     Vietnam.

 8          7     17  WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                     Iran during the month following the Shah's
                     departure.

 9         10      7  BANDITS, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House,
                     $17.95.) A gang of three plots to heist millions being
                     sent to the contras in Nicaragua.

10          9     22  THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.
                     (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family
                     relationships in South Carolina and New York City.
 Q$11      11      2  OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $17.95.)
                     Tracking down a mysterious disease that strikes
                     certain physicians and their patients.

12         13      4  PATIENCE OF A SAINT, by Andrew M. Greeley.
                     (Geis/Warner, $18.95.) A hard-bitten
                     newspaperman learns a lot about his family and
                     decency while on the trail of a wily politician.

13         16      3  WATCHERS, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $17.95.)
                     Two creatures emerge from a secret government
                     laboratory - one to spell doom, the other to spread
                     love across the land.

14                 1  THE DINNER PARTY, by Howard Fast.
                     (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) The feelings of family
                     and friends - which affect government operations
                     - surface at a get-together in Washington.

15         15      2  DREAMS ARE NOT ENOUGH, by Jacqueline
                     Briskin. (Putnam, $18.95.) A California family
                     dynasty out to conquer the world.

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List NONFICTION

 1          1      9  A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
                     (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season
                     spent with the coach Bob Knight and his Indiana
                     University basketball team.

 2          2     43  FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                     Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations
                     from the television star and father of five.

 3          3      3  THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                     $24.95.) Australia from penal colony to its gradual
                     emergence as a flourishing nation.

 4          7      2  THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by
                     Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
                     From the Boston slums of Irish immigrants to the
                     White House: three generations of a family.

 5          5      3  ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
                     Wambaugh. (Morrow, $18.95.) A case involving the
                     murder of a Pennsylvania high school teacher and
                     the disappearance of her two children.

 6          6      7  THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT
                     LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE, by Jane Wagner.
                     (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb observations on life
                     today; script of the show starring Lily Tomlin.

 7         12      4  REAGAN'S AMERICA: Innocents at Home, by
                     Garry Wills. (Doubleday, $19.95.) The 40th
                     President as the product and embodiment of an
                     American mythology.

 8 *              13  A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                     Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                     recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 9          4     51  YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss.
                     (Random House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden
                     Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme.

10         11     21  HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.) From
                     Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized
                     biography of Frank Sinatra.

11         13     41  JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James
                     Herriot. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a
                     Yorkshire veterinarian about his favorite animal.

12                 1  COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                     Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                     visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his family's
                     place in upstate New York.

13          9      7  MARILYN, by Gloria Steinem. (Holt, $24.95.) A
                     biography of Marilyn Monroe, with many
                     photographs by her friend George Barris.

14          8     21  THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam.
                     (Morrow, $19.95.) The crisis in the American
                     automobile industry and Japan's role in it.

15                14  DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland
                     with Greg Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The
                     ballerina recalls her checkered career.

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List ADVICE, HOW-TO AND MISCELLANEOUS

 1          1     18  THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                     by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                     prepared at moderate cost.

 2          3     21  MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO
                     LOVE THEM, by Susan Forward and Joan Torres.
                     (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with overbearing
                     men.

 3          2     37  THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn.
                     (Norton, $15.95.) A regimen based on the
                     Vanderbilt University Weight Management
                     Program.

 4          4     77  WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                     DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                     standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 5          5     55  THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.
                     (Morrow, $14.95.) A television chef's inexpensive
                     dishes.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

FOE, by J. M. Coetzee. (Viking, $15.95.) By reconsidering the events of Defoe's
''Robinson Crusoe'' from the point of view of an Englishwoman, the South African
novelist offers an impressive political parable of liberation and
responsibility.

ENEMIES OF THE PEOPLE, by Anne F. Thurston. (Knopf, $19.95.) A harrowing oral
history of the ordeal of China's intellectuals during the Cultural Revolution of
the 1960's.

THE SEVEN AGES, by Eva Figes. (Pantheon, $14.95.) Men wage war while women give
birth in this short, ambitious, poetic novel; women's voices from the past
render a thousand years of history by intruding on the consciousness of a modern
English midwife.

LITTLE WILSON AND BIG GOD, by Anthony Burgess. (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, $22.50.)
The first volume of Mr. Burgess's turbulent, overflowing autobiography brings
him to the age of 42, when he is beginning to think of himself as a writer and
has been told he is about to die of a brain tumor (he didn't).

DVORAK IN LOVE, by Josef Skvorecky. (Knopf, $18.95.) A historical novel,
dizzying in its diversity, about the Czechoslovak composer's life and his
adventures in America in the 1890's.

THE JAPANESE EDUCATIONAL CHALLENGE: A Commitment to Children, by Merry White.
(Free Press, $18.95.) Cultural differences preclude directly borrowing Japanese
techniques, the author argues, but their main priority - the improvement of
children's lives - is something we might profitably try.

A CLIENT CALLED NOAH: A Family Journey Continued, by Josh Greenfeld. (Holt,
$18.95.) Mr. Greenfeld's third book about his brain-damaged son takes us through
his 20th year; it's an eloquent report of struggle and final concession to a
hopeless situation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COL. GAINS HAWKINS, 67, DIES; EXPERT ON VIETCONG STRENGTH

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 11, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 178 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, Miss.


Col. Gains Hawkins of the Army, retired, who was an expert on enemy forces in
the Vietnam War and served as a defense witness in Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's unsuccessful libel suit against CBS, died Thursday of a gunshot
wound that the Clay County authorities said was apparently self-inflicted. He
was 67 years old.

Colonel Hawkins, who fought in World War II and in the Korean War, served in
South Vietnam from 1966-67 under General Westmoreland as the Army's chief
intelligence expert on the strength of Vietcong forces.

In 1982, a ''CBS Reports'' documentary accused General Westmoreland of a
conspiracy to alter Colonel Hawkins' estimates so that American troops would
appear to hold an advantage.

General Westmoreland filed a $120 million libel suit against CBS, and Colonel
Hawkins was a key defense witness when the case went to trial in New York in
1984.

Colonel Hawkins retired from the Army in 1970 and was the administrator of the
Dugan Memorial Home, a private nursing home in West Point, Miss. Last year he
had a lung removed because of cancer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 3, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET HINTS AT A NEW AFGHAN TIMETABLE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 2


Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze of the Soviet Union was reported by Thai
officials today to have said that Soviet troops could be withdrawn from
Afghanistan within 22 months.

According to a spokesman of the Thai Foreign Ministry, Mr. Shevardnadze said
some aspects of the Afghan withdrawal could become a model for an eventual
pullout of Vietnamese forces from Cambodia.

Mr. Shevardnadze, who is a member of the Soviet Union's policy-making Politburo,
met with Thai leaders at the start of a tour of Southeast Asia and the Pacific.
He later flew to Australia.

Until now, the Soviet Union has said that its troops could be withdrawn from
Afghanistan under United Nations auspices under a timetable of three years.
Pakistan and the United States have insisted on a matter of months. Pakistan and
Afghanistan are holding indirect talks in Geneva under United Nations mediation.
The timetable for a troop withdrawal is said to be the key item on the agenda.

Vietnam has already said that its 140,000 soldiers would be out of Cambodia by
1990. According to Thai officials, the subject of Cambodia dominated two hours
of talks between Mr. Shevardnadze and his host, Foreign Minister Siddhi
Savetsila. They agreed to continue the talks when Mr. Siddhi visits Moscow in
May. The Soviet Union is Vietnam's military backer.

Prospects of Thai Trade

Trade between the Soviet Union and Thailand, which was also discussed, will
again be on the agenda in May, when Mr. Siddhi will lead a team of businessmen
to Moscow. Mr. Shevardnadze also met with Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda, whom
he invited to the Soviet Union.

In addition to Thailand and Australia, Mr. Shevardnadze will visit Indonesia,
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.

Another visiting Foreign Minister here today was Natwar Singh of India, who
arrived from Indonesia, where he had been discussing Cambodia.

Indian officials have been telling Southeast Asian leaders that they believe
Vietnam is showing flexibility on Cambodia, which has been under Vietnamese
occupation since 1978. The Southeast Asian nations are reported to be hopeful
that India, which has an embassy in Phnom Penh, can be persuaded to serve as a
mediator.

A Thai official said that the Soviet and Thai Foreign Ministers had found common
ground for future talks on Cambodia, but that the issue of Thai diplomatic
recognition of the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government was still a point of
disagreement.

At the airport, on leaving for Australia, Mr. Shevardnadze said he had also
raised the issues of the international arms race, the spread of nuclear weapons
and the militarization of space.

DEMONSTRATION IN AUSTRALIA

CANBERRA, Australia, Tuesday, March 3 (Reuters) - Mr. Shevardnadze was heckled
today by about 400 Afghan and Jewish demonstrators when he arrived here for
talks with the Australian Foreign Minister, William G. Hayden.

The Soviet leader walked toward the demonstrators but was escorted away by
security guards. A brief scuffle broke out as some protesters, carrying placards
reading ''Stop Jewish Persecution'' and ''Down With Soviet Expansionism,'' tried
to break through the police cordon. A Soviet flag was burned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 3, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 365 words




The Famous Bronx

The South Bronx has no definitive geographical boundaries. Bad news, say those
who live there, is made in the South Bronx; good news comes out of the Bronx.

The Columbia University Center for American Culture Studies is presenting a
discussion series entitled ''Community and New York City'' on aspects of the
city. Today's topic is ''The South Bronx: History and Myth.'' The participants
are Marshall Berman of the City University of New York Graduate Center; Jill
Jonnes, who wrote ''We're Still Here: The Rise, Fall and Resurrection of the
South Bronx''; Mel Rosenthal, a photographer, and Luis Cancel, executive
director of the Bronx Museum of the Arts.

The program starts at 4 P.M. in the center, Room 603 Lewisohn Hall, on the
Columbia University Campus, 116th Street between Amsterdam Avenue and Broadway.
Admisson, free. Information: 280-8253.

Views of Peace

At age 18, in 1931, Robert Capa, according to some reports, fled Budapest
because he had been involved in socialist youth activities. Other sources say he
left to study journalism and sociology in Berlin. During the Spanish Civil War
he began his career as a photojournalist specializing in wars.

He made pictures in World War II, the 1948 Arab-Israeli war and the French
Indochina war. In May 1954, on patrol with French troops in Vietnam, he died
when he stepped on a land mine. It is said that he was the first to photograph
war in color (he did it in World War II). It is said that he was the first
photojournalist to enter Paris at the city's liberation. And he helped create
the internationally famous photo agency Magnum.

Today is opening day of a monthlong exhibition of his photos. These are a unique
collection of unpublished photographs, not of war but the aftermath of war. The
exhibition at Goethe House, 1014 Fifth Avenue, at 83d Street, is in observance
of Berlin's 750th anniversary. And the pictures are of a war-devastated Berlin
in the summer of 1945. For the opening reception today from 5:30 to 7:30 P.M.,
Mr. Capa's brother, Cornell Capa, director of the International Center of
Photography, will talk about his sibling. Admission, free. Information:
744-8310.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 4, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Tower Commission's Oversight

BYLINE: By Michael C. Janeway; Michael C. Janeway, former editor of The Boston
Globe, was a special assistant to Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance in 1977 and
1978.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The Tower Commission let the big one get away.

That's not to detract from what has been said in tribute to Messrs. Tower,
Muskie and Scowcroft - by each other as well as by editorial writers around the
country, for their frank, fair and exhaustive labors. They have moved a confused
nation from the passive-evasive voice (''Mistakes were made'') to the
active-confrontational voice (''The President did make mistakes. A lot of his
subordinates made mistakes'' - Senator John Tower at the Feb. 26 press
conference.) The commission exposed the intellectual and operational squalor of
a policy of dalliance with terrorism. They bit many bullets.

But on one score the commission looked for the nearest exit. That is the issue
of what the report calls ''The N.S.C. System.'' And that is a missed
opportunity. At the very least, given the severity of concerns over the years
about what a hydra-headed monster has grown up under the euphemism ''N.S.C.
System,'' the commission might have declared itself in favor of spirited debate
on the National Security Council matter.

Instead, says the commission, ''We recommend that no substantive change be made
in the provisions of the National Security Act [of 1947] dealing with the
structure and operation of the N.S.C. System''; that ''overprescription'' as to
its ''structures and processes'' and ''legislative restriction'' as to its size
would ''destroy the system or render it ineffective.''

On the issue of accountability for the national security adviser in the form of
Senate confirmation, the commission let the White House safely off the hook. As
to the national security adviser or the N.S.C. staff being involved in covert
operations, the commission consulted the Sphinx: ''We recommend that each
administration formulate precise procedures for a restricted consideration of
covert action and that, once formulated, those procedures be strictly adhered
to.'' Careful how you step in those pies.

Virtually no one but Senators Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Sam Nunn challenged
Senator Tower's characterization of the Iran-contra caper as an ''aberration.''
The ''aberration'' line neatly compartmentalizes the affair, which means there
is no need to go to deeper, systemic issues. But shouldn't the question very
much be - hasn't it been for years - who, after the President, is in charge of
foreign policy?

Isn't it clear by now that the fudging of that question breeds intemperate
policy and chaos, from Cuba and Vietnam to Iran, Central America and
Soviet-American relations?

What is the point of having a Secretary of State if national security advisers
like McGeorge Bundy, Walt Rostow, Henry A. Kissenger (in his first Nixon
Administration incarnation) and Zbigniew Brzezinski let alone N.S.C. subalterns
like Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North can, again and again, administration after
administration, seize effective control of foreign policy and operations?

Is that the way we want it, in the cause of a strong and effective presidency?
If so, why not come out and say it?

Let the Secretary of State run the diplomatic service, as a sort of super-clerk.
The Secretary of Defense, similarly, could henceforth concentrate on weapons
procurement and military bases and keep his nose out of strategy. The role of
the Director of Central Intelligence, muddy from the start, could remain so, the
standard being that he not get any deeper into the national security advisers'
hair than the Secretaries of State or Defense. Words needn't mean anything if
the ultimate good is the avoidance of ''overprescription,'' so let the charade
that the ''national security adviser'' is merely ''advising'' continue.

The commission, to its credit, was trying to help the President and the nation
out of the Irangate mess. It has done the short-term job well. But the problem
is bigger than the allegedly ''aberrational'' Irangate. It's whether foreign
policy-making without accountability (and a frequent accompaniment,
self-promotional ego-tripping) in the office of the national security adviser is
to continue to be sanctioned, as has been the trend for 25 years.

Let's at least debate the question with more bark off than the Tower Commission
has offered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

COURT RULING AIDS PROSECUTION IN FILM DEATHS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 515 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 4


Prosecutors do not have to prove the precise cause of the fatal helicopter crash
on the set of ''Twilight Zone - The Movie'' to obtain a conviction against the
film's director, John Landis, and four other defendants, the judge in the
involuntary manslaughter trial has ruled.

Judge Roger Boren of Superior Court said the key issue the jurors must decide is
whether the defendants acted in a reckless manner on July 23, 1982, when the
actor Vic Morrow and two children were killed as the helicopter crashed on top
of them amid special effects explosions in the filming of a Vietnam War scene.

''If there is recklessness in this case, the consequences need not be more
foreseen other than explosions took place and bought down the helicopter,''
Judge Boren said from the bench. A defense attorney, Harland Braun, argued at
length in protest of the judge's statements.

''Reckless about what?'' Mr. Braun asked. ''What precautions do I take? What's
the danger?'' Judge Boren cut him off, saying, ''It could be a simple as, 'Don't
put the helicopter too close to the explosions.' ''

Defense Called Cause Important

The judge's decision came as a blow to the defense attorneys, who have long
argued that the crash occurred when heat from special effects explosions on the
movie set removed the aluminum skin of the helicopter's tail rotor blade,
leading to an aerodynamic imbalance that caused the tail rotor system to fly off
the aircraft and render it uncontrollable.

The defense lawyers have said that such a process has never before taken place
in the recorded history of aviation and that their clients should not be held
liable for an event they contend was unforeseeable.

In a 1984 preliminary hearing in the case, prosecutors argued that flying debris
from the explosions dented the tail rotor blade and led to the crash. But at the
trial Deputy District Attorney Lea Purwin D'Agostino said she did not have to
prove whether heat or debris caused the crash, and she presented no evidence to
the jury in an attempt to prove a precise cause.

Judge Boren issued his decision on Tuesday while hearing arguments concerning
instructions that will be given to the jury at the end of the testimony, which
lawyers for both sides say is a month away.

'Reasonably Foreseeable'

Mrs. D'Agostino asked the judge before trial testimony began last September to
consider a jury instruction on involuntary manslaughter that says only that the
deaths of the victims be ''reasonably foreseeable'' and ''not the precise manner
in which the deaths occurred.''

Citing a 1975 vehicular manslaughter case, Judge Boren said the instruction
submitted by Mrs. D'Agostino ''is a correct statement of the law and will be
given.'' He added, however, that his decision did not preclude the defense from
submitting other instructions on the law for his approval.

Mr. Landis is on trial in the case along with the associate producer of the
movie, George Folsey Jr.; the unit production manager, Dan Allingham; the
special effects coordinator, Paul Stewart, and the helicopter pilot, Dorcey
Wingo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 5, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RELAXED ROSE MAKES A BIG HIT WITH AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE

BYLINE: By MURRAY CHASS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: TAMPA, Fla., March 4


Pete Rose has been answering questions for 25 years as a major league player and
manager, but today he asked some.

''How'd they catch you?'' Rose asked the man wearing sunglasses and a light blue
sweater draped stylishly over his shoulders. ''Why didn't they shoot you?''

The Cincinnati Reds were doing their daily pre-practice calisthenics. Their
manager, not into his own conditioning yet, was talking with an unusual visitor
- Sam Hall, an acquaintance and a Dayton, Ohio, resident who less than five
weeks ago ended a 49-day stay in a Nicaraguan prison. Hall was the second
American arrested in Nicaragua as a spy last year.

Hall never did tell Rose why he wasn't shot, but he did explain the
circumstances of his arrest.

''The day before,'' he said, referring to Dec. 11, ''I penetrated two air bases.
The next day I hired a driver to drive me around the perimeter to see where I
wanted to go in. Inadvertently, we got in the wrong area, and I was arrested
with a camera, negatives, binoculars and some important papers.''

A listener suggested to Hall that he might have told his captors he was in
Nicaragua scouting baseball players. Dennis Martinez, a free-agent pitcher
without a job, is the most noted player from Nicaragua.

Rose pointed to Eric Davis, the center fielder, who last year had 80 stolen
bases, and said, ''If you could run like him, you'd never have been caught.''

Change of Fortune

Hall thought about the severe change in his fortune, going from a Nicaraguan
prison to spring training in a matter of weeks. ''It's great, isn't it?'' he
said. ''Unbelievable.''

Hall's story reminded Rose of the time he went to Vietnam with Joe DiMaggio in
1967. ''We walked into this room,'' Rose recalled, ''and Creighton Abrams was
sitting there and W. C. Westmoreland was sitting there. I never saw so many
stars in my life.''

Hall, six days shy of his 50th birthday, told Rose that a book on his life would
be out soon. ''You're in it,'' Hall said. ''I'll send you a copy.''

''O.K.,'' Rose said, ''and I'll send you a copy of my book that's coming out.''

A minute after they changed the subject, Hall interrupted Rose and said, ''I'm
going to autograph the book I send to you.''

''Oh, I wouldn't send you my book without autographing it,'' Rose replied.

Rose appears in the book about Hall because the player played a brief but
critical role in his life, Hall explained.

Helped by Rose

''I was a drug addict for 13 years, and I quit drugs because of Pete Rose,''
Hall said. ''This was in 1979. We were having ribs at a restaurant outside
Cincinnati. He was talking about drive and dedication, and it made an impression
on me. He's my idol.''

During their conversation, Hall, a silver-medal diver in the 1960 Olympics,
asked Rose how often he has been taking batting practice this spring. ''I'll
wait until we cut a few players,'' the manager answered. ''We have too many
now.'' The Reds released Rose as a player last November to make room for a
younger player on the 40-man roster. That means he cannot play for them until
May 15.

''That doesn't mean I will play then,'' he said later in a conversation with
more customary spring visitors - reporters. ''Hopefully, when May 15 comes,
everybody will be doing their jobs and no one will be hurt and on the disabled
list. I have a pretty good idea I can go up there and get on base as a
pinch-hitter, but I'm hoping I don't have to. If I don't, that means everybody
is doing their job. If not, we'll look at the minor leagues to see if someone's
red hot, but it's tough to expect a kid to come up and be a pinch-hitter in the
middle of the season.''

Certain to Play

If he doesn't place himself on the playing roster before, Rose will almost
certainly take that step Sept. 1 when rosters can expand to 40 players. If he
doesn't play for some reason, he said, ''I don't have anything to be
disappointed about. I played five or six years longer than anybody thought
anyway. When I went to Philadelphia'' - in 1979 - ''I was over the hill.''

Rose, who will be 46 April 14, batted only .219 last season, getting 52 hits for
a 24-year total of a major-league-record 4,256. His last hit was a single
against Greg Minton of San Francisco Aug. 14. That was one of three hits he had
in that game, which followed by three days the 10th five-hit game of his career.
He batted for the last time last season Aug. 17 as a pinch-hitter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Sam Hall (Agence France-Presse); Photo of Pete Rose (UPI)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS SAID TO BAR LAOTIAN REFUGEES

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 4


With refugees arriving at nearly all of Thailand's borders, the Thai authorities
appear to be toughening policies on Laotians, now the largest refugee group in
the country.

About 1,300 Laotians seeking asylum have reportedly been held back by troops at
one northern Thai border crossing. Some of the refugees are thought to be
members of an anti-Communist movement who would be endangered if forced to
return to Laos.

Their movement has the support of the United States Council for World Freedom, a
private group led by John K. Singlaub, a retired American general who backs a
number of anti-leftist causes around the world.

Refugee Status in Peril

Many Laotians already in Thai camps may face a loss of refugee status in four
months if they are not accepted by other countries for resettlement, according
to aid organizations.

The moves against the Laotians follow Thailand's closing of the Cambodian
refugee camp at Khao I Dang on Jan. 1. The 22,134 people there are to be moved
to settlements housing about 250,000 displaced Cambodians who are not considered
refugees.

Bangkok's tougher stance also comes as thousands of Burmese have fled into
Thailand to escape fighting between ethnic minority armies and Government
troops. Officials believe more than 18,000 ethnic Karens, 4,000 Shans and
smaller numbers of Mon, Kayah and others are now in the country.

Thailand's Ministry of the Interior, which controls the camps housing about
80,000 Laotian refugees, more than 55,000 of them Hmong and other hill-tribe
people, has told international aid organizations that after July 1 it will
regard all people left in the camps as ''rejected'' by third countries. Agencies
will be asked to curtail assistance, including the foreign-language training
useful for emigration. #1,300 Hmong Constrained In Nan Province, on the Laotian
border, Thai military authorities have been preventing two groups totaling about
1,300 Hmong from seeking asylum and assistance.

About 600 of them are thought to have crossed into Thailand last month; the rest
may have been trapped along the border for eight months or more.

Although opinions differ on the extent to which these hill-tribe people are
being forcibly constrained by Thai troops - and whether any have been driven
back into Laos involuntarily -foreign relief workers believe at least some of
the would-be refugees may be facing hunger if not starvation. They are camping
in mountainous terrain near the town of Nam Pun.

No international organizations have been allowed access to them, prompting an
unusually strong statement of concern from the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees.

''The U.N.H.C.R. continues to monitor the situation and to hold discussions with
Thai authorities in the hope that those Laotians who are seeking asylum can have
their claims processed according to established procedures,'' the statement
said. ''U.N.H.C.R. hopes that the appeal for asylum will be responded to
urgently, as it appears that these Laotians are in need of humanitarian
assistance.''

Anti-Communist Ties

An unknown number of the Hmong near Nam Pun are thought to have been associated
with the persistent but weakened anti-Communist rebels, a movement that goes
back to the Central Intelligence Agency's ''secret war'' against the Communist
movement in Laos during the Vietnam war.

Diplomats here and in Vientiane have differing opinions on the strength of the
insurgency; some say it appears that many Laotians may be giving up the fight
and deciding to flee, prompting Thai fears of a surge in refugees.

The Laotian Government announced last year after a Communist Party Congress that
it was about to begin a drive to improve its army and eliminate security
threats. In the past, periodic conscription drives have produced waves of
refugees in Thailand.

Many Laotian hill-tribe people who emigrate find it difficult to adjust to
Western living; others have refused to be resettled abroad, preferring to stay
around the Ban Vinai refugee camp in Loei Province in Thailand. The camp has
become a hill-tribe town without fences. Most Laotians have been treated well by
the Thais, whose culture is close to theirs.

Leaders of the Laotian insurgency, most of whom are based abroad, have tried to
encourage young Hmong and other Laotian exiles to stay in Southeast Asia and
join the armed struggle against the Vientiane Government, which is closely
allied with Vietnam. Young Laotians in Thai refugee camps frequently tell
reporters they are torn between starting new lives abroad and committing
themselves to the anti-Government movement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows location of Bangkok (NYT)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARTISTS ARE CREATING A WONDERLAND OF VIDEO IN MUSEUMS AND GALLERIES

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 3330 words

DATELINE: By WILLIAM ZIMMER


THE video art to be seen around New York City this weekend might make one wonder
why television was ever called a vast wasteland. On video screens in museums,
galleries and performance spaces, verve and imagination are in flower.

At the Ted Greenwald Gallery, on Mott Street, near Chinatown, two new tapes by
the video pioneer Les Levine can be seen; one is a reverie blending visions of
Hawaii and Ireland, and in the other, grotesque faces out-Picasso Picasso.

Someone passing the large window of the New Museum in SoHo can mark ''real
time'' by watching Hung Su-Chen on a video monitor slowly ingest a length of red
string. At P. S. 1 in Long Island City, Queens, the antics of a cute kitten fill
the screen.

As part of a ''Video Landscapes'' series at the American Museum of the Moving
Image in Astoria, Queens, Bill Viola, who will be the first video artist to have
a retrospective showing of his tapes at the Museum of Modern Art this fall,
holds our attention as a Color Field painter might, with delicate, shimmering
images of barren landscapes in various parts of the world. In contrast, the pace
is frenetic at the Kitchen Center, on West 19th Street, with the opening last
Tuesday of its annual ''Techno Bop'' series - short videotapes by a myriad of
video artists.

Video art - flickering images on a television monitor - is different from its
more staid ancestors. Unlike painting or sculpture, where the gallery patron or
museumgoer circulates freely around the work, video art demands that the viewer
stay put, often for considerable periods of time. And unlike commercial
television, the viewer doesn't just passively consume what he sees but has a
heightened awareness of the manipulation of imagery.

Video art includes documentaries, and people may wonder at first where the
''art'' component is, despite the axiom that anything in a gallery context must
be seen as art - even a selection of daily fare from Nicaraguan television (on
view at Artists Space, on West Broadway in TriBeCa). The preponderance of
documentaries in the video-art realm creates no conflict for the assistant
curator of film and video at the Whitney Museum of American Art, Lucinda
Furlong, who has curated a series of 13 narrative and documentary videotapes on
view at the museum, tapes made by women.

Documentaries are a ''grass-roots'' art, she argues, adding that one should keep
in mind the distinction between video art and video made by artists.

It was video made by artists such as Linda Benglis, Keith Sonnier, Bruce Nauman
and William Wegman that was responsible for the medium's first wave of
popularity in the art world in the late 1960's and early 70's.

Video was an extension of their minimalist ideas carried out in other media.
Those were also the days when ideas advanced by Marshall McLuhan and Buckminster
Fuller - ideas about humans mastering their environment through technology -were
popular. Images were manipulated to look different from standard television fare
and many artists became absorbed in ''playing with the signals.'' Later, such
experimenting was no match for the sensuous surfaces of Neo-Expressionist
painting, and video art has largely been under wraps in recent years, a
specialized pursuit usually supported by grants. If one is beginning to see more
of it now, it is because of the public's fascination with information, an
appetite whetted by the widespread use of computers.

Objectifying Daydreams

Les Levine, who was born in Ireland, says he ''didn't grow up with technology,''
and so was never in awe of it. He made his first videotape in 1964 and now is
concerned mainly with making models of how the mind works. As such, he refers to
himself as a ''media sculptor.'' He makes that clear at the Ted Greenwald
Gallery in his work ''Trade Wind'' as he constantly shifts from an image of
blossoms in Hawaii to one of Dubliners engaged in random conversation, in this
way objectifying the way that someone daydreams. Each image is followed by an
abstract grid of the actual colors in the image picked up by a computer. The
procedure might be extremely up-to-date but there is old-fashioned poetry on the
soundtrack, lilting recorder music played by a man we do not glimpse until the
end of the tape.

From the limpid beauty of ''Trade Wind,'' there is a shift of sensibility with
Mr. Levine's second tape, ''Close Frenzies.'' Young adults on the screen talk
seemingly nonstop about what friendship means, but Mr. Levine has manipulated
each face like a kaleidoscopic image - everyone has eight eyes and four mouths.
This manipulation emphasizes that the person each speaker really clings the
closest to is himself.

There is facial distortion of a gentler kind in the tape ''East/West'' by Hung
Su-Chen, as part of the ''Reading Art'' exhibition at the New Museum of
Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway. Ms. Hung speaks out of both sides of her mouth,
as the screen carrying an image of her face is split. She speaks Mandarin
Chinese from the left half of the composite face and English from the right. The
implied setting is an immigration office; the moment of truth in Ms. Hung's
division comes when saying that, if asked to bear arms, she doesn't know which
side she would fight for.

According to Ms. Hung, it is not political confrontation but something more
eternal, comparable to the slowness of Zen breathing exercises, that informs
''Sweet Red-2,'' the installation in the New Museum's window facing Broadway.
Last month, the artist staged a performance in which she ingested a red string
that dangled in front of rice paper masking the window, with her situated behind
the paper. Now on the continuously playing record of that event, the viewer sees
what looks like an animated Rorschach blot, moist lips moving against the paper.
The event illustrates that favorite theme of video artists, ''real time'' - the
time in which the string was eaten almost simultaneous with the act's recording
on tape - but it is also inarguably tinged with eroticism.

The TV Set as Sculptural Form

At P. S. 1, a different experience awaits the video viewer. Hearing the screech
from the video room, a visitor walking down the hallway may fear finding a
catastrophe inside. But most viewers will be totally disarmed by the playful
kitten on the screen. When the cat's image goes off momentarily, ultraviolet
light comes on as if Dale Hoyt, the artist, is trying to create a tension
between the feline's innocence and the frightening world around him. Elsewhere
at P. S. 1, video is used in clearly pragmatic ways as a supplement to more
conventional media. Betsy Damon has filled a room with a huge cast-paper
installation created in a dry riverbed in Utah. Her tape documents the casting
process, beginning with the gathering of the weeds that went into the paper
pulp. Seeing the process makes the finished work all the more stupendous. Buster
Simpson documents an ancient cherry tree he tried to save from bulldozers in
Seattle. But he also shows sculptures he made from the tree when his efforts
failed.

With some installations, it is not only what is on the screen but also the
actual cube-like monitor itself that is treated as a sculptural form, an idea
pioneered by Nam June Paik in the late 60s. Two installations in this video-art
category are at Artists Space, as part of a series of installations called
''Dark Rooms.'' In Carolee Schneemann's ''War Mop,'' a household mop is in an
apparatus that lets it continually flagellate a monitor carrying the image of a
bombed-out refugee camp in Lebanon. The ludicrousness of the piece is certainly
in keeping with its political content.

The two widely separated monitors of John Knecht's ''I'm Glad to the Brink of
Fear'' carry the smiling faces of President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev. The
faces are almost frozen even though one senses that they might move, and this
objectifies Marshall McLuhan's famous notion of television as a 'cool' medium:
one of static uniformity, in contrast to the 'hotter' media of print, which one
must internalize and digest, or of film, whose scale envelops the viewer.

However, the most exotic fare at Artists Space is the presentation of ''TV
Sandino'' - game shows, soap operas, as well as news and public-serving
programming, from Nicaraguan television. Certainly, watching this programming
helps demystify the Sandinistas. One also appreciates the details in the viewing
area, such as a couch with bamboo arms, which sets a semi-tropical mood. (The
project's curators were Annie Goldson and Carlos Pavam.) Links Between Tapes In
a marathon series that has a point, such as the Whitney's, comparisons might be
made between various tapes. In the series ''Social Engagement: Women's Video in
the 80's,'' there is a grouping called ''Critiques of the Media.'' In one work,
Joan Braderman has concocted an appropriate Pop-Art set of flowered wallpaper
from which she makes an analysis of The National Enquirer. Though she makes
incisive and serious comments, on the screen Ms. Braderman's face and a melange
of Enquirer articles are arranged in a bold way using brightly colored circles
and jagged lines. Martha Rosler's ''Simple Case for Torture'' is much more
sober-sided and bare-bones. Her fingers are shown perusing clippings and photos
as well as advertisements from newsmagazines to develop a case that the media is
an inciter of violence.

A couple of videotapes are directly concerned with the fine arts. Jenny Holzer,
who is known for her electronic messages, confesses in ''Sign on a Truck'' that
she was attracted to the technology of a truck with an electric sign board on
which faces are instantly enlarged to the size of Chuck Close paintings. The
tape was made in 1984 and Ms. Holzer's crew asked people who they were voting
for in the Presidential election and why. Ms. Holzer's work always has an eerie
tinge to it and the effusive remarks she elicited sound chillingly ironic a
couple of years later.

Cheang Shu Lea's ''Trial of the Tilted Arc'' is a straightforward documentation
of the hearings concerning the removal of Richard Serra's controversial
sculpture ''Tilted Arc,'' situated in Federal Plaza in Lower Manhattan. The tape
makes a good case for those who hold the philosophical position that the words
spoken about an artwork become the artwork, while the physical piece becomes a
sort of prop.

A perennial showcase for video is the Kitchen, whose screening room is open
Tuesdays through Sundays with a varied menu of programming. This weekend is the
beginning of the 1987 ''Techno Bop Show,'' curated by Sara Hornbacher. It is a
show that highlights the upbeat use of graphics and computers. Survival Research
Laboratories, Ed Rankus, Gretchen Bender and Robert Longo are some of the
artists. There is a change of pace when Mark Karlin's four-part documentary on
Nicaragua weighs in.

This diverse presentation is complemented by David Daniels's ''Buzz Box,'' an
installation that includes not only a 15-minute videotape, but also the hundreds
of paintings, sculptures and graphic works used in making the tape. Along with
an electronic soundtrack, ''Buzz Box'' is an example of what Mr. Daniels calls
''maximalism.''

The Screen as Canvas

A bit far from Manhattan, closed on Saturdays and Sundays, but having the
strongest contemporary video on view right now, is the Robeson Center Gallery of
Rutgers University, in Newark. Some of the tapes here are the visual equivalent
of paintings; the screen is treated like a canvas and abstract shapes are
created. Highlights are Dan Reeves's documentary ''Smothering Dreams,'' which is
about the Vietnam War, and Dara Birnbaum's seemingly pointless ''Kiss the
Girls,'' which uses images from the television game show ''Hollywood Squares.''
But the silliness has a point: commercial television is the father of video art.

One bastion of video art in Manhattan has been the Museum of Modern Art. The
museum began exhibiting video art on a regular basis in 1974, having been given
impetus by shows in its Projects' Space. Keith Sonnier's multimedia exhibition
in 1971 was a major stimulus.

Frequently on Monday evenings, the museum presents a ''Video Viewpoints''
series. On March 30, the series will feature Peter D'Agostino discussing his new
work ''Double You (and XY and Z),'' a work in ''interactive video disk,'' which
means the viewer can manipulate the images.

Bill Viola's retrospective will be in the museum's main gallery for changing
exhibitions in October and will consist of three new installations in addition
to a retrospective of his videotapes.

For the Consumer, Flexibility

One of the advantages of video art is its potential flexibility in relation to
the viewer's time and surroundings. In 1969, Howard Wise staged an exhibition at
his uptown gallery called ''TV as a Creative Medium.'' Soon afterward, he closed
his gallery and founded Electronic Arts Intermix on Mercer Street, billed as the
oldest video-art screening room. By appointment, the public may view the
collection of more than 700 tapes, at no charge. Items in the collection range
from historical tapes by those considered video art's Old Masters, such as Nam
June Paik, to the newest experimental work, including tapes of dance and rock
performances. Terms that are common parlance here, such as ''image processing''
and ''media reflexive,'' may make one's head spin, but tapes in these modes are
also available.

The fact that almost everyone by now has inserted a rental movie into a
video-cassette recorder might mean that it will soon be commonplace to screen
art videos at home. The most resourceful video outlet is the Video Data Bank at
the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. The catalogue reveals that the bank
carries video biographies of many major painters and sculptors and a recent
flyer advertises ''What Does She Want?,'' an anthology featuring ''the most
original women working in film video and in the visual arts.'' In the salad days
of video, the Castelli and Sonnebend galleries operated a video outlet and their
vintage offerings are available through the Video Data Bank.

Video has also crossed over into live multimedia performance as one more visual
component. Because it is prerecorded, it provides an added narrative element.
For some of his dance performances, Merce Cunningham has set monitors on the
stage, and directors and playwrights such as Robert Wilson and Richard Foreman
have exploited the added texture that video brings to a work. Artist-musicians
such as Laurie Anderson and Talking Heads understand how video's beam of light
can redouble the intensity of their performances.

Video in performance is widespread in the 1980's, but innovators of the '60s
included Joan Jonas - and even earlier, Nam June Paik used videos when he
appeared with the adventuresome Fluxus group.

However, according to the director of Media Alliance, Robin White, the real role
that video is beginning to play in performance art lies in preserving a
performance. Performers such as Eric Bogosian have made tapes of their
monologues, performances that were specially staged for the taping.

More Entertaining, More Involved

It is therefore likely that videos will be increasingly entertaining and,
probably, increasingly elaborate. Mary Lucier's latest epic, ''Wilderness,''
which will be installed at the Neuberger Museum in Purchase, N.Y., in April,
could be called baroque. The piece is shown on seven monitors mounted on antique
columns, and the narrative - about the advance of civilization on the
environment - uses sites painted by members of the Hudson River School in the
19th century.

And it is likely that video will be more innovative. The 1987 Whitney Biennial,
which opens in April, will give a taste of the future through several
installations. The redoubtable Nam June Paik will build a couple of human
figures out of monitors; Judith Barry will forgo use of the monitor and project
her image directly on the wall; the team of Grahame Weibren and Roberta Friedman
will introduce ''interactive'' video in which the image changes when the screen
is touched. Another ''Old Master,'' Bruce Nauman, will bring back video by
putting a monitor in his installation.

The curator of film and video at the Whitney, John Hanhardt, sees a greater
interest in video everywhere, citing a shopping complex in Atlanta that is
holding a talent search for an artist to create a permanent video installation
there.

In his introduction to the ''Film and Video'' section of the 1987 Biennial's
catalogue, Mr. Hanhardt credits the ''enormous changes in the economy and
technologies of production, distribution, and exhibition'' that have taken place
in the last five years as being responsible for the resurgent interest in video
art.

''This doesn't mean,'' he said in a recent interview, ''that video artists are
deliberately trying to be entertaining; it's that now everyone feels freed from
the constraints of commercial television.''

PLACES TO WATCH VIDEO ART

A selection of video art available in the metropolitan New York area or through
catalogues follows:

American Museum of the Moving Image, 34-12 36th Street, Astoria, Queens. ''Chott
El-Djerid'' by Bill Viola and ''Coast of Cape Ann'' by Paul Ryan. Today and
tomorrow at 6:30 P.M. Admission, $2. A $4 ticket includes admission to the
''Play Ball'' film series. Information: (718) 784-4520.

Artists Space, 223 West Broadway, between Franklin and White Streets.

''Dark Rooms'' installations and videos from Nicaraguan television.

Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. Nicaraguan videos through next
Saturday. Free. Information: 226-3970.

Electronic Arts Intermix, 282 Mercer Street, near Eighth Street and Broadway. By
appointment, Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Free. Information:
473-6822.

Ted Greenwald Gallery, 181 Mott Street, between Kenmare and Broome Streets. Les
Levine's ''Close Frenzies'' and ''Trade Wind.'' Shown every hour, beginning at
10:30 A.M. and running through 4:30 P.M., Tuesday through Saturday. Free
admission. Information: 219-1642.

The Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street.

''Techno Bop Show.'' Tuesday through Saturday, 1 P.M. (screenings of other works
run until 6 P.M.). Through March 28. Also:

David Daniels's ''Buzz Box,'' through March 21. Information: 255-5793.

Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street. ''Video Viewpoints.'' Next screening,
featuring Peter D'Agostino's ''Double You (and X Y and Z)'' is on March 30 at
6:30 P.M. Free tickets are available after 6 P.M. Information: 708-9490.

Neuberger Museum, Purchase, N.Y.

Mary Lucier's ''Wilderness'' will be installed April 12. Information: (914)
253-5133.

New Museum, 583 Broadway, between Prince and Houston Streets. Hung Su-Chen's
''East/West.'' Open Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 6 P.M. (till 10 P.M. on
Friday and 8 P.M. on Saturday). Suggested donation, $2.50. In museum's Broadway
window: Ms. Hung's ''Sweet Red-2.'' Information: 219-1222.

P. S. 1, 46-01 21st Street, Long Island City, Queens. Dale Hoyt's ''Kitten
Season.'' Open Wednesday through Sunday, noon to 6 P.M. Free.

Through March 22. Also: installations by Betsy Damon and Buster Simpson.
Information: (718) 784-2084.

Robeson Center Gallery of Rutgers University, 350 Martin Luther King Boulevard,
Newark, N.J. Today, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Frank Gilette's ''Symptomatic Syntax'' and
Paul Ryan's ''Echo Channel Design.''

Monday, Dan Reeves's ''Smothering Dreams'' and Dara Birnbaum's ''Kiss the
Girls.'' Free admission.

Information: (201) 648-5970.

Video Data Bank, School of the Art Institute of Chicago, 280 Columbus Drive,
Chicago, Ill.

Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, ''Social
Engagement: Women's Video in the 80s.'' Today and tomorrow at noon and 3 P.M.;
and Sunday at 1 and 4 P.M. Museum admission, $4 ($2 for the elderly; students
and those under 12, free). Information: 570-3633.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos from works of video art (Bob Marshak; Les Levine; Kenji Fujita;
Beri Andrew)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Dena Kleiman

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1097 words




Friday

ALL-WORLD ANTIQUES

Sometimes the best things in life are found when one isn't looking for them, and
when it comes to home furnishings, there is perhaps nothing better than
strolling through an antiques show - particularly one with no restrictions on
year, period or style. This weekend the fourth annual Sanford Smith's Spring
Armory Antiques Show at the cavernous Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and
66th Street, will attract more than 75 dealers from the United States, Austria,
England, France, the Netherlands and Sweden. Among the many items to be sold are
a 19th-century Sumida Gawa flask vase, a 19th-century Egyptian Revival pedestal
cabinet in rosewood and burl, a Biedermeier plant stand, Georgian jewelry,
American quilts and a Gorham sterling pitcher. The show runs today and tomorrow
from noon until 10 P.M., and from 11 A.M. until 6 P.M. on Sunday. Admission is
$7. Information: 535-6500.

DERVISHES, BELLY DANCERS

Nothing could be further from the serene sounds of a symphony orchestra than a
fiery array of flamenco dancers, whirling-dervish masters and Moroccan belly
dancers. Nevertheless, that's the lineup tonight at Avery Fisher Hall, the home
of the New York Philharmonic. The event is the International Dance Spectacular
featuring the exotic dances and haunting music of Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco and
Spain. The Maria Alba Flamenco Dancers with their flouncy black dresses,
castanets and fans will start the program. Then the Ibrahim Farrah Near East
Dancers will follow in jeweled costumes for stick dances, Tunisian scarf dances,
and a ballet that traces the origins of the belly dance. Tickets to the 8 P.M.
performance are $15.50 to $21.50. To charge tickets, the number is 874-6770.

EMOTIONAL IMAGES

There are certain images that capture all the pathos and frenzy of a complicated
moment. A decade's worth of those images - some powerful, some moving, some
sinister, some filled with joy - are being shown, starting today, at the
International Center of Photography-Midtown in an exhibition entitled ''Contact:
Photojournalism Since Vietnam.'' There is, for example, a photograph of the
runner Mary Decker grimacing in pain after her fall in the 3,000-meter final at
the 1984 Olympics. There is the image of crowds in Guatemala as Pope John Paul
II takes off in his helicopter. There is the picture of President Reagan and
June Scobee raising their faces to the sky at the memorial services for the
Challenger astronauts. There is the face of an Ethiopian mother embracing her
malnourished child. The 110-print exhibition presents the work of David Burnett,
Alon Reininger, Gianfranco Gorgoni, Dilip Mehta, Annie Leibovitz, Jose Azel and
Frank Fournier, among other photographers of Contact Press Images, a photoagency
founded in 1976 by Robert Pledge and Mr. Burnett. The exhibition, which
celebrates the 10th anniversary of the agency, is open from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
today and noon to 5 P.M. tomorrow. The gallery is at 77 West 45th Street.
Admission is free. The show runs through April 18. Information: 536-6443.

Saturday

TWO DANCE REVIVALS

Those who haven't seen Eliot Feld's ''Tzaddik,'' a pungent evocation of
Sephardic life inspired by the choreographer's memories as a youth. will have an
opportunity Saturday and Sunday nights. The dance was created in 1974 and last
seen in New York 10 years ago. It was choreographed to Aaron Copland's
''Vitebsk,'' and is considered one of Mr. Feld's richest works, drawing on the
rituals he watched as a child in synagogue. Meanwhile, on Saturday afternoon,
the Merce Cunningham dance company plans a revival of its own - ''Septet,'' a
Cunningham classic that has not been seen since 1964. Performed to Erik Satie's
''Trois Morceaux en Forme de Poire,'' it is a dance (despite its name) for six
dancers, who wear the original costumes by Remy Charlip. The Feld performances
are at 8 P.M. Saturday and 7:30 P.M. Sunday at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth
Avenue, at 19th Street. Tickets are $25. For information and reservations, the
number is 242-0800. The Cunningham performance is at 2 P.M. Saturday at the City
Center, 131 West 55th Street. Tickets are $12 to $30. Theater Development Fund
vouchers are accepted with a $7 surcharge. Reservations and information:
246-8989.

A NEW 'BUTTERFLY'

Puccini spent three years working on ''Madama Butterfly,'' the opera he would
ultimately describe as his favorite. Saturday night the well-known tale of a
young Japanese woman's love for an American lieutenant who, she learns after
renouncing family and religion, has an American wife will be sung anew by the
New York City Opera National Company at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing
Arts at Brooklyn College. Featured performers include Marianna Christos as
Cio-Cio San and Michael Philip Davis as Lieutenant Pinkerton. Anne C. Ewers has
directed the production with scenery by Peter Dean Beck. Ted Taylor conducts.
Those who miss that production may see it Sunday night, when the company - which
is the touring arm of the New York City Opera -presents the opera at the Lehman
Center for the Performing Arts. In that performance, Louisa Jonason plays
Cio-Cio San and Paul Hartfield portrays Pinkerton. Tickets to the 8 P.M.
Brooklyn College performance at Whitman Hall are $10 to $20 and may be obtained
by calling (718) 434-1900. The campus is one block from the intersection of
Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues. Tickets to the 7 P.M. Lehman Center performance
are $13 to $17.50. Round-trip bus transportation is available from Manhattan for
$7. The center is at Bedford Park Boulevard West and Goulden Avenue in the
Bronx. For information, bus and ticket reservations, the number is 960-8833.

Sunday

JEWISH LIFE EXPO

Chopped liver, gefilte fish, knishes and matzoh balls won't be the only things
served up Sunday at the Kosher Foods and Jewish Life Expo at the Jacob K. Javits
Convention Center. There will be wig-styling seminars, concerts, comedians,
Kosher Chinese cooking lessons, a lecture about Jewish life in Denmark, a
performance by the comedian Mark Weiner, the chance to taste an assortment of
Kosher wines, singing by Rabbi Shlomo Carlbach and Meir Sherman, artworks,
seminars on the Kosher dietary laws, and a few surprises. Admission to the expo,
which is open from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M., is $5. Children under age 6 are admitted
free. A free continuous shuttle bus will operate between the northwest corner of
Seventh Avenue and 31st Street and the Javits Center, at 11th Avenue and 34th
Street. Information: 889-1808.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 7, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MARIA JOLAS, 94, A TRANSLATOR AND PARIS MAGAZINE FOUNDER

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 469 words


Maria Jolas, an American-born translator who was one of the last survivors of
James Joyce's Paris circle, died Wednesday at her home in Paris, where she had
lived for almost 60 years. Mrs. Jolas, who was 94 years old, remained an
American citizen.

With her husband, Eugene Jolas, she founded a Paris quarterly literary review
called transition, which in the 1920's published articles by James Joyce,
Gertrude Stein, Samuel Beckett, Dylan Thomas, Franz Kafka, William Carlos
Williams, Henry Miller and James Agee.

The review published sections of Joyce's ''Work in Progress'' that eventually
became ''Finnegans Wake,'' a book for which Mrs. Jolas corrected proofs. She and
her family not only repeatedly helped the impoverished Joyce and his family, but
after World War II she also rescued his papers and possessions from an attic in
Montparnasse.

Managed the Business

Unlike her husband, a critic and poet, Mrs. Jolas chose to manage the business
side of the review. She also translated into English about a dozen books by
Nathalie Sarraute, whose style -with broken sentences, stream of consciousness
effects, characters who remain nameless for many pages and abrupt shifts in
perspective - would prove daunting to any translator. Although her translations
were widely praised, Mrs. Jolas insisted, in an interview in The New York Times
Book Review in 1970, that translating is a lazy person's job. ''Someone else has
done the thinking,'' she said, ''and you accompany him like a pianist
accompanying the singer, self-effacing if essential.''

In the 1960's Mrs. Jolas was a leader of the Paris American Committee to Stop
War, an organization of United States citizens who opposed American involvement
in Vietnam. She also translated ''The French Student Uprising,'' a sympathetic
account of events of 1967 and 1968.

Born in Kentucky

Mrs. Jolas was born Maria McDonald in Louisville, Ky., in January 1893. After
her graduation from high school she studied music in Berlin and Paris. Back in
the United States she met Mr. Jolas, an American citizen who had been reared in
France. They moved to Paris after their marriage in 1926, and remained there
until the war. Before the war Mrs. Jolas founded a school in Neuilly, and when
the Nazis invaded she evacuated some its students to a chateau in south central
France. She and her husband returned to the United States during World War II
and worked in the Office of War Information.

Mrs. Jolas is survived by two daughters, Betsy Jolas, a music professor and
composer in Paris, and Tina Jolas, an anthropologist, of Vaucluse, a region of
southern France. She is also survived by five grandchildren.

She is to be buried today alongside her husband in the cemetery in the village
of Cherence, where they maintained a summer home for many years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PLAN FOR ARMY COPTER STARTS A BATTLE FOR BIDS

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1506 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 7


The Pentagon is preparing to decide what kind of combat helicopter will serve
the Army for the next two decades, making choices that will affect billions of
dollars in military spending and thousands of jobs in the helicopter industry.

At issue is a still undesigned aircraft that the Pentagon has dubbed LHX, for
light helicopter, experimental. The Army wants to buy 4,500 of them for an
estimated $40 billion to $60 billion. Beginning in 1995, the LHX would replace
thousands of helicopters, including the Cobras and Hueys that flew in Vietnam.

The program would provide years of work for virtually every major company in the
helicopter business. A competition to select the eventual producers has already
begun, pitting a team led by McDonnell Douglas and Bell Helicopter against one
led by Boeing and Sikorsky.

Highest Research Priority

The Army calls the LHX its highest research priority, worth sacrificing other
programs to finance. Critics say the project is too ambitious, too hurried,
worth neither the risk nor the expense.

''It is clear that the Army will eventually need to replace its aging light
helicopter fleet,'' Richard Godwin, the Defense Department's senior procurement
official, said in a memorandum in January to the Secretary of the Army,
summarizing his own review of the LHX. Mr. Godwin said the Army had not proved
that its costly plan was the most effective solution.

In April, after an intensive study, two top Army and Defense Department review
boards will meet to judge whether the Army has resolved the issues raised by Mr.
Godwin and other skeptics. If the program is approved by the boards, Congress
will be asked to start paying for a development program that will preoccupy the
helicopter industry for years to come.

In pressing for the green light, Army officers speak glowingly of revolutions in
technology they hope to incorporate into the helicopter. Composite materials
would replace metals; fiber optics would be used instead of cranks and cables.
Speed, agility and range would increase; the costs of operating and maintaining
the equipment would decrease.

Most rewarding, the Army says, the LHX could be piloted by a single officer, a
breakthrough. The helicopter would have advanced controls, instrument panel
displays and computers that would reduce the complexity of flight to a
previously unachievable simplicity.

But selling such ambitious plans to Congress in a year when the military budget
is virtually frozen is not easy. And the generals who run the program are
finding the task complicated by divisions over the program's merits at the
Pentagon and among military contractors.

A recent report by the Pentagon's Defense Science Board, which assembles panels
of independent experts to study military technologies, questioned the need for a
helicopter with the performance envisioned for the LHX. The panel also said the
program's cost and schedule estimates seemed unduly optimistic.

Congress Remains Adamant

So far, even after adopting some of the panel's recommendations, the Army has
not persuaded Congress that it is on the right course. Last year, after the
General Accounting Office, a Congressional investigating arm, issued a report
expressing doubts about the projected costs of the LHX, Congress held up funds
for helicopter research until the Army could prove that its cost estimates were
realistic. Despite pleas by the Army that the money be released, Congress has
not relented.

On Wednesday the Army's helicopter branch plans to deliver a study of the costs
and benefits of the LHX program to senior Pentagon officials. On Thursday the
generals are to brief a committee in the House of Representatives on the study.

''We've been a little reluctant to go over and extol the program without the
full comparative data,'' Brig. Gen. Ronald K. Andreson, the program manager,
said in an interview at the Pentagon. But he also said the Army's study, which
he called the largest such effort it had ever conducted, involving thousands of
analysts, ''will strongly support the case'' for the LHX.

Role of the Apache Copter

In particular, the general said it would show the wisdom of a disputed decision
made by the Army last autumn: to stop buying its current attack-helicopter
model, the Apache, a heavy aircraft manufactured by the McDonnell Douglas
Corporation, next year. General Andreson said computer models had indicated that
the LHX could do similar jobs 50 percent better at a lower lifetime cost than
the Apache.

The plan to end Apache purchases has raised the ire of the manufacturer, which
last month began an advertising campaign in The Washington Post to praise the
Apache. While the advertisements also praise the LHX's potential as a
technologically advanced aircraft, McDonnell Douglas makes it plain that
canceling the Apache is too high a price to pay.

McDonnell Douglas points out that the LHX is not meant to replace the Apaches,
which would remain in service, and that the Army has often said it needs more
than 1,000 Apaches. Rather, the LHX is to replace outmoded, smaller helicopters,
which would be taken out of service to be stored or sold abroad.

McDonnell Douglas representatives are on one of the two industrial teams bidding
to design the LHX. But the corporation recently opened a new, $325 million
factory in Mesa, Ariz., where Apaches are built by a work force of 6,000 people.
''It would become a ghost town,'' Robert Little, a senior McDonnell Douglas
official, said of that plant's future without Apache. ''We would not be around
for the next helicopter,'' he said.

Army Stressing Competition

The Army has emphasized the importance of maintaining competition in the program
between two primary teams, one led by McDonnell Douglas and Textron
Incorporated's Bell Helicopter division, the other by Boeing Vertol and the
United Technology Corporation's Sikorsky Aircraft unit. Two dozen other
manufacturers have joined the immense teams.

The competition, which is to continue through the research phase and into the
helicopter's production, is crucial to restraining the program's costs, Army
officials said.

But influential lawmakers, including Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who
heads the Senate Armed Services Committee, and Representative William L.
Dickinson, a helicopter expert from Alabama who is the ranking Republican on the
House Armed Services Committee, have questioned the Army's approach of starting
new programs at the expense of continuing existing programs.

In January a study by the Congressional Budget Office suggested that the Army
could save $800 million in 1988 and $1.4 billion through 1992 by canceling the
LHX and extending both the Apache program and the production of the Blackhawk, a
multipurpose Sikorsky helicopter whose production is also scheduled to end soon.


Following Technology's Pace

The study said the helicopters could be improved as new technologies became
available, and extending their production would assure that there would be no
gap in military helicopter production in the early 1990's. That prospect worries
some members of Congressional committees supervising the armed services.

Last week, McDonnell Douglas presented the Army with an unsolicited proposal to
go on buying Apaches at a rate of 84 annually for five additional five years.
Even though the numbers of aircraft would be lower than what is currently
produced, the company said it would guarantee that the price would not rise.

Though the Army had not solicited the McDonnell Douglas proposal, military
officials said they would study it. But Army officers warn that their current
budget has no leeway for such a contract and that Congress would have to agree
to increase the budget to make room for more Apaches.

The Budget Problem

The Army's problem, officials said, is that its share of the Pentagon's total
spending on weapons research and production has been shrinking for several
years, and is now less than 17 percent of the total. When the Pentagon decided
to ask for only 3 percent growth in military spending for 1988 and 1989, in
addition to an increase to make up for inflation - a rate far lower than it has
sought in the past - something had to be cut from the budget. The Apache was
sacrificed.

General Andreson said those same budget problems might force the Army to
reconsider its aggressive development schedule for the LHX.

The Army had planned to ask each of the two competing contractor teams to
produce prototypes of two LHX designs, one meant for scout and attack missions,
the other for carrying troops and conducting other operations. Now the Army
might choose to proceed with only the scout and attack helicopter. Once the new
technology had been demonstrated, development of the multipurpose helicopter
carrier would proceed.

Although this would save up to $500 million, it would delay the introduction of
the new helicopters, the general said, and would not free enough money to pay
for many additional Apaches and Blackhawks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Officers in Panama Study Guerrilla War

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: QUARRY HEIGHTS, Panama


A new research team at the United States military headquarters here is seeking
ways for United States and Latin American forces to win small wars against
leftist insurgents in this region.

A recent United States assessment by the group said nine Latin American nations,
most of them fragile democracies, were threatened by guerrillas said to be
supplied and advised by Cuba and the Soviet Union. Insurgencies in El Salvador,
Colombia and Peru were reported to be among the more active. Unless an effective
strategy and workable tactics can be found, a study by the research team said,
''the United States is almost assured of experiencing disasters in the Western
Hemisphere similar to those suffered in Southeast Asia.''

The research unit was established in July last year by Gen. John R. Galvin, the
commander here. The unit was named the Small Wars Operations Research
Directorate, or Sword.

The research team's effort is based on a belief that nuclear war between the
United States and the Soviet Union is unlikely because leaders of the
superpowers realize both nations would be destroyed, and that a conventional war
in Europe is unlikely because it would soon escalate into nuclear war.

In this view, however, the United States could be involved in prolonged wars
against insurgents in Latin America or other places in the third world of
developing nations.

''The Third World War has already started,'' one officer said, ''and its outcome
will determine, more than any other war, what the shape of our world will be
like.''

Beyond figuring out how to defeat insurgencies, Sword officers said, they face
institutional obstacles in the United States armed forces. Most regular officers
have resisted putting personnel, money and careers into unconventional
operations, considering them to be outside the mainstream of military activity.

In one report, the team concluded that ''the United States really does not know
how to wage an efficient and economical counterinsurgency war.''

Rebellions Are Studied

From the outset, the research team, led by Col. Robert M. Herrick, an
intelligence officer with experience as a Ranger, has collected information from
around the world on insurgencies and on methods for fighting them that the team
believes have proven either successful or unsuccessful. .

The team has analyzed the Hukbalahap rebellion in the Philippines, from 1946 to
1954; the Malayan insurgency, from 1948 to 1960; the Algerian fight against the
French, from 1954 to 1962; the continuing troubles in Northern Ireland, and
several phases of the war in Vietnam.

In Latin America, Fidel Castro's insurgency in Cuba and the Sandinista-led
rebellion in Nicaragua have come under particular scrutiny, as have recent
political and military tactics in El Salvador, where officers here said
Government forces appear to have gained an edge over the insurgents.

From these studies, Max G. Manwaring, a political scientist and former Army
colonel, has assembled a list of 72 factors that he says must be considered when
addressing an insurgency. At Sword, they are known jokingly as ''Max's
Factors.''

The team contends that the single most important element in defeating an
insurgency is political legitimacy rather than military tactics.

''An essential error of many embattled governments fighting an insurgency,'' the
team said in the draft of a new analysis, ''is the failure to realize that the
central goal of the insurgent is to destroy the legitimacy of the government in
power.''

Intelligence Operations Stressed

The team also said an insurgency must keep its plans of operations secret, and
''effective intelligence operations are the key'' to defeating it.

But, the analysis said, ''intelligence capabilities of governments threatened by
insurgencies still remain inadequate,'' and few governments have developed an
''intelligence-oriented strategy.'' It said intelligence has not been emphasized
in United States doctrine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'Yankee' Police Chief Upsetting Shreveport

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 33, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 399 words

DATELINE: SHREVEPORT, La., March 7


Charles Gruber has ruffled a few feathers since he arrived here in December.

A ''Yankee go home'' theme ran through the first of the controversies that has
surrounded Mr. Gruber. The 39-year-old former Chief of Police in Quincy, Ill.,
is the first Shreveport Chief of Police who is not a native of the city.

He has stirred up his department, instituting new rules and describing some
members of the force as ''lazy, lethargic no-accounts.'' He has also stirred up
local citizens, speaking out for gun control in a town where more than half of
the residents own guns, and, most recently, telling an interviewer that he was a
member of a youth gang called the ''Dukes'' when he was growing up in Chicago.

All this has given Mr. Gruber high visibility in this northwest Louisiana city
of 200,000 people, nestled near the Texas border. He receives dozens of letters
and phone calls daily, almost all of them positive, he said. And last month the
City Council unanimously passed a resolution supporting him.

Mr. Gruber, a former Marine who had combat duty in Vietnam, took over a Police
Department that has been stunned by two scandals in the last decade.

In 1976, the Commissioner of Public Safety, George D'Artois, was forced to
resign after his indictment for felony theft of city funds totaling $32,000.

Then last year, Police Chief Cliff Heap resigned after it was disclosed that he
was given a Cadillac by a Florida businessman. Other members of the department
received automobiles, a van and a fishing boat from the same businessman.

Shortly after his arrival, Mr. Gruber instituted a policy that prohibits police
officers from accepting gifts. And, in another major change on a police force
previously accused of racist practices, he has named a black as spokeswoman for
the department.

Mr. Gruber stirred up controversy of a different sort at a televised forum on
gun control in early February at which he supported a proposal requiring tougher
rules on identification of gun owners.

Mr. Gruber, a former member of the National Rifle Association who quit in
dispute over some of its policies, also raised the ire of the audience when he
responded to a question asking if he would shoot someone burglarizing his own
home.

''I'm not going to kill somebody who stole my property,'' Mr. Gruber said. ''I'm
not going to shoot people for stealing. I value life more than that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
LIFE, DEATH AND THE AUDIENCE

BYLINE: By Frank Rich

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1700 words


IN THE VIOLENT SHIFT OF EMO-tional key that occurs toward the end of Woody
Allen's film ''Radio Days,'' a fractious Brooklyn household suddenly halts its
squabbles to listen to an urgent radio news bulletin. Somewhere in the rural
American heartland, a somber announcer informs his nocturnal audience, a young
girl has tumbled into a well and is in grave danger of losing her life. Up to
this point ''Radio Days'' has lovingly re-created the fizzy kiddies' serials,
game shows and pop music entertainments of radio's halcyon era before World War
II. But in this sequence Mr. Allen obliquely prefigures a darker modern world,
of unspeakable national tragedies and increasingly proficient electronic media,
that would follow in the war's wake.

As the announcer drones on, ''Radio Days'' intercuts footage from the scene of
the well accident with Edward Hopper-like tableaux of bars, restaurants and
homes, where anonymous Americans gather in tense silence around their radios,
waiting for word of the child's fate. And when the reporter at the scene finally
announces the grim news, we share the on-screen listeners' grief - not because
we know or care about the deceased little girl, but because Mr. Allen has evoked
the spirit of a later and less innocent time. ''Radio Days'' has bled into
television days, when a nation would gather by the tube waiting to hear the
death toll of an assassination attempt or a round of terrorist bombings or an
undeclared guerrilla war.

The global electronic village that Mr. Allen depicts has now been ours for so
long that it's hard to imagine a world that wasn't wired for mass communication.
It's harder still for a contemporary audience to imagine a time when the theater
played a role in society akin to the one that television can fulfill today. Who
goes to the theater in 1987 expecting to tap into the life-or-death mainstream
of national life - hoping to feel the sense of urgency, community and catharsis
experienced even by those monitoring the far-off story of the girl and the well
in ''Radio Days''?

The eras in which the theater was temple or town hall, a prime clearinghouse for
national tragedies and myths, are many centuries and several civilizations in
the past. While we have a fairly lively political theater - as evidenced most
recently by the varied likes of George C. Wolfe's ''Colored Museum,'' Wallace
Shawn's ''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' and Martha Clarke's ''Vienna: Lusthaus'' - it
tends to be intellectual in approach, post-Brechtian ironic in style. Our more
polemical theater artists (and England's, too) tend to think things through,
often brilliantly, rather than lead with their hearts or fists. When we see
theater as urgent as that very day's headlines, the play and the headlines are
often imported from a distant country. New Yorkers this season have sampled a
searing South African ''living newspaper,'' the Johannesburg Market Theater's
''Born in the R.S.A.,'' at Lincoln Center; audiences at Washington's Arena Stage
have given standing ovations to Yuri Lyubimov's ''Crime and Punishment,'' a
production inspired by the specific nature of repression in the contemporary
Soviet Union. Compelling as these presentations of apartheid and Stalinism are,
even the most empathic American theatergoer must watch them from a vicarious
remove.

Yet the potential for the American theater to seize the moment of its own
culture - to be on top of the news, to galvanize a community with a force that
is even beyond the means of television's on-the-scene video cameras - is also
great, ready to be exploited. It's a capability that was realized by the theater
during the Depression - before the electronic age had fielded its full arsenal
of competition -and, to a lesser extent, during the first televised war, in
Vietnam.

For much of this decade, and especially during the last two years, the theater
has been presented with another crisis of such proportions to respond to - the
AIDS epidemic. To be sure, television, newspapers, magazines and everyone else
has a lot to say about AIDS these days. But it's possible that the theater has a
unique contribution to make, and not just because its own casualty list is high.
Only a few days after seeing ''Radio Days,'' I found myself at the latest of New
York's proliferating plays about AIDS, surrounded by an audience as silent - and
as gripped - as the mournful radio listeners in Mr. Allen's film.

The place was La Mama in the East Village on an icy Sunday night, and the event
was the closing workshop performance of ''Safe Sex,'' a new trilogy of one-act
plays-in-progress by Harvey Fierstein, the author of ''Torch Song Trilogy.''
Theatergoers crammed themselves into any available space in the small
auditorium, seeming all but to hang from the ceiling's low rafters. In size and
style, the crowd was not unlike the one I had found down the block at the La
Mama Annex some nights earlier, during a performance of Andrei Serban's
adaptation of Euripides and Sophocles, ''Fragments of a Greek Trilogy.'' But the
travails of the exiled Trojan women at best mustered a respectful, esthetically
distanced silence from La Mama's audience - the Trojan War, especially as staged
by Mr. Serban in the echt 60's manner, was someone else's political problem. The
quiet at ''Safe Sex'' was of another order. At the evening's exact epicenter - a
monologue midway through the bill's second and titular play - the audience
seemed to stop breathing.

The hush descended during a speech delivered by a homosexual man named Ghee,
acted by Mr. Fierstein himself. The monologue's subject, loosely stated, was the
effect of the AIDS epidemic on the relationship between the hetero- and
homosexual communities. Ghee noted that homosexuals no longer belong to a
''great chic mysterious underground'' but are instead ''courted, polled,
placated'' throughout heterosexual society. ''Now they see us everywhere:
hospitals, classrooms, theaters, obituaries. . .We know who we are. They know
who we are. And they know that we care what they think.'' Why? ''Because of a
virus,'' Ghee went on. ''A virus that you don't get because you're gay, just
because you're human.'' Mr. Fierstein took a pause, then stared directly into
the auditorium and concluded: ''We were gay. Now we're human.''

The audience that listened to these words so intently, like most New York
audiences, contained both the ''we'' and ''they'' of Ghee's linguistic
formulation - in other words, theatergoers of both sexes and all sexual
persuasions. Although any overall critical evaluation of ''Safe Sex'' must wait
until the production is seen in finished form on Broadway next month, there was
no doubt that, in this speech and on this night, Mr. Fierstein had hit the
jugular of his entire, sociologically diverse audience.

How? Part of the answer has to do with possessing the talent to articulate
issues of grave import in an honest and dramatic way, and the timing to do so at
the very moment those issues are at the forefront of his audience's
consciousness. The workshop run of ''Safe Sex'' coincided with the spiraling
press and public recognition that one need only be human - and not necessarily a
member of an AIDS ''high risk group'' - to be susceptible to the anxieties and
sorrows that most of Mr. Fierstein's characters must endure on a daily basis.
But there was also a specifically theatrical component to the speech's impact.
The communality of the theater offered the transitory balm of shared emotional
intimacy to an audience now frightened of physical intimacy. ''Safe Sex'' might
well be presented on television someday - a play (''As Is'') and made-for-TV
movie (''An Early Frost'') about AIDS have already been - but the effect of a
broadcast version wouldn't be the same. At La Mama, the theater had become a
temple again, offering the temporary illusion - and, with AIDS, it is most
definitely an illusion - that there's at least some safety in numbers.
Television, by contrast, leaves the anxious or grieving viewer isolated at home,
alone.

Theater that lives by the day's headlines, of course, can quickly become
yesterday's news. While ''Ghosts'' has outlived the discovery of a cure for the
venereal disease (syphilis) at the center of its plot, some of the more
polemical passages in Larry Kramer's drama about AIDS, ''The Normal Heart,''
were already dated by the play's opening night in 1985. Not every playwright who
plugs into his society's most pressing concerns is a poet of the order of
Euripides, Shakespeare or Ibsen, but that still leaves room for the more
transitory gifts of a Clifford Odets. That Odets's ''Waiting for Lefty'' is but
an academic curiosity to audiences in 1987 doesn't detract from its success at
provoking an audience to storm the stage shouting ''Strike!'' in 1935. (''The
actors no longer performed; they were being carried along as if by an exultancy
of communication such as I had never witnessed in the theater before,'' wrote
Harold Clurman of the ''Lefty'' opening, on another wintry Sunday night, at the
old Civic Repertory Theater, 10 blocks north of La Mama.) While the Vietnam
plays that rocked audiences during the war might also look crude today, they
nonetheless served a vital purpose that should not be confused with the grander
ambitions of the better Vietnam dramas, such as ''Streamers'' and ''Tracers,''
that followed the war and may prove more lasting as theater art.

Whether ''Safe Sex'' or any other play about AIDS is a utilitarian, disposable
''living newspaper'' or a drama for the ages is a matter for posterity to decide
- and is an entirely trivial concern next to the issues raised by the plays
themselves. One can assume, in any event, that the author of any AIDS play,
however impassioned, would rather not have the subject to write about. But if it
would be grotesque to suggest that anything good has come of AIDS, it can be
said that the theater has found its own voice in rising to the disease's
challenge. Like it or not, a theatergoer who sees a play like ''Safe Sex'' will
find himself wired into the real world of this precise moment - a place where
more and more innocent victims each day fall into a terrifying, fatal well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TWO WHO WERE THERE VIEW 'PLATOON';
THE CORRESPONENT

BYLINE: By David Halberstam; David Halberstam won a Pulitzer Prize for
international reporting in 1964 as a New York Times correspondent in Vietnam.
His latest book is ''The Reckoning'' (Morrow).

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1894 words


I HAD WAITED FOR THIS FILM A very long time.

By nature the movie industry has been a notorious cheat when it comes to
confronting serious subjects, and on Vietnam in particular there was a rare
schizophrenic attitude on the part of the industry's leaders. No industry, at
the height of the antiwar movement, seemed so committed to ending the war. Its
moguls outbid each other at Vietnam fund-raisers, its celebrities flashed their
peace beads endlessly, and yet to an uncommon degree the very same people backed
off making serious movies about the war. Hollywood in all those years gave at
the fund-raiser, not at the office.

The one real exception was John Wayne, who made ''The Green Berets.'' Wayne's
attitude towards Vietnam was some 180 degrees different from mine, but at least
he put his money where his mouth was.

Of the serious postwar films that have preceded ''Platoon,'' none to me ever
passed the test of being a true Vietnam war movie. ''Coming Home'' was poignant,
an interesting remake of ''The Best Years of Our Lives,'' a movie about the
effect of the war but not about the war itself. ''The Deer Hunter'' was a
brilliant movie about the rites of passage in a blue-collar town. Its weakest
scenes were the ones shot in Vietnam; and ''Apocalypse Now'' was two films, an
occasionally brilliant Vietnam movie mixed gether with Francis Coppola's version
of ''Heart of Darkness.''

By contrast, ''Platoon'' is about Vietnam. It exists only, as they say,
in-country. It has no other objective, no other agenda. To me it is both a great
American movie and a great war movie. Its combat scenes are as good as any I
have ever seen. As a war movie, it ranks with my other two favorites, ''All
Quiet on the Western Front'' and ''Paths of Glory.'' It is painfully realistic.
The other side gets to shoot back. The enemy soldiers, albeit more of a shadow
hovering constantly in the background than a fleshed-out reality, are portrayed
as professional and tough.

From the very early scene when the Americans set a night ambush, we see the
N.V.A. regulars move into that ambush and we see how skillful and careful they
are. In a World War II movie, all the N.V.A. soldiers would be blown away; in
this one, although surprised, they fight with considerable skill.

It is critical in understanding ''Platoon'' to know when it took place. It is
the time of Tet, and it comes at the end of a vast series of miscalculations on
the part of the American architects of the war: they have, first and foremost,
miscalculated the tenacity and durability of the N.V.A. and miscalculated
Hanoi's willingness to send regulars into the South; they have misjudged the
capacity of American airpower to limit infiltration into the South; they have
miscalculated the effectiveness of our allies, the South Vietnamese regulars;
and they have miscalculated whether we can even control the tempo of the war -
in reality it is the other side which controls it, alternately raising or
lowering the level of violence to suit its purpose. The young Americans,
semi-stranded here in a bitter and costly struggle on the Cambodian border - in
truth, military orphans of a great and distant nation - are the ones who are
paying for all these miscalculations in a war that the rest of the country is
turning from.

By this time, more and more of the grunts are draftees instead of volunteers,
and most of them have sensed that the war cannot be won, and that the only
remaining cause is survival; that is the moment which Oliver Stone has captured
here, and he has done it brilliantly. ''Platoon'' always feels right. The acting
is uniformly exceptional. Some people have complained about his allegorical use
of the two sergeants. I have no problem with them: both seem real enough to me.
Barnes (Tom Berenger) as the sergeant of darkness, is simply extraordinary. When
he says, ''I am reality,'' I believe him, and if I were a member of that
platoon, I would alternately loathe him and figure he was my only ticket home;
Elias (Willem Dafoe), as the sergeant of light, seems even more haunting, an
idealized portrait of human sweetness wasting away in the dark. If they are not
who we are, they are certainly who we can become.

It is part of Mr. Stone's immense achievement that in breaking away from the
genre of the World War II movie, he has cast his film not as Hollywood normally
does, by traditional demographics , the good cleancut farm kid from Iowa, the
wiseguy from Brooklyn, the slow but steadfast Pole from Chicago, the plainspoken
but shrewd Texas country boy, but by psyche, by what the war did to the grunts
themselves and by what happened to them as they were forced to respond to it.

We see them through the prism of Vietnam and in the civilization of Vietnam, not
as is usually done in a war movie, through the prism of America and the
civilization of America. That, too, is a triumph; most of our war movies are a
reflection of Hollywood's vision of what it wants America to be, both at home
and at war; Mr. Stone has settled for us as we were in that terrible moment, and
that is enough.

For a long time after I saw ''Platoon'' the first time and then again after I
saw it a second time, I wondered why I found the movie so powerful, so genuinely
authentic. Obviously part of it is the acting and the directing. One scene after
another seems stunningly real. But the movie transcends all the individual
scenes, no matter how good they are. Then finally I realized what it was. What
Mr. Stone has captured and put together is the special reality of Vietnam, the
loneliness of these men, how isolated they are and how on this terrain they are
always foreigners.

It is we, not those whom we would track, who are the aliens. It is the
Americans, despite their immense firepower, who are always surrounded, either by
the terrain, or by the enemy, or by the enemy using the terrain. Because we are
aliens, there is the constant sense that the other side is everywhere. The
feeling of that isolation is so pervasive that it reaches into the audience. As
the men are in effect stranded, so is the audience watching the movie in warm,
comfortable theaters back in America. This is why no matter how brilliant the
individual parts of ''Platoon,'' the whole exceeds their sum, and why he has
been able to communicate his experience to those who did not share it.

Every person who went there has his own Vietnam, and I have no doubt that there
are some who went there who savor their own memories and who are offended by
some portion of ''Platoon,'' be it the allegory of the two sergeants or the My
Lai-like incident in the village. But I think that Mr. Stone has not just
captured combat in general, but Vietnam in a way so special that any dissent
from what he has given us seems almost petty. He has, I think, captured and
blended into his larger tapestry two critical factors which help explain why we
were unsuccessful in Vietnam, and the average person who goes to the movie in
some elemental way can understand them.

I think, for example, that many Americans, in their late 50's, 60's and 70's,
Americans of traditional loyalties who found Vietnam so puzzling, will find
''Platoon'' helpful in understanding their own political conversion. After all,
these were people who, as the war went on, gradually turned on it, even as they
were uncomfortable in doing so.

Because Mr. Stone has complemented the historians of the war, these people will
understand the degree to which the heavy foliage filtered out the principal
American asset, our technological superiority. There was never any chance that
Americans would be more willing to die for victory in Vietnam than would the
other side, skilled, professional, already engaged in revolutionary war for 20
years. Thus the only true lever of power there was our technology, our
airplanes, helicopters, armored vehicles and artillery. But the movie shows
explicitly how the jungle and the night diminished that advantage and reduced
the edge to a ratio which the other side could bear.

We dropped, according to the Pentagon Papers, two and a half times the amount of
bombs we used in World War II, and it made no difference. Watching this movie,
seeing the thickness of the jungle, seeing the other side move at night, one can
readily understand why that was true.

What Mr. Stone has done in both a medium given to fantasy and in a political age
given to longing (if not fantasy) is to strike an enormous blow for reality, for
what happens when we do not understand what we are doing and what our limits
are. One cannot truly appreciate his achievement, I think, without comparing it
to the work of Sylvester Stallone. If this is not the age of Rambo politically
(rhetoric which greatly exceeds our political and military realities, cowboys
dashing out of the White House on illegal, incompetent, covert operations), then
it most assuredly has been - until ''Platoon'' - cinematically. It would be hard
for me to understate my loathing for Mr. Stallone and what he has done. I have
no doubt that Mr. Stallone is politically one of the shrewdest men in Hollywood,
with a surprisingly keen instinct for the raw nerve in American life and for
sensing the social and economic frustrations of our age.

That is no small gift; regrettably, like a demagogue - a cinematic Joe McCarthy
- he has chosen not so much to explain what has gone wrong and why, to
illuminate our condition to ourselves, as to exploit it. ''Rambo'' fantasizes
the war as it should have been (as Rocky in an age of Muhammad Ali, Teofilo
Stevenson and Mike Tyson fantasizes the heavyweight boxing world; the fantasy is
Sylvester Stallone, the reality is Gerry Cooney) . But the war was not a fantasy
and it was very real, and so was the enemy. The N.V.A., by its battlefield
skills and battlefield valor and willingness to pay a terrible price, stalemated
one of the mightiest armies in the history of mankind.

Yet for all his professed admiration of the American grunts, Mr. Stallone
diminishes what they did because he diminishes their opponents: in ''Rambo'' we
are told that where an American battalion would have failed, one
soldier-as-cowboy can do it all, wipe out hundreds of dinky Vietnamese. With the
barely covert racism of the movie, Mr. Stallone would undo what few lessons we
have learned from Vietnam.

Because of ''Rambo,'' I am that much more in Oliver Stone's debt. I am surprised
in part that more people in the world in which I move do not share my passion
for it and indeed have not seen the movie. Sometimes at dinner parties, I ask
others, more often than not people who were against the war, if they have seen
''Platoon,'' and they often answer, that well, they have read about it, but it
sounds too brutal, too real.

Real it is. This is the ultimate work of witness, something which has the
authenticity of documentary and yet the vibrancy and originality of art. Oliver
Stone seems to me to be the almost miraculous survivor, someone who went to
Vietnam to do one thing and managed to survive in order to do another. I am not
sure which is his greater achievement, getting the film made in such a shallow
and hostile environment or making so remarkable a movie. But in the process he
has done something more important than all the war's historians; he has given us
something which is not only real, but which lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from 'Platoon'; Photo of David Halberstam

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TWO WHO WERE THERE VIEW 'PLATOON';
THE MARINE OFFICER

BYLINE: By Bernard E. Trainor; Bernard E. Trainor, a retired Marine Corps
lieutenant general, is now the military correspondent of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1408 words


GOING TO A SUNDAY AFTER-noon movie is usually a good tonic for a retired Marine
general suffering from midwinter blues. I did just that a couple of weeks ago
with three of my adult daughters. Fortified with popcorn, we settled down in a
suburban theater to see the much heralded ''Platoon.''

As a career Marine, I had seen my share of war, both on the silver screen and in
real life. Needless to say, they are different, but ''Platoon'' does succeed in
narrowing some of the differences. A filmgoer does not experience Vietnam by
seeing ''Platoon,'' but he will see those who did. It is less a war movie than a
movie of men at war.

Each war has its own characteristics, but these change if the war goes on long
enough. So it was in Vietnam. In 1965, those of us who went out to Indochina
were on a holy crusade to stop the spread of communism. We were living. . .and
dying. . .proof of the late President John F. Kennedy's pledge to ''pay any
price, bear any burden, meet any hardship. . .to assure the survival and success
of liberty.'' We really believed that rhetoric. There was nobility in what we
were doing.

None of that sentiment is in ''Platoon.'' By 1968, the setting for most of the
film, the crusade was over. Frustration had replaced eagerness. ''Endure'' had
replaced ''achieve.'' ''Platoon'' reflects the change in attitude that had taken
place.

In 1970, when I returned to Vietnam for a second time and took command of an
infantry battalion, I had a wise regimental commander who was fond of saying to
his officers: ''Gentlemen, we are not fighting a war; we are campaigning.'' His
statement conjured up visions of Queen Victoria's Indian Army doing its best to
keep order over the unruly outposts of an indifferent Empire.

The message was clear. Winning the war was no longer the objective. We were
simply to maintain control of our assigned operational areas and hopefully
survive in the process. The Vietnam crusade had become a war of small, violent
actions, waged without pity by both sides. Winning meant beating the Vietcong in
a local firefight. It had nothing to do with final victory; that idea was long
past. Whatever glory there had been to the war was gone. ''Platoon'' reflects
that feeling in spades.

Some of my friends, who do not view the film as allegoric, complain that it is
too negative. They are particularly offended by the village atrocity sequence,
which they say could be misinterpreted as a routine occurrence. They rightly
point out that those who served in Vietnam tried hard to help, not hurt, the
people of that tortured land.

Countless acts of kindness did take place. Orphanages were built, friendly
villages were protected, medical assistance dispensed, wells dug, money given.
All true, and true from the beginning to the very end of the tragic adventure.
But that is irrelevant. We went to war to kill Vietcong and North Vietnamese
soldiers, and that is precisely what we did for eight long and wearying years.

The war was brutal, and all wars come with their share of regrettable
atrocities. The Vietnamese war was no exception. They are not to be excused nor
condoned, but neither should they be overlooked.

The film tries hard to convey the pent-up rage which led to the graphically
depicted village atrocity, but not unexpectedly it fails to get it across. It
was a hopeless task. There is no way a well-fed, dry and comfortable movie
audience, munching popcorn in a climate-controlled theater, can vicariously
experience life in the bush in 30 minutes of film time.

Day after day of stalking an enemy rarely seen but always present. Endless hours
of incredible heat, dust and humidity or sucking mud and chilling rain.
Brain-numbing monotony of endlessly putting one foot in front of another under
the weight of a pack, rifle, ammunition and four or five canteens of precious
water. Then suddenly an explosion and the shrieks of those who are still able to
scream out. A weary foot has found a hidden land mine.

The adrenaline flows. The heart beats faster. The medical evacuation helicopter
is called in. When at last the mess is cleaned up and fragments of humanity have
been whisked to the rear, quiet returns to the scene and with it a terrible
weariness. Recognition that the scene just past is the repeat of a previous one,
which in turn will be repeated again. In minutes? Hours? Days? Nobody knows, but
it will be repeated. And every grunt walking through Gethsemane knows the local
villagers have a hand in the carnage.

How many of us who still share these memories can deny tasting bile and and the
urge to kill at the time? Yet only a rare few did. A film can never replicate
those experiences, although this one makes an honest attempt to do so.

As grim as much of the war was, it was also terribly boring. After all, if you
are not out to win, time goes by slowly. I've long believed that most of the
drug problems that cropped up during the latter half of the war were due to
boredom and not the stress of combat. Grass smokers did not make popular point
men on patrol.

As incomprehensible as it may seem to those who never had the experience, there
was no greater high than that which came from firefights. They were scary, but
the crump of mortar shells and the popping of automatic weapons was an antidote
without rival to the ennui of soldiering. Unless they were ambushed, most troops
reveled in it. They were never more alive than when they were close to death.
The intoxication of coming to grips with an enemy known mostly for his infernal
mines brought out a primitive bloodlust in all of us. In this respect Vietnam
paralleled my earlier experiences as an infantry platoon leader in Korea. I
suspect the same could be said of veterans of Normandy, Waterloo and Agincourt
for that matter.

I'm not sure the exhilaration of battle comes through in the film's typically
Hollywood version of combat. Small matter though, because what does comes
through in ''Platoon,'' to make it a notable war movie, is its authentic
portrayal of infantrymen.

Those who did the endless patrolling, sat in ambush, endured the mines, got into
the firefights, knew they were a breed set apart from the rest of society. With
the exception of helicopter crews, who were considered comrades in terror, the
infantry both despised and envied those who lived in a saner and safer world. As
for those of military age back in ''the world'' of the United States,
particularly war protesters, not even the foulest and most obscene infantry
epithet was adequate. New ones were constantly being coined. The fact that the
troops themselves may have been antiwar down to the marrow was of little matter.
The difference was, the troops were in it and the protesters weren't; and that,
to a young lance corporal, made a big difference.

The infantrymen knew that the legions of nonfighting support troops in Vietnam
referred to them with derision, but they also knew they were held in awe because
of their continuous flirtation with death. Bill Mauldin's Willie and Joe of
World War II would have been at home with the young infantrymen of Vietnam. They
were a band of brothers held together by a common bond of dependence, who lived
with squalor, violence, fear, stench, mosquitoes, leeches and countless other
indignities.

Midway through the war, during the fighting around Con Thien along the border of
the two Vietnams, a newspaper reporter asked a black Marine if there was any
racial bias in his rifle company. The youngster laughed and replied, ''Hell, no,
we're all treated like niggers up here.'' That line would have been at home in
''Platoon.''

When the film ended that Sunday afternoon, I didn't have sweaty palms or tremors
and I was totally composed. After all, it was just another war movie. My
daughters and I stood to leave the theater as the credits unfolded on the
screen. As I donned my coat, one credit line caught my eye: ''Dedicated to those
who fought and died in Vietnam.''

That one line hit me hard. I couldn't speak, and my stomach knotted. While my
daughters walked out of the theater to our parked car, I took a solitary walk to
get control of myself. I didn't realize that I had seen so many familiar faces
in the film. Neither did I realize, until then, that for 15 years I have been
keeping an anguished genie bottled up inside of me. He nearly escaped. I quickly
put the cork back in the bottle that afternoon, but he's still there trying to
get out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Phot of Bernard E. Trainor; Photos from 'Platoon'

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S DOING IN;
Montreal

BYLINE: By ROCHELLE LASH BALFOUR; Rochelle Lash Balfour is a writer who lives in
Montreal.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 10, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1854 words


The people of Montreal are steeled for snow from October to May. They can't beat
their long Canadian winter, so they do the only sensible thing: They adapt to it
- outdoors or in.

Outdoors, Montrealers ski, toboggan and take horse-drawn sleighs on Mount Royal.
There is ice-skating on the site of the 1976 Olympic Games' rowing basin in the
St. Lawrence River, and 50 miles of cross-country ski trails border the island
metropolis, some following the fur-trading route of the 1600's to Lachine, so
named because Robert Cavalier, Sieur de LaSalle, was looking for China.

Indoors, a weatherproof underground city thrives. Smart shops, Continental-style
cafes and cinemas with films in French and English line indoor promenades
beneath office buildings like the cruciform-shaped Place Ville Marie, and hotels
like the Bonaventure Hilton. Those centers of commerce as well as virtually
every important site for sports or civic events are linked by the Metro, whose
bright blue cars run quietly on rubber tires. Stations are decorated with
ceramic murals and sculpture, and one subway stop, at McGill University, has a
small lending library.

Montreal feels like Europe, but it's only 400 miles (about an hour's flight)
from New York. Conversation is mostly in French, and theater is more likely to
be Moliere than Shakespeare.

As spring approaches and the maple sap begins to flow, Montrealers head to a
cabane a sucre outside town for a sugaring-off party.

AROUND TOWN

The buildings of Old Montreal near the port settled by Samuel de Champlain in
1608 are being renovated and restored. A fast-food franchise serves burgers in
what was the residence in the late 1600's of the explorer Cadillac, founder of
Detroit. The Montreal History Center (514-845-4236), in a former fire station at
335 Place d'Youville, has an exhibit of early tramways as well as permanent
displays and films.

Save Montreal (514-282-2069), an architectural conservationist group, and Les
Montrealistes (514-744-3009), a tour company, conduct walking tours through many
neighborhoods as well as the underground city. Fees range from $30 to $45 for
fewer than 10 people for two hours. These and all other prices are given in
United States dollars, converted at the rate of $1.40 for a Canadian dollar.

Another area worth exploring is the Square Mile, bounded by Sherbrooke, Peel and
Guy Streets and Pine Avenue. In the sector are some of the stone mansions and
town houses built by industrialists in the late 1800's.

The district known as Plateau Mont-Royal stretches 20 blocks north of Sherbrooke
and the same distance east of Mount Royal. Bistros and boutiques are dressing up
factories and row housing along St. Denis and Laurier Streets and St. Lawrence
Boulevard. Renovations are rampant on Victorian walk-ups with outdoor spiral
staircases giving rise to the term balconville.

COMING EVENTS

At Place des Arts, Charles Dutoit conducts l'Orchestre Symphonique de Montreal
(514-842-3402) most Tuesday and Wednesday nights and Sunday afternoons. The
30-year-old Les Grands Ballets Canadiens (514-849-8681) will offer Soirees des
Montrealais, with works by local choreographers from March 12 to 14, and a
varied program including ''Les Noces'' from March 26 to 28. L'Opera de Montreal
(514-521-5577) stages Bellini's ''Puritani'' on April 14, 18, 23, 25 and 29 and
May 2. The Quebecois singer and comedian Jean Lapointe, an annual sell out, is
performing until April 4. Tickets range from $7 to $35 at Place des Arts.

At the Forum (514-932-6131), tickets are $7 to $12 to see hockey's great Les
Canadiens, who with 23 Stanley Cups, have set a record for championships by
North American professional sports teams. Opponents include the New York
Islanders on March 16.

This month, the 80-year-old Galerie Morency (1564 St. Denis Street,
514-845-6442) is exhibiting the primitive oils and drawings of Arthur Villeneuve
while the contemporary Galerie John A. Schweitzer (42 Pine Avenue West,
514-289-9262) is showing abstract steel-and-cement sculpture by Liliana
Berezowsky.

WHERE TO STAY

Hotel Quatre Saisons (1050 Sherbrooke Street West, 514-284-1110), a 31-story
tower, has large rooms decorated with Georgian-style writing desks and pastel
chintz. Rates are $140 to $155 for two in a room during the week, $88 on
weekends, and there's a rate of $85 a night for a minimum two-night stay. Rates
include access to a Gymtech health club and a year-round outdoor heated pool.

The three-month-old Delta Hotel (475 President Kennedy Street, 514-286-1986) is
a best buy at $50 a night on weekdays, $43 on weekends, until April 21. A
fireplace warms the lobby, each room has a balcony, and there is a business
center, day-care services and a health club with two pools.

The Old World-style Ritz Carlton (1228 Sherbrooke Street West, 514-842-4212)
opened 75 years ago. Rooms are $115 to $140 a night, and there's a weekend
package for $83 a night, which includes a 25 percent discount on a rental car.

At the rococo-style l'Hotel de la Montagne (1430 rue de la Montagne,
514-288-5656), the owner, Bernard Ragueneau, personally manages the lodgings,
restaurants, bars and discotheque. Rooms are $75 a night, and there's a weekend
rate of $55 a night for two nights, including breakfast Saturday and brunch
Sunday.

The Lord Berri (1199 Berri Street, 514-845-9236) is a new no-frills hotel that
offers good-size, simply furnished rooms at $40 or one-bedroom suites at $65.
There's no bellman or room service, only a coffee shop.

WHERE TO DINE

Restaurant prices are for one person, without wine, tax or service.

A new formal French restaurant, Les Mignardises (2035 St. Denis Street,
514-842-1151) has created a sensation since it was opened a year ago by Peter
Steiger with the haute cuisine of Jean-Pierre Monnet, formerly a chef at Les
Halles, Montreal's best-known dining spot for 15 years. Specialties include
salmon tartare, roasted shelled lobster, sliced steak with marrow and for
dessert fruit blanketed with warm sabayon. The table d'hote for lunch begins at
$10; dinner is about $35. The wine list ranges from a red Bordeaux, Labottiere
1984 ($17), to Chateau Cheval-Blanc, Premier Grand Cru, St. Emilion 1983 ($153).

Mr. Monnet's departure hasn't hurt Les Halles (1450 Crescent Street,
514-844-2328), and the owners, Jacques Landurie and Jean-Pierre Beauquier,
nurture a bustling atmosphere and classical cuisine. There is a list of 220
wines ($15 to $400), and the large menu offers a mousseline of shrimp, spicy
fish soup, quail with almonds, rack of lamb and mousse of white and dark
chocolates (lunch $7 to $15, dinner $30).

Le St. Germain (1458 Crescent Street, 514-282-9003) is a new bistro with black
and white decor and nouvelle cuisine, including snails in watercress, veal
kidneys with mustard and filet mignon with black pepper sauce (lunch $7 to $10,
dinner $20). Chablis Bichot 1980 costs $32. For something almost as good, try
the functional dining room of l'Institut de Tourisme et d'Hotellerie (3535 St.
Denis Street, 514-282-5120) run by students of Quebec's hotel school. The
nouvelle Quebecoise cuisine includes foie gras in caribou sauce or duck with
locally made apple liqueur. (Lunch $7 to $15, dinner $20 to $30). The house wine
is a Cuvee of Burgandies ($12 a bottle).

Not every Montreal restaurant is French. George Lau, owner of the Sichuan
restaurant Le Chrysantheme (1208 Crescent Street, 514-397-1408) recently opened
l'Orchidee de Chine (2017 Peel Street, 514-287-1878), offering dishes from five
different regions of China. (Lunch $7 to $10, dinner $25 to $30).

Ten-year-old La Sila (2040 St. Denis Street, 514-844-5083) offers an Italian
menu (dinner $20) of meat and seafood, but also look for homemade pasta such as
trinette al pesto.

Bagel, etc. (4320 St. Lawrence Boulevard, 514-845-9462), is a diner that is open
round the clock for supper, cheese blintzes and eight kinds of bagels. Just
about everything, except caviar and Champagne, is less than $10.

The international fast-food stalls on the top floor of Faubourg Ste. Catherine,
Montreal's newest indoor shopping plaza at Ste. Catherine and Guy Streets,
provide snacks or lunches from around the world, including Vietnam, India and
Lebanon. There are four cinemas in the basement and small groceries and bakeries
on the first floor.

Old Coca-Cola signs and ketchup bottles on Formica tabletops help make La Paryse
(302 Ontario East, 514-842-2040) an authentic hamburger joint. The basic burger
($2.75) is a heap of ground beef, sauteed onions, mushrooms, pickles, lettuce
and mozzarella. =

ON THE TOWN

Night life, in a lull for a few years, is picking up with the opening of big
dance clubs. More than $1.5 million was spent to open L'Esprit (1234 de la
Montagne, 514-397-1711), a bar and disco in what was, during the late 1800's, a
mansion belonging to Sir Alexander Tilloch Gault, one of the founding fathers of
Canada, and during the mid-1900's, a funeral parlor.

High-fashion dress and punk hairdos are the passwords at the door of Bar
Business (3500 St. Lawrence Boulevard, 514-849-3988), a small club behind the
run-down facade of an old factory.

Club Soda (5240 Park Avenue, 514-270-7848) offers live rock bands and comedy
groups, including a French revue by Le Group Sanguin from March 19 to 22 and
March 25 to 29.

SHOPPING

Certain shops offer better-than-retail prices on name-brand merchandise. Bedo
(1253 Ste. Catherine Street West, 514-284-0822) is popular with under-30's for
sportswear for men and women and inexpensive spoofs of names like Chanel. Most
separates are $20 to $60. J. Schreter (4350 St. Lawrence Boulevard,
514-845-4231) is a holdover from the time when Montreal's main street was the
center of its garment industry and has been selling men's clothing for 60 years.
Harris tweed jackets cost $60, Levi's jeans $22, Reebok sneakers $33 and up. At
Caplan-Duval (Plaza Cote des Neiges or Cavendish Mall, 514-483-4040), a busy
emporium of housewares, a five-piece place setting of Royal Doulton bone china
in the Sonnet pattern costs $41. Mink's (1383 Green Avenue, 514-937-0642)
carries haute couture fabrics from Italy, Switzerland and France. Cottons by
Giorgio Armani start at $35 a yard, and there is a hand-beaded Valentino silk at
$1,500 a yard.

At Pratesi (1448 Sherbrooke Street West, 514-285-8909), which has a New York
branch, queen-size bed sheets from Italy range from $265 in cotton to $760 in
silk. Norma (1456 Sherbrooke Street West, 514-842-4377) sells leatherwear for
women designed by Norma Lepofsky, the owner. Lambskin jackets trimmed in wool,
fabric or fur are $400 to $1,600. At Orientations Objets d'Art (1460 Sherbrooke
Street West, 514-844-5500), antiques from the Orient range from $200 to $20,000.

Spring styles have arrived from France at Boutique Bruno-Laurent (2070 Crescent,
514-842-1519), a regular stop for some of the city's best-dressed women.

Zoo Options (1250 Crescent, 514-397-2674) and Mousseline (1228 Ste. Catherine
Street West, 514-878-0661) sell avant-garde designer clothes from Europe and
Canada for men and women.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Montreal; Map of Montreal

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: March 8, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1470 words

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List FICTION
 1          1      5  WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                     (Morrow, $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences
                     that befall a woman and her family after her
                     appointment as Ambassador to Rumania.

 2          2      6  THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                     (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                     king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.

 3          3     32  RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                     $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians.

 4          5     26  IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                     horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in
                     a small Maine town.

 5          4      8  NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon &
                     Schuster, $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans
                     from being discovered by the Germans.

 6          6      7  THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday,
                     $17.95.) A financial wizard undertakes to defuse the
                     crisis besetting the American economy.

 7         11      3  OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $17.95.)
                     Tracking down a mysterious disease that strikes
                     certain physicians and their patients.

 8          8     18  WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                     Iran during the month following the Shah's
                     departure.

 9          7     19  FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts.
                     (Naval Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                     Vietnam.

10         10     23  THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.
                     (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family
                     relationships in South Carolina and New York City.

11          9      8  BANDITS, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House,
                     $17.95.) A gang of three plots to heist millions being
                     sent to the contras in Nicaragua.

12         15      3  DREAMS ARE NOT ENOUGH, by Jacqueline
                     Briskin. (Putnam, $18.95.) A California family
                     dynasty out to conquer the world.

13         13      4  WATCHERS, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $17.95.)
                     Two creatures - one good, the other evil - emerge
                     from a secret government laboratory.

14         12      5  PATIENCE OF A SAINT, by Andrew M. Greeley.
                     (Geis/Warner, $18.95.) A hard-bitten
                     newspaperman learns a lot about his family and
                     decency while on the trail of a wily politician.

15         14      2  THE DINNER PARTY, by Howard Fast.
                     (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) The feelings of family
                     and friends surface at a Washington get-together.

16 *               1  ANYWHERE BUT HERE, by Mona Simpson.
                     (Knopf, $18.95.) Love, hate, fear, need and loyalty
                     lock mother and daughter in 20 years of combat.

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List NONFICTION

 1          1     10  A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
                     (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season
                     spent with the coach Bob Knight and his Indiana
                     University basketball team.
 Q$ 2       2     44  FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                     Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations
                     from the television star and father of five.

 3          4      3  THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by
                     Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
                     From the Boston slums of Irish immigrants to the
                     White House: three generations of a family.

 4          5      4  ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
                     Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $18.95.) A case
                     involving the murder of a Pennsylvania high school
                     teacher and the disappearance of her two children.

 5          3      4  THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                     $24.95.) Australia from penal colony to its gradual
                     emergence as a flourishing nation.

 6          8     14  A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                     Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                     recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 7         12      2  COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                     Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                     visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his family's
                     place in upstate New York.

 8          6      8  THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT
                     LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE, by Jane Wagner.
                     (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb observations on life
                     today; script of the show starring Lily Tomlin.

 9                 1  INTIMATE PARTNERS, by Maggie Scarf.
                     (Random House, $18.95.) Changing patterns in love
                     and marriage.

10 *        9     52  YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss.
                     (Random House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden
                     Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme; the first Dr.
                     Seuss book for adults.

11          7      5  REAGAN'S AMERICA: Innocents at Home, by
                     Garry Wills. (Doubleday, $19.95.) The 40th
                     President as the product and embodiment of an
                     American mythology.

12         10     22  HIS WAY, by Kitty Kelley. (Bantam, $21.95.) From
                     Hoboken to superstardom: an unauthorized
                     biography of Frank Sinatra.

13         14     22  THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam.
                     (Morrow, $19.95.) The crisis in the American
                     automobile industry and Japan's role in it.

14         11     42  JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James
                     Herriot. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a
                     Yorkshire veterinarian about his favorite animal.

15                 1  LIFE WISH, by Jill Ireland. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                     The author tells of her battle against cancer.

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List ADVICE, HOW-TO AND MISCELLANEOUS

 1          1     19  THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                     by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                     prepared at moderate cost.

 2          2     22  MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO
                     LOVE THEM, by Susan Forward and Joan Torres.
                     (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with overbearing
                     men.

 3          3     38  THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn.
                     (Norton, $15.95.) A regimen based on the
                     Vanderbilt University Weight Management
                     Program.

 4          4     78  WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                     DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                     standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 5          5     56  THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.
                     (Morrow, $14.95.) A television chef's inexpensive
                     dishes.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer lists statistically relialbe.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ARMED TRUCE: The Beginnings of the Cold War, 1945-46, by Hugh Thomas. (Atheneum,
$27.50.) The first volume of a series on the cold war, Lord Thomas's
postrevisionist study finds the origins of the conflict in Soviet ideology and
fear of the Germans.

THE RED WHITE AND BLUE, by John Gregory Dunne. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.)
Left-wing politics, big business, Hollywood, the Roman Catholic Church, Vietnam,
Central America and much, much more are entangled in a pungent, violent,
distinctly unsympathetic fictional treatment of America's last 20 years.

ENEMY IN THE PROMISED LAND: An Egyptian Woman's Journey Into Israel, by Sana
Hasan. (Pantheon, $18.95.) The stereotypes of two nations fall in this account
of a brave and rebellious woman's 1974 migration to the enemy's heartland.

BETTY: A Glad Awakening, by Betty Ford with Chris Chase. (Doubleday, $16.95.) A
modest book about recovery from alcohol and drugs that should help others who
haven't recovered yet.

LAZAR MALKIN ENTERS HEAVEN, by Steve Stern. (Viking, $16.95.) Sharply plotted,
sometimes horrific stories about Jewish life in the South by a prodigiously
talented writer from Memphis.

A WRESTLING SEASON, by Sharon Sheehe Stark. (Morrow, $17.95.) The title - a
reference to a son's high school athletics - is the governing metaphor in this
wise novel of domestic combat, of the tensions that separate families and the
ties that bind them.

THE BROOM OF THE SYSTEM, by David Foster Wallace. (Viking, Cloth, $18.95.
Penguin, Paper, $7.95.) Exuberant, cartoonish, playful, preposterous and
unrestrained, this first novel plays language games with a heroine who lives
near a black sand desert in Ohio in 1990 and owns a cockateel named Vlad the
Impaler.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIRECTOR OF ALL HE SURVEYED

BYLINE: By Norval Morris; Norval Morris is the Julius Kreeger Professor of Law
and Criminology at the University of Chicago. His books include ''The Future of
Imprisonment'' and ''Madness and the Criminal Law.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3439 words


SECRECY AND POWER
The Life of J. Edgar Hoover. By Richard Gid Powers. Illustrated. 624 pp. New
York: The Free Press. $27.95.

ON May 9, 1924, at the age of 29, J. Edgar Hoover became the third Director of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation. On May 2, 1972, when he was 77, Hoover died
in office, having shaped a lasting Government agency in his image. In the years
since, the F.B.I. has been refashioned by more politically independent and wiser
leadership to shed many of the unseemly, even conspiratorial activities that
characterized Hoover's vision of the bureau. But Hoover's contribution remains
determinative.

''Secrecy and Power'' is the best biography of Hoover so far, although it is
clear that the Hoover story holds such interest that more books about him will
follow. This volume, by Richard Gid Powers, a professor of history at the
College of Staten Island of the City University of New York, is a probing,
balanced and lively analysis of the life of a man who for half a century
survived at the center of the storms of domestic turbulence that periodically
bedevil this nation in its long search for domestic tranquillity. And he stirred
up a storm or two himself.

Hoover came to the directorship as a result of the Teapot Dome scandal.
President Coolidge fired Attorney General Harry Daugherty for his failure to
investigate cabinet officers' involvement in the sale of Government oil lands
during the administration of President Harding, who had died in August 1923. A
Senate probe revealed that Daugherty had used the F.B.I. to harass and discredit
a senator who had denounced Daugherty's role in the scandal, and the next person
to be fired was the F.B.I.'s Director, William Burns. Harlan Stone, Coolidge's
new Attorney General, fresh from the deanship of Columbia Law School and one of
the severest critics of the men Hoover had previously served loyally and well in
the Justice Department, nominated Hoover to succeed Burns. Stone's
recommendation of Hoover to the President was supported by Roger Baldwin, the
founder of the American Civil Liberties Union. It was an unlikely genesis.

Hoover had been in the Justice

Department for seven years, first as a clerk in the files division, then as an
attorney and later as a special agent in the Enemy Aliens Bureau. In 1919 he had
been appointed Special Assistant to the Attorney General in charge of the drive
against radicals that accompanied the Red Scare of the postwar years. The mass
arrests of accused radicals in 1919 have become legend as the Palmer Raids,
named for Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer, but they were carried out under
the direction of Hoover. Anti-Communism was the force that brought Hoover to
power and gave him authority; anti-Communism was the force that defined both his
career and the contours of the F.B.I. The organizing principle of his dedication
to domestic tranquillity was unremitting struggle against all who would threaten
lawful governmental authority - in particular, as he often phrased it,
''Commu-nists, subversives and pseudoliberals.'' Defining enemies so widely gave
him and the Presidents and attorneys general a wide selection of Continued on
page 36 potential enemies to be investigated, harried and in at least two cases
persecuted to suicide by a far-ranging investigative agency under Hoover's
unfettered control.

There was a consistency, an unremitting routine about his life. Values
inculcated in his childhood, youth and early adulthood in Seward Square near the
Capitol in Washington, values of loyalty and, in Mr. Powers' words, ''of
Southern, white, Christian, small-town, turn-of-the-century Washington,'' were
apparently never doubted by Hoover right up to the time he died in 1972 in his
second and last home, in northwest Washington. Indeed, he does not seem to have
been much troubled by doubt about anything. He rarely even vacillated, though he
could and did admit error when it concerned his F.B.I. His agents did not share
this view; to them the aura of certainty was impenetrable. Among the apocryphal
stories Mr. Powers tells is one about Hoover's announcing the death of an agent
in a shoot-out. The agent was in fact only wounded. His buddies, they claim,
drew straws to decide who should visit the hospital and bring the necessary
credibility to the Director's words. ''Because Hoover used the margins of memos
for his comments,'' Mr. Powers continues, ''he became irritated whenever the
typist failed to leave enough room. Once, when the margins got too narrow, he
scrawled 'Watch the borders!' His puzzled lieutenants put the bureau offices
near Mexico and Canada on alert.'' BUT not all such stories are apocryphal. Mr.
Powers gives testimony from two agents who entered the F.B.I. in the 1960's that
tells a great deal about the dangers of Hoover's power - to his agency and in
the end to himself. The agents were thoroughly indoctrinated in the legend of
Hoover's life, one he had built up for decades not only inside the F.B.I. but in
Hollywood and in the press. The culmination of their indoctrination was a
meeting with Hoover. They were carefully instructed not to let their eyes wander
from his or let their voices quiver or stand around with their hands in their
pockets (''Deviates do that,'' they were told) and they were given the choice of
three greetings they might use, with no variations allowed. Finally they were
cautioned not to look down, because the 5-foot-9-inch Hoover ''occasionally . .
. enjoys standing on a little box when he greets people in his office. Of
course, it's just a small one, only six inches high. Pretend you never even
notice it! Not long ago we had a new agent who for some reason just couldn't
keep his eyes off it. He was fired.''

It was always dangerous to become elevated over Hoover; even Presidents found
that out. For agents it could be disastrous. Consider the case of Melvin Purvis,
the man generally credited with the tracking down and killing of John Dillinger
and Pretty Boy Floyd. When the credit began to make Purvis famous, Hoover sent
inspectors to Purvis's Chicago office who wrote damning reports about him.
Hoover kept up the pressure for years until Purvis finally resigned in 1935.
Hoover then used the F.B.I.'s power to prevent Purvis from getting a series of
jobs, from work in the movie industry to a position on a Senate staff. Purvis
remained fanatically loyal to Hoover, apparently never realizing what the bureau
was doing to him. But when he finally shot himself in 1960, Hoover's staff
recommended that he not send a letter to Purvis's family, and the Director wrote
''Right'' on the bottom of the staff memorandum.

Hoover acquired bachelor's and master's degrees in law at George Washington
University. He remained a wily lawyer all his life, particularly adept at
finding Federal jurisdiction for his agents when he wanted it, and not when he
did not. When he wished to protect his F.B.I. he would deny that it was anything
but a law enforcement agency, confined to the investigation of Federal crime.
Hence it took the vigor of both President Kennedy and his brother Robert, the
Attorney General, to drag Hoover's agents to the attack against organized crime,
and the determination of President Johnson to energize the F.B.I. in the
enforcement of civil rights laws. And no President or Attorney General
succeeded, while Hoover lived, in entwining the F.B.I. in the thankless task of
enforcing the drug laws.

Yet he stood ready to answer a President's request for the most personal
information about anybody, and allowed himself absolute jurisdiction to
anticipate what information a President might in future want about anybody - a
wide investigative swath indeed. How far this authority could carry him was made
clear by the revelation in the 60's that he had electronically eavesdropped on
the pillow talk of suspected subversives and even on that of Martin Luther King
Jr. And he assumed the right to disseminate his findings to whomever he would,
for his own ends. HOOVER determined early on never to collaborate with other
agencies in the collection or the dissemination of information. His agents would
collect all and advise headquarters of all, and he would decide what to
distribute and to whom. Since he could not tolerate an independent intelligence
in the bureau, the rest followed - a torrent of information came his way for him
to pass on as he chose, with only the broadest and least specific evaluations.
With unchallenged responsibility for domestic security, and with agents acting
as legal attaches at American embassies throughout the world (and in World War
II also running our agents in South America) he was able to flood his Presidents
and attorneys general, and others in and out of government, with an incessant
flow of unevaluated information from ''reliable sources'' (from hard observation
to tittle-tattle) for them to use as they might wish. The proviso was that
F.B.I. files must remain securely closed to all, including Presidents and
Congress. Such a structure gives every opportunity for the misuse of information
against individuals but very little opportunity for its rational use in policy
formation. It does, of course, excellently protect the agency's rear. When
disaster strikes the informant can say ''But I told you so,'' and can usually
find a memorandum that at least hinted at the disaster to come. In the result,
what was ''known'' and when is never really known.

These services he performed for eight Presidents and for countless politicians
and friends. His files were a threat and were seen as a threat. Some of Hoover's
most closely held private files were destroyed immediately on his death but,
with help from the Freedom of Information Act, Mr. Powers has unearthed others
that make one understand even a President's hesitation to cross Hoover. For
instance, information he had about President Kennedy goes a long way toward
explaining his disdain for Kennedy, who obviously did not fit Hoover's
standards. First, the Director knew one of the Kennedy family's deepest secrets,
that the President had Addison's disease, severe allergies and crippling back
pain that kept him on powerful antipain drugs during his early days in the White
House. Hoover also had transcripts of a young Kennedy, during World War II,
talking in bed with a former Miss Denmark whom Hoover suspected of being a Nazi
spy (she wasn't). Then he found that during 1961 and early 1962 Judith Campbell,
introduced to the President by Frank Sinatra, had been talking often with
Kennedy on the telephone and visiting the White House. He then discovered, Mr.
Powers writes, that she ''was the mistress not only of Kennedy, but of mobsters
Sam Giancana and John Roselli.'' Hoover confronted the President with his
information, and Kennedy's telephone calls and the woman's visits to the White
House stopped abruptly.

When the terrain was safe, he would confront and defeat the Presidents he
served. Coolidge, Hoover, Roosevelt and Eisenhower all supported the growth of
his power and that of his F.B.I., and in consequence attracted his unswerving
loyalty. Truman and Kennedy did not, and he schemed against them politically -
and successfully. And when Hoover saw Mr. Nixon's demands that the F.B.I.
investigate Daniel Ellsberg in connection with the leak of the ''Pentagon
papers'' in 1971 as a threat to the F.B.I., Hoover, against Mr. Nixon's orders,
left the field to John Ehrlichman and his ''plumbers'' - G. Gordon Liddy and
Howard Hunt among them - whose unprofessional illegalities the F.B.I. would
never have duplicated. HOOVER would have served President Reagan well. Communism
was his Evil Empire too, the Soviet Union his Satan. He was the paradigmatic
fundamentalist fighting for what he saw as traditional American values - the
values of the plantation. In relation to blacks and civil rights this became
most clear. He did not dislike blacks; in their place they were fine. Hence when
Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General he most despised, pressed him for advice on
how many black agents were in the F.B.I. he could truthfully answer ''five,''
though all five served as his personal servants, paid from F.B.I.
appropriations.

He recognized that black civil rights organizations and leaders were not
Communist front organizations; but they, like children, could be unduly
influenced by ''outside Communist agitators'' who required the F.B.I.'s
pervasive investigation and the launching of counterintelligence operations
against them. His beliefs justified intruding into Martin Luther King's bedrooms
and even telling Cardinal Spellman to caution the Pope not to meet with King
lest the Pontiff be embarrassed (they met and the Pope wasn't). It also
justified an F.B.I. informer giving the Chicago police a map of the premises
before their 1969 raid on a house where the Black Panther party leader Fred
Hampton was sleeping, a raid in which Hampton and an associate, Mark Clark, were
gunned down. In Hoover's view blacks were also lecherous and therefore a threat
to white womanhood. The actress Jean Seberg and her former husband were hounded
to death because she became pregnant by a black lover. Seberg had fallen into
the net Hoover spread for the Black Panthers when she met her lover, a North
African who had vague ties to the Panthers in the United States. His
hand-written notation (he reserved blue ink for himself) on an F.B.I. memorandum
that ''King is a 'tom cat' with obsessive degenerate sexual urges'' says it all.

By the time he launched his Cointelpro (counterintelligence program) operations
against the black radicals, Hoover was beginning to slip in power and in public
esteem. In some ways his decline has tragic dimensions, for it came from
arrogant confidence that derived directly from his earlier successes. His first
Cointelpro was set up against the Communist Party of the United States in the
30's, and it succeeded in shattering the old left in this country. Then in 1964,
goaded by President Johnson, Hoover began another such operation against the Ku
Klux Klan, and in a short time the F.B.I. had 20 percent of the Klan membership
enrolled as informers. That Cointelpro was invaluable in Federal efforts to
crush white racial violence in the South. Then Johnson himself became a factor
in the downfall of Hoover, for he began demanding that the F.B.I. discover the
''conspiracy'' behind the urban riots of the late 60's and the protests against
the Vietnam war, and Hoover dutifully set up Cointelpros against the black
radicals and the New Left.

Between 1968 and 1971 the F.B.I. ran 271 counterintelligence operations against
the New Left, and some of the ''information'' the bureau surreptitiously
disseminated to the news media, local police, university officials, parents,
whoever, sounds suspiciously like that it used against the black radicals. The
New Leftists were not only accused of disloyalty to the nation and conspiracy to
destroy its institutions, but of all kinds of imaginable sexual deviation. But
the game ended on March 8, 1971, when someone broke into the F.B.I. office in
Media, Pa., and took all its files dealing with domestic security. When they
were published the public uproar over the F.B.I.'s conduct stunned Hoover into a
return to prudence, and all Cointelpros were ordered closed down in April.

In ''Secrecy and Power,'' Richard Gid Powers has to struggle not to let Hoover's
defects of character overwhelm appreciation of his formidable capacities and
contributions. Mr. Powers avoids preoccupation with the question of whether
Hoover's 44-year close and daily association with the handsome Clyde Tolson was
overtly homosexual; but he sketches the details of their working days and
holidays together, and concludes that their relationship was ''spousal'' and
''so close, so enduring, and so affectionate that it took the place of marriage
for both bachelors.'' To me it seems clear that sexual sublimation accounts in
part for the astonishing and unwavering energy Hoover dedicated to the virtuous
task he saw himself as privileged to perform - the creation of a great law
enforcement agency. THE F.B.I. is indeed a great agency, now serving this
country well. With fewer than 9,000 agents it effectively fulfills a great range
of Federal law enforcement tasks; and its strong foundations were laid by
Hoover. Through the training academy at Quantico, Va., Federal, state and local
law enforcement officers are groomed for senior positions. The bureau's Uniform
Crime Reports give some insight into the ebb and flow of crime. The crime
laboratory serves the police forces of the country. And now other functions of
collaboration with, and service to, other police agencies give pre-eminence to
the F.B.I.

Mr. Nixon got it right: ''The greatness of Edgar Hoover will remain inseparable
from the greatness of the organization he created and gave his whole life to
building, the Federal Bureau of Investigation.'' And Mr. Nixon knew Hoover well.
It was Hoover who had fed him information to use against Alger Hiss, and they
remained close throughout Hoover's life. Nevertheless, Mr. Nixon once tried to
fire Hoover, who had been openly opposing the President's plans, threatening his
re-election. A breakfast for the two of them was arranged at the White House
expressly to allow Mr. Nixon to persuade Hoover to retire; it ended in Hoover's
acquiring the increase in legal officers he wished for at American embassies
overseas (not a topic on Mr. Nixon's agenda) and with Hoover's directorship of
the F.B.I. even more secure.

The F.B.I. building named in Hoover's honor in Washington captures the point. It
is right and proper that it be so named. It is a looming and powerful presence;
and it is ugly. Astonishment remains that a man so insensitive to the sweeps of
cultural change in this country can have played so pivotal a role for so long.
It is a fascinating story; Richard Powers tells it precisely and well.

HOOVER THE RUTHLESS, HOOVER THE RESPONSIBLE

One book truly changed the career of Richard Gid Powers. It was in 1970 that he
first read J. Edgar Hoover's 1958 anti-Communist manifesto, ''Masters of
Deceit,'' which mixed history and comic-book melodrama to detail the sins of the
Communist Party. ''It was a potboiler,'' Mr. Powers said. ''I was intrigued by
his use of the popular stereotypes of evil drawn from the entertainment world -
science fiction, horror stories, detective entertainment - to communicate the
evil of the Communists.'' During the years since, Mr. Powers, a historian who
specializes in popular culture, has been consumed with the life of Mr. Hoover
and the agency forever linked with his name, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.

In 1983, Mr. Powers published his first book, ''G-Men: Hoover's F.B.I. in
American Popular Culture.'' It reviewed the bureau's decades of manipulation of
news organizations and the film industry to create a public image of an
all-powerful, incorruptible national police.

''Once that book was finished, I decided that what I needed to do was get inside
the man who was most responsible for producing that image,'' Mr. Powers said in
a telephone interview from his Brooklyn home. ''Hoover was in the very midst of
the combat over the most important issues of the first three-quarters of the
20th century -Communism and racial justice.

Historians are always going to have to confront J. Edgar Hoover.'' In preparing
his new book, Mr. Powers said, he received extensive cooperation from the
F.B.I., even though its current managers are known to be uncomfortable with the
tarnished Hoover legacy. ''In the last four or five years the bureau has really
been forthright and outgoing,'' he said. ''I found no problem.'' His sole
difficulty, he added, was with retired agents who seemed to believe that
''anything that diminishes Hoover diminishes them. As I understand it some of
the retired agents put me on the enemies list.''

Not surprisingly, Mr. Powers's studies have left him divided on the Hoover
legend. A ruthless man who was willing to bend and even break the law, Hoover
was still responsible for the creation of a great American institution, and he
kept it independent. ''From the beginning to the end there were conflicting
strains in Hoover, of idealism but also of an almost savage sense of
self-preservation,'' Mr. Powers said. ''I don't think he will be understood as a
sheer ogre. But the final assessment of him will be less than favorable. As time
goes on he will be seen as a complex and significant figure who tested the outer
limits of permissible political behavior.''

PHILIP SHENON

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of J.Edgar Hoover (AP); photo of J.Edgar Hoover (The National
Archives/NYT/Paul Hosefros) (page 36); photo of Richard Gid Powers (page 36);
photo of J. Edgar Hoover and Richard M. Nixon (UPI)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

How to Choose Future President

BYLINE: By JAMES DAVID BARBER; James David Barber, professor of political
science at Duke University, is author of several books on the Presidency.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 633 words

DATELINE: DURHAM, N.C.


Today's starkest irony is the gap between reporting the President-we've-got and
the Presidents-to-be.

All sorts of newly wise observers -out to lunch for six years - now tell us that
Ronald Reagan is not in charge, independent and factual, but rather is a
President who has delegated the Presidency, who has bought whatever scripts his
aides have handed him and who could not have cared less whether he was speaking
fact or fiction. True, but late. Where were these pundits when we needed them,
back when we the people were trying to figure out who ought to be President?

There are those who blame the modern Presidency for the failure of modern
Presidents. From Lyndon B. Johnson's deadly obsession with Vietnam to Mr.
Reagan's loose-jointed side-step from what he swore to do at his Inauguration -
to ''take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed'' -Presidents have
disappointed us.

Has this been due to the office or the man? What we keep forgetting is that the
man makes the office. Within very large limits, the President can organize his
system as he wants to -and that is what each one has done. It was Mr. Reagan's
responsibility to shape and populate the White House team. Who the staff members
were and what they did were up to him, not to some abstract ''Presidency.''

Which brings the problem back to the character, world view and style of the
President and the overriding importance of assessing those qualities before we
pick the next one. The task is not without its difficulties. Political
predictions are risky and uncertain. But figuring out how a President will apply
in the White House the political habits he has been operating with for decades
is not that hard.

In the fall of 1980, I described Mr. Reagan as a passive-positive type -that is,
a person who exudes optimism but puts out little energy. I argued that this was
the correct reason to worry about him - not his supposed ideology or stands on
the issues of the day. The danger of the Reagan type in the Presidency, I said,
''is that he will cave in to pressure''; that ''tragedy for the passive-positive
type flows from his inordinate need to hang on to friends as he drifts toward
disaster.'' The danger in Mr. Reagan, in short, was not that he would generate
some massive lurch to the right but that his friends would do him in.

Such rough predictions do not require psychoanalysis or other mysterious
methods. What they do require is an insistence that we bring to bear
Presidential criteria when we pick a President, based on straightforward
understanding of what a President has to do and how similar characters in that
office have met their challenges. The Reagan debacle, from the ''effectiveness''
which gave us history's biggest deficit to the collapse of American political
integrity in the world scene, ought to underline that need.

Yet in the back pages of the newspapers and magazines, stories about ''Campaign
'88'' are now appearing. And here we go again. Forget Presidential
qualifications. Instead, how is he doing in the polls? How's his image-making
going? What are his one-liners and his taste in Iowa pizza? Will he titillate
teen-agers in New Hampshire as he traipses about from speech to speech? And
supposedly most important, how will he do in the next primary compared with how
folks now think he will do?

In short, we are supposed to set aside what we now know about Presidents in
office and focus instead on the fun and games of campaign politics. That is how
we have wound up again and again with Presidents who have mastered campaigning
but brought into the very center of the Government a fatally flawed set of
political habits. One wonders all over again: When will we ever learn to
evaluate Presidents, not after they have nearly done us in but before they win
the job?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

College Tuition Is Not-So-Simple Arithmetic

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 529 words


To the Editor:

Secretary of Education William J. Bennett is at it again. In ''Our Greedy
Colleges'' (Op-Ed, Feb. 18), he takes colleges to task for ''blithely''
continuing to increase tuition at rates that outstrip inflation, motivated by
greed and by what he terms increases in Federal financial aid in recent years.

His article is more crafty than convincing, more fiddling than forthright. To
begin, Mr. Bennett's argument that availability of student aid encourages
colleges to push up tuition at excessive rates is incredible.

In the 1970's, Federal funding of student aid increased significantly -by at
least a factor of three - and tuitions fell behind inflation. In the present
decade, Federal funding of student aid has stalled, while tuitions have
increased faster than inflation. This pattern is just the reverse of that
predicted by Mr. Bennett.

His assertion that Federal expenditures for student aid have increased greatly
in real terms since 1980 is simply wrong. Programs generally available to
college students under Title IV (Pell grants, college work study, guaranteed
student loans, etc.) are, in the aggregate, up less than 10 percent in real
terms over the period from 1980-81 to 1985-86. And if one counts in specially
directed aid programs - including Social Security benefits that have been
eliminated by this Administration and Vietnam veterans programs that are winding
down - total Federal student aid is down nearly 14 percent in real terms over
this same period.

Federal aid to students would be down much more if the Reagan Administration had
achieved its budget objectives. Repeated efforts to gut aid programs have been
resisted year after year by Congress, which is where credit for present levels
of Federal student aid properly belongs.

As for tuition, Mr. Bennett compares presumed tuition increases of 6 percent to
8 percent with inflation during 1986 of ''about 1.8 percent,'' a number that is
apparently a reference to the Consumer Price Index. This is a measure of
inflation as seen by the average middle-income consumer, defined in terms of a
representative market basket of consumer goods and services. It weighs energy
costs heavily and rose little in 1986 because of the sharp drop in energy costs.

But the Consumer Price Index and its cost of bacon and gasoline have little
relevance to the costs borne by colleges and universities, which are dominated
by compensation of faculties and staffs. A better measure of changes in these
costs is the Higher Education Price Index, which increased in 1986 by 4.4
percent. This measure of inflation, which has risen by more than the Consumer
Price Index in every year since 1982, is a more appropriate and sensible measure
of cost changes for comparison with tuition changes.

Driven largely by the needs of colleges to restore real salary levels ravaged by
a dozen years of uncontrolled inflation, tuitions have increased faster than
inflation, however defined, in recent years. But, obviously, there is much more
to this story than Mr. Bennett would have us believe.

PAUL E. GRAY
President, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology
  Cambridge, Mass., Feb. 27, 1987

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: MONDAY, MARCH 9, 1987

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1075 words



INTERNATIONAL    A2-11



AIDS has hit hard in Western Europe in the last year or so. Some 4,000 people
there are reported to have AIDS, and experts expect the disease to become a
major public health emergency, as it has in the United States.

    Page A1



A free syringe exchange plan, first adopted by the Netherlands in 1985 to curb
hepatitis B infections among drug addicts, may become common elsewhere in Europe
as several countries strive to combat the spread of AIDS.    A9



Ethiopia's ties to Christianity are 1,600 years old, an 12 years of Marxist rule
seem barely to have dented that attachment. But religious leaders say the
Government has rendered the church powerless.    A1



A ferry's bow doors were likely open when it left its dock Friday, ferry
officials said. But they insisted that this was a standard procedure to
ventilate the lower decks.    A3



Prayers were offered in Zeebrugge, Belgium, on the first Sunday of the Lenten
season for the victims of the ferry disaster that left 51 people dead and 84
more missing and presumed dead within the ship's hull.    A3



Greece's leader accused Washington of favoring Turkey over his country, and he
threatened to close a Voice of America relay station unless what he said was an
imbalance was redressed.    A11



A Costa Rican protest to the U.S. is being considered since the Tower Commission
report showed that the United States violated an explicit prohibition on the
secret use of a Costa Rican airstrip by Nicaraguan rebels.     A6



In West Beirut, a clean-up drive was begun by city workers, aided by teen-agers
and supervised by Syrian soldiers, who wiped off political slogans and took down
street signs that rival militias had put up.    A2



'Consultative status' at the U.N. was denied to several groups recently.
Officials said that usually the more significant a group's work is, the more
likely it will offend a member nation and be refused admission.    A7

NATIONAL    A12-13, B6-7, B9, B14, D12

he push for early deployment of a rudimentary anti-missile system is speeding up
some areas of weapons research but hurting others and may delay long-term plans
for a defense system, leading anti-missile scientists say.    A1



Indictments in the Iran affair are expected and investigators working for the
special prosecutor are studying felony charges that could be brought against
current and former Government officials, law-enforcement officials say.    A1



The special prosecutor law that is being challenged in lawsuits by Lieut. Col.
Oliver L. North and Michael K. Deaver has come under quiet scrutiny by the
special court responsible for the law's operation and by a Senate subcommittee.
    A6



A U.S.-Japan trade showdown is imminent, perhaps the most serious conflict of
the postwar period, Government officials and many private analysts believe.
Frustrations have stiffened attitudes on both sides of the Pacific.    A1



Transit subsidies don't help the poor who are the most dependent on local
transit systems, say some critics, who urge changes in the law that set up the
subsidies.    A1



Biotechnology firms' legal rights to market advances are being disputed in a
number of lawsuits. The litigation over genetic engineering patents could
determine the fate of dozens of companies, experts say.    A1



Recent racial incidents on campus are creating a furor at the University of
Michigan, which has long been known for social tolerance. The situation at the
school is ''ready to explode,'' one student said.     A12



Problems at S.M.U. have shaken Dallas and its business leadership. The school's
illegal football recruiting scandal and the possible involvement of some local
politicians have made the matter a local fixation.    A13



Arizona's Governor has made news consistently since he took office two months
ago, taking on local newspapers, government bureaucrats and others, including
some fellow Republicans in the Legislature.    A12



The chance of becoming a victim of violent crime has been calculated by the
Government's National Crime Survey, which says 83 percent of 12-year-old
children will be victims or intended victims at least once in their lifetimes.
    A13



Sadness has turned to anger at CBS News, where 215 people were dismissed on
Friday. That anger is aimed at Laurence A. Tisch, chief executive officer of
CBS, but he said he did not order the cuts.    C14



Can G.M. turn itself around? Roger B. Smith, General Motors' beleaguered
chairman, has a good chance of succeeding, many auto industry analysts say. But,
they add, his road could be bumpy.    D1



WASHINGTON TALK    B14



Scandal snarls a bureaucracy
News from shouting matches

REGIONAL    B1-5



An 'Adopt-a-Monument' program is putting 20 public monuments in New York City up
for private adoption so that the works, almost abandoned by the public treasury,
can survive an increasingly hostile environment.    A1



New Yorkers flocked to the outdoors to revel in record-breaking temperatures.
But today's forecast calls for a dramatic drop in temperatures, with wind,
clouds and the chance of rain or wet snow.    B1



Governor Kean gives mixed signals as he travels outside New Jersey to promote
his vision of his party's future. He says he wants to help shape the Republican
agenda but insists he will not run for national office next year.    B1



The Connecticut Veterans Home and Hospital, whose tradition of caring for the
state's war veterans began in the Civil War, is surrounded these days by
questions about its role in the post-Vietnam era.    B2



An A.F.L.-C.I.O. dispute with Coors, the Colorado brewery, has moved into the
New York metropolitan area since Coors began distributing its beer in New York
and New Jersey in mid-February.    B4



Stand-up comedy on the Iran scandal, nicknamed ''Gippergate,'' has brought White
House politics to the forefront on Broadway stages and smoky comedy dives all
across Manhattan.    C11



A commission in disarray

    B2


Reporters lampoon politicians

    B3


Long Island man seized in killing

    B5



Police compare priest slayings

    B5


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPUS RACE INCIDENTS DISQUIET U. OF MICHIGAN

BYLINE: By ISABEL WILKERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1305 words

DATELINE: ANN ARBOR, Mich., March 7


As college officials around the country try to stem what they perceive as
worsening racial tensions, racial incidents at the University of Michigan are
creating a furor among students and administrators on a campus long known for
social tolerance.

Two weeks ago, the campus radio station here was shut down after a student disk
jockey broadcast racist jokes that Harold Shapiro, the university's president,
termed ''painful'' and ''a cause for grief.''

In January, a flier declaring ''open hunting season'' on blacks was slipped into
a lounge where a group of black women were meeting. And a wooden shanty built on
campus to protest the South African Government's policy of racial separation has
been knocked down repeatedly and burned once. It was leveled again a few weeks
ago.

Earlier this week, hundreds of people packed a special hearing on campus called
by state legislators investigating the incidents. There, minority students told
of being spat upon, taunted with racial slurs or threats of lynching, and
otherwise attacked.

'Ready to Explode'

''What you have here,'' Anthony Henderson, a graduate student, told the
legislators, ''is a situation that's ready to explode.''

Students and administrators say they are confounded by the assaults involving
some of the nation's most enlightened young people and occurring on a campus
where, less than a generation ago, students staged frequent demonstrations over
everything from civil rights to the Vietnam War.

''I think of these things happening in the South, not in Ann Arbor,'' said Brian
Stirling, a freshman, who is white. ''But if they're doing it here, it has to be
worse other places.''

In recent months, racial incidents have been reported at colleges across the
country. Last October at The Citadel, a military academy in Charleston, S.C.,
five white cadets clad in white sheets and hoods invaded a black cadet's room at
night, shouted racial obscenities and burned a paper cross.

Trustee's Words Give Offense

The following week, a crowd of white students attacked several black students
outside a dormitory at the Amherst campus of the University of Massachusetts.
The melee, somehow related to the victory of the New York Mets in the World
Series, left 10 people injured, including a black student who was beaten
unconscious.

And last month, a member of the board of trustees at Wellesley College in
Wellesley, Mass., resigned amid campus outrage over a class lecture in which she
made comments that were construed as racist.

Though no one keeps statistics on such incidents, officials at the colleges and
experts in race relations say they seem part of a growing pattern of bigotry and
animosity toward minority students on campus.

In a recent survey of black students at 16 predominantly white colleges, 4 out
of 5 blacks reported experiencing some form of racial discrimination. And the
rate of such incidents was as high at schools in the Midwest and on the coasts
as it was at those in the South, according to the survey.

Feeling Unwelcome

''There is a consistent pattern of students feeling alienated and unwelcome,''
said Dr. Walter Allen, a sociologist at Michigan and the author of the study.
''The experiences range from unkind words to physical assaults.''

Minority students and faculty members across the country say the incidents are
evidence of longstanding racial unease. In part, they blame cultural
insensitivity for the conflicts, along with resentment over affirmative action
programs and a decline in black student enrollment in the past decade that sets
black students apart at predominantly white schools.

According to the Federal Education Department's Office of Civil Rights, blacks
in 1972 constituted 3 percent of the students in four-year institutions. The
figure rose to a peak of 10.3 percent in 1976, but by 1982, the latest year for
which figures are available, the proportion had declined to 9.6 percent. Blacks
make up 5.3 percent of the 34,000 students at the University of Michigan, as
against 7.2 percent in 1976.

Some students say that because of their small numbers, many black students
unintentionally widen the gulf between racial groups when they socialize with
other blacks and observe voluntary color lines in cafeterias and fraternities.

Competitive Atmosphere

Others point to a highly competitive atmosphere that pits students against each
other. ''Students aren't as interested in social responsibility when it's not
going to get them a job,'' said Kurt Muenchow, a senior who is president of the
student body at Michigan.

College administrators are seeking ways to deal with the incidents and
underlying racial problems. At the University of Massachusetts, the chancellor,
Joseph Duffey, ordered a special investigation of the October melee, asked the
Hampshire County District Attorney to put a special investigator on the case and
proposed annual seminars on racial tolerance.

At The Citadel, the intruders who harassed the black cadet were punished, though
not expelled. The black victim resigned the academy and has filed suit against
the school. And the Justice Department is now considering the case for
prosecution.

At Michigan, Dr. Shapiro, the university president, said he would seek to bring
more minority students and faculty to the campus. He also shut down the campus
radio station Feb. 19 and set up a special commission to investigate the Feb. 4
broadcast of racial jokes after a black student played a tape of the show to the
university's board of regents.

'It Almost Slipped By'

The student disk jockey, Ted Sevransky, a sophomore, was fired from his
nonpaying job after charges that he encouraged callers to make racist jokes on
the air. He said in a public apology earlier this week, ''I recognize now that
it was my poor judgment and poor taste alone that were to blame for this
offensive incident.''

But black students say they are equally disturbed by the apparent indifference
of Mr. Sevransky's listeners. ''It almost slipped by without being noticed,''
said Michael Walker, a senior economics major there and member of the campus's
newly formed United Coalition Against Racism. ''People sat and listened to the
show without realizing it was wrong.''

Despite the attention the incident received, ''some white students still can't
understand why things are being blown out of proportion over a few harmless
jokes that most people are guilty of laughing at anyway,'' he said.

At Michigan, black students are not the only ones singled out for attacks. Two
years ago, swastikas were scrawled on the house of a predominantly Jewish
sorority and the library stall of a Chinese-American graduate student was
defaced with death threats and racial slurs.

''I'd never had my life threatened,'' said the graduate student, Kevin Scott
Wong. ''It's not a hurt feeling. It's a sick, nauseous feeling.''

Alumni and graduate students said they barely recognize the campus they
frequented 15 or 20 years ago when, they said, the incidents would not have
happened. ''It's really scary,'' said Susan Ataman, a white graduate student who
was an undergraduate here in the 1970's. ''It's a totally different campus from
what I remember. People were much more tolerant. I guess it was a hangover from
the '60's.''

Black students say they are hoping the overt incidents will make others more
aware of an underlying hostility they sense every day. ''It's an aura,'' said
Jason Dotson, a senior economics major at Michigan. ''You can feel the intensity
in the classroom. You see it in the teacher's eyes. You see it in the students'
faces. You're always under scrutiny.''

''These are people who basically hold your future in their hands, but they don't
want you here,'' he continued.''It's hard enough to make it in this school
without that added pressure.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of University of Michigan students; Photo of students addressing
special hearing investigating racial incidents (NYT/Peter Yates)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AGING CONNECTICUT VETERANS' HOME IS FAULTED FOR BEING BEHIND THE TIMES

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. MADDEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: ROCKY HILL, Conn.


The Connecticut Veterans Home and Hospital, whose tradition of caring for the
state's war veterans began in the Civil War, is surrounded these days by
questions about its role in the post-Vietnam era.

In recent weeks, four state agencies have criticized the state-run institution
for such things as poor control over the residents' savings accounts, allowing
some residents to administer medication to other residents and the lack of an
alcohol-treatment program.

Gov. William A. O'Neill has formed a committee - which first met last week - to
study the institution's long-term needs and future use, and a committee of the
General Assembly is considering a separate inquiry.

To some critics, the very organization of the home shows that it is oriented
toward an earlier generation of veteran. The home is set up much like a World
War II Army unit. Its residents are assigned to barracks and divided into eight
platoons, each of which is overseen by a resident designated as an unofficial
sergeant.

A bar in the basement of one building is known as the Foxhole; the veterans must
have passes to drink soda or the 50-cent glasses of beer and wine that are
served there four hours each day.

Yet three floors above is Fellowship House, where alcoholic residents are
allowed to live in private rooms if they do not drink and they attend daily
meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous. Although state officials say 80 percent of the
residents have been diagnosed as alcoholic, the home has no formal
alcoholism-treatment program.

'The Tail End of the Parade'

Others see more direct evidence of generational change. Most of the residents -
the 314 men in the home and the 301 men and 9 women in the separate hospital -
served in World Wars I and II or the Korean War. But their numbers are
declining, while Vietnam veterans have begun to appear.

''We are dealing with the tail end of the parade,'' said the acting commandant,
David B. McQuillan. ''But that's all right, if we also care for the front of the
next parade.''

State Representative Paul Gionfriddo, a Middletown Democrat and co-chairman of
the Governor's study committee, said his panel hoped to ''define an appropriate
level of care'' to meet the needs of a new generation of veterans. The current
operation, he said, ''seems not to be so relevant to the Vietnam veteran.''

Some veterans' groups have proposed using part of the home as a halfway house,
where younger veterans who otherwise might be homeless could live while finding
jobs in the community.

Finance Officer Arrested

Mr. McQuillan and other officials who run the home and hospital, a cluster of
well-maintained brick buildings on a hilltop in this suburb south of Hartford,
said that they welcomed ideas for improvement, but that they were proud of the
care and treatment.

The scrutiny of the home and hospital began last May after a finance officer was
suspended. He was later charged with forgery and the theft of $16,000 from
veterans' savings accounts. Officials at the institution said they discovered
the forgeries and turned the case over to prosecutors.

After a series of stories about the home and hospital by The Hartford Courant,
several state agencies recommended changes ranging from tighter control over the
dispensing of medication to establishing an alcohol-abuse treatment program.

Much of the publicity has focused on the apparent tolerance of residents'
drinking problems. Though the home bans alcoholic beverages outside the Foxhole,
it operates a bus that takes residents into Rocky Hill for shopping and errands,
and officials acknowledge that some veterans do their shopping at a liquor
store. They then drink in a park known as ''the Weeds'' before catching the bus
back to the home.

A Budget of $20 Million

''We have tried to find an acceptable alternative to having men climbing over
the fence and going into town and getting into trouble,'' Mr. McQuillan said.

But Chris Panioto, chairman of the Connecticut council of the Vietnam Veterans
of America, said, ''It's ludicrous to have additional staff and money for
alcohol abuse, while continuing to have a bar in the facility and very lenient
control over what residents drink.''

The home and hospital opened on 247 acres here in 1940, replacing a home founded
in Darien in 1864 by Benjamin Fitch, a Civil War general, to care for soldiers
and their children.

Officials said the institution, with an annual budget of $20 million, fills a
need not met by Veterans Administration hospitals, which generally treat only
service-related ailments. #27 Vietnam Veterans The home and hospital is open to
honorably discharged veterans who served at least 90 days in time of war and
entered the service from Connecticut, or lived at least two years in the state
before admission. Of the state's 103,000 Vietnam veterans, 27 are at the
institution.

Ray Feeney, a World War II veteran who has lived in the home almost 10 years,
said, ''They treat us real good.'' He said criticism of the place was
''over-exaggerated.''

Veterans' groups, however, have criticized the institution for billing residents
when they voluntarily leave the home and for filing claims against the estates
of those who die at the home or the hospital. Mr. McQuillan said that because
many of the residents have limited resources, only about 20 percent of the cost
per day - $89 for the home and $121.72 for the hospital - is ever collected.

''With the resources we have, we are doing a remarkably good job,'' Mr.
McQuillan said. ''We are not going to let it get us down,'' he said of the
criticism and the studies.

But Mr. Panioto said, ''The state has to look to the future. We just want to
make sure that in 20 years, when it's needed by our generation, that facility
will be there and addresses some of the problems that we face.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo (NYT/Steve Miller)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DIRECTORS GUILD HONORS STONE FOR 'PLATOON'

BYLINE: BY ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 421 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, March 8


Oliver Stone won the 1986 Directors Guild of America award Saturday night for
''Platoon,'' a movie partially based on his own experiences as an infantryman in
Vietnam.

The guild award made Mr. Stone the front-runner for best director at the Academy
Awards March 30. Only three times since the guild award was created in 1948 has
that award's winner failed to win the Oscar.

After being introduced as the fifth of five nominees, Mr. Stone barely made it
back to his seat at the Sheraton Premiere Hotel in Universal City before being
announced as the winner. ''This is really a Cinderella story,'' he said. ''I'm
just honored to be in this room with the giants of my youth.''

Elia Kazan, the particular giant whose ''Viva Zapata'' inspired Mr. Stone's
other 1986 movie, ''Salvador,'' received the guild's highest honor, the D. W.
Griffith Award for lifetime achievement. Mr. Kazan, whose movies include ''A
Streetcar Named Desire,'' ''Panic in the Streets,'' ''Gentleman's Agreement,''
''East of Eden'' and ''On the Waterfront,'' accepted his award at a dinner held
simultaneously in New York.

The Directors Guild has always had a heavily male orientation. Of its 8,200
members, 4,667 are full directors, and of those 378, roughly 8 percent, are
women. The male bulwark crumbled a bit this year. The actress Lee Grant won the
most prestigious television award, the prize for a dramatic special program, for
her direction of the television movie ''Nobody's Child,'' which starred Marlo
Thomas as a woman who grew up in a mental hospital. It was the first time a
woman has won for any prime-time series or movie. Catlin Adams won the award for
daytime dramatic shows for an ABC ''After School Special,'' ''Wanted: The
Perfect Guy,'' and Perry Miller Adato took home the documentary prize for
''Eugene O'Neill: The Glory of Ghosts.''

The guild's membership is gradually changing as women are hired for such
entry-level jobs as production assistant and second assistant director. Of the
166 production assistants in the guild, 121 are women.

The other nominees for best picture were Woody Allen for ''Hannah and Her
Sisters,'' James Ivory for ''A Room With a View,'' Rob Reiner for ''Stand by
Me'' and Randa Haines for ''Children of a Lesser God.'' Ms. Haines is only the
second woman to earn a nomination as director of a feature film.

Other television awards went to Terry Hughes for the ''Isn't It Romantic?''
episode of ''Golden Girls'' and Will MacKenzie for the ''Atomic Shakespeare''
segment of ''Moonlighting.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AND IRAN CONTROVERSY: REACTIONS ARE MIXED IN AKRON AND NASHVILLE;
HOW THE PRESIDENT ADDRESSED PUBLIC IS AN ISSUE IN OHIO

BYLINE: By PHIL GAILEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 787 words

DATELINE: AKRON, Ohio, March 9


David Bersnak, a 37-year-old unemployed rubber company worker, did not vote for
Ronald Reagan in 1980 or 1984, but he said he had developed ''some respect for
the man'' and thought the President was doing a ''fair job'' in managing the
economy.

Now, after following the Iran arms affair for three months, Mr. Bersnak has
revised his opinion of the President. ''I think the Iran thing may turn out to
be worse than Nixon in Watergate,'' he said. ''I don't think he's telling the
truth about not knowing what was going on. If he didn't know, then he's
incompetent and should step down.''

Like a number of other Akron residents interviewed in the last two days, Mr.
Bersnak said he was not bothered as much by Mr. Reagan's efforts to trade arms
for American hostages in Lebanon as by the way the President had handled the
issue in his public statements.

''At first he denied everything,'' said Mr. Bersnak, who is dipping into his
savings to go back to college after being laid off from two jobs in the last
four months. ''Then he admitted it. I think he was waiting to see if it was
going to heat up or go away. You can't believe him anymore.''

Polly Crouse, a 43-year-old housewife who is a Republican, is troubled by the
Iran affair, but said she was pulling for the President's political recovery.
''I feel the President did what he had to do to bring the hostages home,'' she
said, pausing to scold her dog, Cramer, for killing a groundhog. ''I think that
was his primary concern, but I think he should have been wiser in choosing his
subordinates.''

'I Want Him to Finish His Term'

Mrs. Crouse said she was more supportive of the President than was her husband,
a banker who is a Republican precinct captain. ''Maybe I'm making excuses, but I
see him aging and the surgery he had may have been a factor,'' she said. ''To
what extent he was involved, I'm not sure, but I want him to finish his term. I
don't want another weakened President.''

Another Republican, Thomas Reymann, president of the Atlantic Foundry, a small
manufacturer of steel products, said the arms deal with Iran was ''a gross
mistake,'' but added that he was becoming disenchanted with Mr. Reagan even
before the Iran controversy broke.

''I felt like I was seeing a little more form than substance,'' said the
56-year-old businessman, a self-described ''middle-of-the-road'' Republican who
admits to being disturbed by the President's apparent inability to deal with
Federal budget deficits.

His nephew, David Reymann, a 47-year-old shop steward at Local 856 of the United
Automobile Workers, said he disliked former President Jimmy Carter but could
never bring himself to vote for Mr. Reagan. Even so, he strongly backed Mr.
Reagan's tough posture in foreign policy, including the decision to launch a
bombing raid on Libya as punishment for that country's support of terrorism.

''I agree with going in with military force in certain situations, but being
sneaky is something else,'' said David Reymann. He said he snapped off the
television after hearing a few minutes of Mr. Reagan's speech last Wednesday,
which was in response to the critical findings of a special review board headed
by former Senator John G. Tower of Texas. ''He was being an actor again. He came
clean to the point he said he had made a mistake, but this thing still smells.''


Reagan 'Hasn't Come Clean'

George H. Miller, 54, a line foreman for the Ohio Edison Power Company, said
that in his opinion, Mr. Reagan ''hasn't come clean.'' But he said the Iran arms
sale was not the worst scandal of the Reagan Administration.

''I think the bombing of our marines in Beruit was out-and-out murder,'' he
said. ''We put them over there like sitting ducks to be murdered. That's the one
I can't forgive.''

David Bedell, a 38-year-old insurance agent who describes himself as an
independent with Republican leanings, said he could accept the arms deal with
Iran as a strategic gambit, but not as barter for hostages.

''I had the impression that everything was under control before all of this
happened,'' said Mr. Bedell, who twice voted for Mr. Reagan for President.

At Post 8487 of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, where the jukebox is loaded with
country music that, along with the whisky, offers solace to the growing number
of unemployed rubber workers, Bill Huff, the post commander, said he had heard
little about the Iran issue from patrons who were preoccupied with job layoffs.

''Every President makes mistakes in foreign policy,'' said Mr. Huff, a
60-year-old retired Goodyear employee. ''The biggest foreign policy blunder of
our time was not the Iran thing, but the Vietnam War under Kennedy and Johnson.
We're still not over that one.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of those who voiced reactions to Iran controversy (NYT/Dennis
Gordon)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
A Profound Test

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 755 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Mikhail Gorbachev understands that the Soviet Union pays a price in the world
for its abuses of human rights. The end of Andrei Sakharov's exile and the
release of some important political prisoners were, at a minimum, gestures to
the opinions of mankind. Incomplete as we may think them, we have to understand
that they were bold steps for a Soviet leader.

A more profound test of Mr. Gorbachev's understanding, boldness and political
skill is now at hand. The issue is Afghanistan. Soviet policy there has caused
human suffering on a scale so large that it is hard to grasp. Unless and until
the policy changes, Afghanistan will cast a shadow on all Western negotiations
with the U.S.S.R.

Seven years after the Soviet invasion, 115,000 Soviet troops are in Afghanistan.
It is a faraway place, and we have not paid enough attention to its sufferings.
But if Moscow thinks Afghanistan will be forgotten, or somehow kept separate in
our minds from East-West relations generally, it is wrong.

Consider one stark fact. There are roughly five million refugees from
Afghanistan now. That is half the refugees in the world, a third of the
pre-invasion population of Afghanistan. And of those remaining in the country,
perhaps two million more have fled their homes because of Soviet bombing of
villages and other dangers.

The best studies of Afghanistan's torment were published jointly last December
and a year earlier by two private human rights organizations in New York,
Helsinki Watch and Asia Watch. One practice they described is the use of ''toy
bombs'' -explosive devices disguised as toy trucks, dolls and other objects.
When children pick them up, they explode, blowing off hands, maiming, blinding
the victims.

''The practice of using toys to kill is such an outrageous concept that many
have refused to accept it as true,'' the 1986 report of the two watch committees
said. ''Yet Helsinki Watch has received scores of testimonies about such
weapons, from credible witnesses who often have no notion of the significance of
what they were reporting.''

Children are also the targets of an extraordinary Soviet political enterprise.
That is the sending of Afghan children to the Soviet Union in large numbers for
indoctrination.

No one knows exactly how many children have been taken to the U.S.S.R., but
sources among the Mujahedeen or resistance movement put the figure as high as
60,000. Two men in the resistance movement who are now visiting the United
States, Mohammed Es'Haq and Wakil Akberzai, saw a deep and depressing message in
the program to indoctrinate young Afghans.

''The Soviets came on a short-term pretext,'' Mr. Akberzai said, ''to safeguard
their borders. But it has turned out to be a long-term process, the
Sovietization of Afghanistan and of Afghan children.''

By now it seems clear that the Soviet Union cannot impose itself on Afghanistan
without a continuing heavy cost. The Mujahedeen fight on. The Soviet-imposed
Government in Kabul has not attracted any respected Afghans to join it. Is there
any way out of a situation that is destroying Afghanistan and bleeding the
U.S.S.R.?

U.N.-sponsored negotiations, just resumed in Geneva, are looking for that way
out. The crucial issue is whether the Russians, who have talked of withdrawing
their forces from Afghanistan over a period of years, will agree to withdraw in
a time period short enough to make the Afghans - and the West - believe they
really intend to let Afghanistan decide its own fate.

Soviet leaders no doubt fear that if they pull out unconditionally, a government
hostile to the U.S.S.R. will take over - and the United States, which arms the
Mujahedeen, will keep sending weapons to Afghanistan. Those are risks. But they
are risks that will have to be taken if Mr. Gorbachev wants to get out of the
Afghan quagmire. And it is as good a time as any to take them.

The Reagan Administration, ready to do business with Mr. Gorbachev on other
matters, is more likely now to respond with restraint to a genuine move from him
in Afghanistan. As for the Afghan resistance, Mr. Es'Haq said: ''We have no real
disputes with the Russians, in land or economics. We can assure them that a
government chosen by Afghans would have a nonaligned status. I see no real
problem except the pride of a big power.''

That is a terrible problem, as the United States demonstrated in Vietnam. Mr.
Gorbachev will not find it easy in his own political system to pull out of the
disaster in Afghanistan. But the initiative has to come from him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER HOWARD BEACH: SEEKING RACIAL PEACE

BYLINE: By GEORGE JAMES

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1481 words


Out of the tragedy and bitterness of the Howard Beach racial attack, George
Russo, a white lawyer who grew up in the Queens neighborhood, and the Rev.
Irvine A. Bryer Jr., a black minister in Queens Village, have become friends.

Their friendship is a small, personal story to be sure: two men trying to foster
racial harmony by first exploring their own racial attitudes.

But in the larger drama of racial tension in New York City that has grown from
the death of a black man in Howard Beach on Dec. 20, human and civil rights
officials see their friendship as having the potential to galvanize others
interested in improving race relations.

Symbol of an Effort

In the more than two months since the attack, the men have become a visible
symbol of a reconciliation effort intended to address the division in area
neighborhoods and to prevent another Howard Beach. Mr. Russo, who is 32 years
old, and Mr. Bryer, who is 39, are chairmen of the Concerned Citizens of South
Queens, an ecumenical, multiracial and multi-ethnic coalition that began forming
a few days after the racial attack on three black men by a mob of white
teen-agers.

With some 60 core members, including about 20 residents from predominately
Italian and Jewish Howard Beach, 20 from other neighborhoods and the rest
clergymen and representatives of city, state, Federal and private rights
agencies, the coalition has reached out through half a dozen community meetings,
started a newsletter and presented proposals to city and education officials.

''Role models,'' is how Dr. Marcella Maxwell, the city's Commissioner on Human
Rights, describes the two friends.

''Racial issues are difficult to comprehend and deal with,'' the executive
director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, Norman Siegel, said. ''But you
can touch their friendship.''

Mr. Russo, president of the District 27 Community School Board, and Mr. Bryer,
an adjunct professor of social studies and African history at York College in
Jamaica, Queens, have talked with each other nearly every day. Coalition work
has cut into Mr. Bryer's duties as pastor of the 280-family Hollis Avenue
Congregational Church and Mr. Russo's law practice.

The seriousness of their effort, however, is marked by gracious humor. A
confident Mr. Bryer said that if they could not get Mayor Koch to attend a
meeting, he would give up his ministry. If the Mayor did attend, Mr. Russo said,
he would treat Mr. Bryer to dinner at Villa Russo, his family's restaurant in
Richmond Hill.

Seeking Solutions

''You have to do the cooking,'' Mr. Bryer said.

''O.K., but I'm a terrible cook,'' the restaurateur's son confessed. Mr. Russo
owes Mr. Bryer dinner. Last month the Mayor did attend a meeting and agreed to
consider their request for up to $100,000 in financing for a package of
proposals that included hiring a full-time administrator for educational,
recreational and cultural programs, and training students and adults in conflict
resolution and mediation of racial disputes.

The group has also proposed substantive curriculum changes to the Board of
Education to enhance understanding of racial and ethnic diversity.

The coalition began on Dec. 22 when Rose Zanazzi, a Democratic district leader
from Howard Beach, organized a meeting of 20 religious, civic and political
leaders to ease tensions. The Rev. Floyd H. Flake, a minister in Jamaica and the
newly elected United States Representative for South Queens, brought some black
ministers, including Mr. Bryer. They met in the Rockwood Park Jewish Center, six
blocks from where Michael Griffith was killed by a car on the Belt Parkway as he
fled his attackers.

'Sitting on a Tinderbox'

The group met again on Dec. 23 and by the third meeting seven days later, a
march against racism through Howard Beach had prompted shouting matches between
whites and blacks and a conciliatory Mr. Koch had been booed at Our Lady of
Grace Catholic Church by parishioners.

''At the time we felt we were sitting on a tinderbox and that the next
confrontation might carry with it tragic results,'' Mr. Russo said. ''We had to
establish ourselves as a voice and show that a group of prudent, sober citizens
from Howard Beach and other communities was coming together in a healing
process.''

The 34 men and women at the third meeting agreed that Howard Beach was taking a
beating. But they also felt that racism had to be recognized as existing in
society; meaningful discussion had to go beyond the community's boundaries, and
the effort had to be led by a white and a black.

Mr. Russo, who last year moved from Howard Beach with his wife and young
children to neighboring Ozone Park, and Mr. Bryer, who grew up in an interracial
neighborhood in Beacon, N.Y., had never met, but people at the meeting say their
personalities meshed and they were youthful enough to connect with young people.


A Place for All

Three days later, the coalition announced its goals at a news conference in the
gym of St. Helen's Catholic Church. Mr. Russo, a former assistant district
attorney in Queens, denounced the attack and called for swift justice. Both men
were careful to note that it was unfair to condemn all of Howard Beach for the
acts of a few.

''There are many good people in this community,'' said Mr. Bryer.

The coalition tries to involve residents from different neighborhoods, including
Howard Beach, where even those residents who denounce the attack sympathize with
the families of the 12 youths charged in the incident.

Early last month, the executive director of the Catholic Interracial Council of
New York, John J. Garra, attended a meeting where 65 people candidly exchanged
views.

''I tell you I was very impressed with the enthusiasm, vitality, commitment and
dedication of the people present,'' he said, praising the way Mr. Russo and Mr.
Bryer drew everyone out.

''It wasn't 'We're the chairmen,' '' Mr. Garra said. ''The key was, 'This is our
community and these are our concerns about our homes, families and kids and it's
up to all of us to take responsibility and do something to make it a place where
we can all live.' ''

Of another meeting Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward said, ''Were this happening
all over the city, we would not have the problems that we have.''

Finding the Light

Mr. Bryer, a Vietnam combat veteran, whose study door is adorned with a sign
that reads, ''Let peace begin with me,'' has received anonymous telephone calls
from blacks labeling him ''Tom'' and ''Oreo'' and whites saying, ''We don't need
any more niggers in Howard Beach.''

Mr. Russo has been stopped in the street and asked, ''Why are you pandering to
blacks? Why are you with them and not us?''

Both say expressions of support have far outnumbered such remarks.

Initially, some felt that the group was not focusing enough on Howard Beach,
others felt that it was not addressing immediate problems.

But Thomas Malcolm, a black resident of Howard Beach who serves on the youth
subcommittee, said the true measure will be what the coalition accomplishes
after media attention on Howard Beach has faded.

''I have to be optimistic,'' he said. ''If there's no hope, people have no
recourse for correcting problems. You've got to find the light in every
situation, because that allows people to continue the nonviolent method for
constructive change.''

'Spiritual Revitalization'

That message already appears to be spreading. Invitations to speak have been
coming from concerned groups and later this month, Mr. Bryer and Mr. Russo will
address a seminar sponsored by the Catholic Interracial Council in Manhattan on
creating similar coalitions.

Of the group's formative stage, members say there was one uplifting event that
imbued it with an almost religious zeal: a prayer vigil for racial peace in
mid-January at Kennedy International Airport. More than 280 people attended the
vigil, most of whom were individuals and families with children.

''The spiritual revitalization that took place that night armed us with a new
commitment to each other,'' Mr. Bryer said. ''People were saying they felt good.
You could sense it, a word we use that sometimes lacks meaning - brotherhood.''

''Our religious leaders were telling us we are on the right path and not to give
up,'' Mr. Russo said. ''It reinforced us. We were trying to get to that common
ground, we were part of a positive flow of events, we were in the middle of
something that was begun long before us.''

If the coalition does nothing else, its major accomplishment, according to Mr.
Flake, will have been to create a ''mechanism for people to voice not only their
frustrations, their anger, their shame and their hurt, but also their hopes.''

''George and Reverend Bryer have definitely developed a relationship, and they
represent the symbol of that hope which we are striving for,'' Mr. Flake said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the Rev. Irvine Bryer Jr. and George Russo (NYT/David A.
Cantor)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 11, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'Lethal Weapon' Is No. 1 At Box Office for Week

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 101 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 10


''Lethal Weapon,'' starring Mel Gibson and Danny Glover, was the No. 1
box-office attraction last week, earning $6.8 million in its debut week.

''Nightmare on Elm Street 3'' came in a close second with $6.7 million in ticket
sales. ''Platoon,'' the Vietnam War drama that has been nominated for several
Academy Awards, slipped to third place with $6.1 million, bringing its
box-office receipts to $84.6 million in 12 weeks.

''Angel Heart,'' which stirred controversy when 10 seconds had to be cut to gain
an R rating instead of an X rating, was the No. 4 film for the week, bringing in
$3.7 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 12, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 348 words


History Lesson ''In Their Own Words: A Vietnam Chronicle'' is just that, a stage
work that describes the war in the words of those who died in it and those who
lived through it - at home and abroad. Betsy Lifton and Mindy Schanback wrote
and adapted the work based largely on the oral history ''Nam,'' by Mark Baker,
and ''Dear America,'' a collection of letters written by soldiers in Vietnam to
friends and relatives. Ms. Schanback said the 75-minute show was produced with
the cooperation of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Commission and was especially
designed for high school and college students.

The Walden Theater Conservatory is presenting the work today and tomorrow at the
Park Avenue Christian Church, at 85th Street and Park Avenue, at 8 P.M. Mark
Lococo directed the cast that includes Mike Campbell, James DeLorenzo, Mary
Harper, Alice King, Mark Edward Lang, Dave O'Neil, Charles Roby and Yolanda
Snowball. They represent five marines, an Army nurse and the loved ones back
home.

Admission, $4; information: 473-3675. Revolutionary Behavior When did Ulster
Presbyterians, Anglicans and Roman Catholics fight side by side? During the
American Revolution, says Dr. Thomas P. Robinson, provost of the College of Boca
Raton in Florida. Dr. Robinson says the Irish presence in the Colonies from 1763
to 1776 was ''formidable.'' He credits Irishmen with protesting England's
policies and leading demonstrations against the Stamp Act and the Townshend Act.
Irishmen also fought as soldiers and sailors from 1775 to 1782, he says.

''The Irish and the American Revolution'' is the subject of today's discussion
at 12:30 P.M. at Fraunces Tavern Museum, which played its own role in the
revolution.

This discussion is one of a series. The second will be Victor R. Greene's talk,
''The Poles in Early New York and Revolutionary America.'' That one is scheduled
for April 2 at 12:30 P.M. Admission is free, with admission to the museum. The
tavern museum, owned and operated by the Sons of the Revolution in the State of
New York, is at 54 Pearl Street. Information: 425-1778.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 14, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Light and the Afghan Tunnel

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 427 words


In Moscow a few weeks ago, Henry Kissinger heard a senior Russian say something
unexpected about Afghanistan - that the Soviet-backed regime in Kabul wasn't
really Communist or even technically Socialist.

This distancing will come as a surprise to the Afghan regime, which swears by
Lenin, boasts a red flag and carries out blood purges over ideology.

Based on this and other unorthodox remarks, Mr. Kissinger says he's no longer so
sure that Moscow would never permit the overthrow of an Afghan regime
established by Soviet power. He proposes two sensible conditions for testing
Soviet seriousness about ending this eight-year war. One is a six-month deadline
for withdrawing 100,000-plus troops. The other is a post-occupation regime
established without the threat of another Soviet invasion.

                                     *  *  *

The tests are useful for judging the latest moves in Geneva at peace talks
managed by a never-give-up United Nations mediator. The other day, Moscow pared
down its withdrawal timetable to 22 months; the Kabul regime now says 18 months
will suffice. That's three times the six months that Pakistan presently insists
is enough. Still, it's significant, as the U.N.'s Diego Cordovez contends. And
since there is agreement on the rest of the package it might seem, to recall a
phrase, that peace is at hand in Afghanistan.

The catch is that the Afghan resistance has had no seat at these negotiations.
Its leaders would be understandably hostile to any agreement, reached over their
heads, that would end the vital flow of American arms through Pakistan in return
for a Soviet pullout.

Yet their participation is essential to bring about the return of five million
Afghan refugees from Pakistan and Iran, and to create a post-occupation regime
of national reconciliation. If Mikhail Gorbachev wants a decent end to this war,
and friendly ties with a nonaligned Afghanistan, these are adversaries he'll
have to address.

It's far from clear that Mr. Gorbachev is ready to stop this war if the price is
the overthrow of a Soviet-enthroned regime. That would be the most dramatic
Russian pullback since the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Austria three
decades ago. The fall of Kabul could be as humbling as the fall of Saigon was
for the United States. Yet by any rational calculus, Mr. Gorbachev stands to
gain more by ending a predecessor's bloody blunder. This barbarous conflict has
claimed up to a million lives, including those of as many as 30,000 Soviet
soldiers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

V.A. POWERS FACE CHALLENGE AT A CONGRESSIONAL HEARING

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 22, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


The Veterans Administration's authority to grant or withhold payments is facing
its most serious challenge in more than a century.

On Tuesday a joint hearing of the House and Senate Veterans Affairs Committees
is to review charges of misconduct by the agency's compensation and pension
division.

Many of the accusations of abuse of veterans' rights have been verified in
Veterans Administration documents that were subpoenaed in a lawsuit under way in
Federal District Court in San Francisco.

What the Documents Showed

Among the documented flaws are these:

* Under a system of employee merit pay, bonuses for turning out paper work and
loss of promotions for low output, the V.A. has long known that its claims
adjudicators in 58 regional offices were under such pressures to clear claims
that many were denied without investigation or notice to applicants that
documentation was required. The agency employees thus earned ''work credits.''

* Regional offices have been allowed to underreport the high ''error rates'' in
judgments on claims even though an internal audit by the agency's inspector
general disclosed in 1982 that the number of errors was two to three times
higher than had been reported.

* The V.A. and the Justice Department, whose lawyers represent the agency, are
planning to spend $1.2 million, to computerize the mass of documents for the use
of Government lawyers in defense of the system.

Disbursement Is the Key

Bonner Day, a V.A. spokesman, said of the hearing, ''We cannot comment on what
Congress is going to ask on Tuesday.''

At the heart of the matter Tuesday is a formidable, little-understood system
that is a major part of monthly Government disbursement to beneficiaries. The
V.A. dispenses $14.4 billion a year to six million people, - disabled and
pensioned veterans and their parents, wives and children.

Since 1865, when Lincoln said in his second Inaugural Address that it was the
nation's duty ''to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his
widow and his orphan,'' the Government's system of determining the eligibility
and compensation has been ''nonadversarial'' and, by statute, preferential to
claimants.

By law, the decisions of the Veterans Administration to grant or deny money give
applicants ''the benefit of the doubt.'' Because of that and the agency's
mandate to ''advocacy'' of its constituency, the system has been presumed fair.
Veterans are generally barred from seeking any review of denials outside the
agency, and appeals in courts are specifically precluded.

A century ago Congress, to keep lawyers from gouging the unwary, passed a
measure saying veterans pressing their claims within the agency were forbidden
to pay lawyers more than $10 in fees. That ceiling, enforceable by criminal
action against lawyers who violate it, has deprived most veterans of legal
representation before the V.A. Only lawyers willing to work without pay or
lawyers paid by third parties may appear before the agency's panels.

Efforts in Congress since the mid-1970's to alter this system have been resisted
both by the V.A. and most of the major national veterans organizations, which
have ''service officers'' to aid claimants in lieu of lawyers.

The hearing next week is expected for the first time to challenge the argument
of the veterans' groups that the ''informal,'' nonadversarial claims system is a
trade-off that works to the benefit of veterans.

Change Blocked by House Panel

''The evidence at the V.A. reminds me of the stories about the letter carriers
who dump the mail in a trash can,'' said Representative Lane Evans, Democrat of
Illinois, chairman of the Vietnam Veterans Caucus in the House. and a sponsor of
a measure this year calling for due process for veterans. Four such measures
passed the Senate since 1975, to be blocked in the House Veterans Affairs
Committee.

Last summer, the chairman of the Veterans Affairs Committee, Representative G.V.
(Sonny) Montgomery, Democrat of Mississippi, persuaded the committee to reject
by a vote of 20 to 2 a measure allowing veterans to seek court review of
disputed V.A. decisions. In January, Mr. Montgomery, who has close ties to the
older veterans organizations that oppose judicial review, said there would be no
need for hearings on a renewed attempt at passage this year.

The Suit in San Francisco

The hearing Tuesday was prompted by a series of disclosures in pretrail
proceedings in the San Francisco case. The suit was brought against the Veterans
Administration in 1983 by lawyers for the National Association of Radiation
Survivors, which represents thousands of servicemen denied V.A. compensation for
diseases they say were contracted when they served at sites for tests of atomic
weapons after World War II.

The Supreme Court is waiting for a ruling by Federal District Judge Marilyn Hall
Patel on whether the medical and legal complexity of the radiation claims merit
court intervention.

Judge Patel allowed the plaintiffs to see the V.A. records and files, including
the documents that disclosed the agency's refusal or inability to curb abuses,
and then heard testimony by V.A. officials that disclosed that other potentially
incriminating papers had been destroyed and still others withheld. Judge Patel
then held the agency in contempt of court.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR G.O.P. RIVALS, COMMON GROUND IS BAITING BUSH

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 28, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: NASHUA, N.H., March 14


It was open season on Vice President Bush this weekend in New Hampshire.

In their first joint appearance, six other potential Republican contenders for
the 1988 Presidential nomination sniped at Mr. Bush, who is leading in public
opinion polls, and frantically competed for audience attention, throwing out
ideas and images that they hoped would raise them above the pack.

The Rev. Pat Robertson, the television evangelist, called for the elimination of
Communism everywhere, including the Soviet Union. Representative Jack F. Kemp of
upstate New York pledged that, if elected, he would immediately deploy ''off the
shelf'' anti-missile technology. And former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld
said he would retaliate against countries involved in state-sponsored terrorism
with economic and military sanctions.

The candidates fought with issues and charm, mingling with the hundreds of state
officials, party activists and reporters who had descended on the castle-like
Tara Sheraton Hotel for the Republican National Committee's Northeast Regional
Leadership Conference.

Three-Ring Gathering

''Isn't this a circus?'' said Pierre S. du Pont 4th, the former Governor of
Delaware. ''It's like the cheerleaders' picture before the start of the football
season.''

Alexander M. Haig Jr., the former Secretary of State, wryly agreed: ''I have not
seen so many distinguished statesmen since Henry Kissinger dined alone in the
Great Hall of Mirrors.''

Even before Mr. Haig hosted an ''Old Tyme Picnic'' this afternoon in nearby
Manchester, featuring Fuzzy the Kop, Happy the Clown, and Uncle Sam on Stilts,
the weekend had taken on a three-ring atmosphere. On Friday night, the six
contenders, including Mr. Haig, Mr. du Pont, Mr. Kemp, Mr. Robertson, Mr.
Rumsfeld and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, were allowed five minutes to make their
case.

There was some time devoted to good old New Hampshire conservative values -
lowering taxes, fighting Communism and standing by President Reagan. But much of
the time was spent taunting the conspicuously absent Mr. Bush, who in an effort
to stay above the fray, created one. The other candidates and some state
officials contended that Mr. Bush had pulled strings with Gov. John H. Sununu,
who is chairman of the Bush campaign in the state, to get a separate speaking
spot at a luncheon today.

Taking Advantage of Position

Governor Sununu said the Vice President has certain security and scheduling
demands that prevent him from campaigning as others do, but he also said that it
would be ''foolish'' for Mr. Bush not to take advantage of the benefits of his
status.

Despite warnings by Richard Wirthlin, the Republican poll taker, not to hurt the
party by carving each other up, the ''lesser candidates,'' as Mr. Haig jokingly
called them, could not resist taking shots at Mr. Bush.

Mr. Dole, who was so angry about Mr. Bush's special treatment that he had
threatened to boycott the event himself, instead demonstrated that the better
part of valor was derision.

In a reference to the Vice President's role in the Iran arms affair, Mr. Dole
told the crowd: ''I did get a telegram just as I walked in that said, 'Sorry I
can't be there this evening. Nobody told me. Signed, George Bush.' '' Mr. Dole
did leave early, refusing to attend today's panels or the luncheon at which the
Vice President was speaking.

Mr. du Pont offered an equally snide reference to the Vice President's
credentials. ''With a name like du Pont and from a little state like Delaware,
people have told me that my candidacy is a long shot,'' he said. '' 'For
heaven's sake,' they tell me, '' 'You've never even been to the funeral of a
foreign leader.' ''

Bush Ignores the Barbs

Mr. Bush, who arrived here this afternoon, did not deign to respond to the
snipers.

'' It just shows he's a good strong frontrunner,'' said Lee A. Atwater, Mr.
Bush's campaign manager, when asked about the barbs.

In his speech, Mr. Bush defended the Central Intelligence Agency, which he once
headed.

The trouble with the Iran affair, he said, was that the C.I.A. was not brought
in to review the implications of the secret arms deals. ''Covert actions make
sense,'' he said, ''only in support of a larger foreign policy. They make sense
only when properly planned. And that was the problem with the N.S.C. running the
Iran initiative.''

Several of the candidates in this conservative state, where the first 1988
Presidential primary will be held, struck an anti-Communist note.

Mr. Haig criticized recent moves by the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
''It's important for us to remember on the eve of arms control discussions once
again,'' he said, ''that Mr. Gorbachev's apparent openness is not designed to do
the West a favor but is a product of failures in his own system.''

Litany of Presidential Crises

Mr. Haig also said that the Republicans should stand behind Mr. Reagan, and that
he had served seven Presidents and it was important to remember that ''each and
every one had his Iranian brouhaha.''

''Dwight Eisenhower had his U-2, his Suez crisis, Jack Kennedy his Bay of Pigs,
Lyndon Johnson his Vietnam War, and I don't have to tell you about Nixon's
Watergate, Carter's hostage crisis, and the most physically agile, physically
adept man to ever enter the Oval Office left office with the perception that he
couldn't walk and chew gum at the same time.''

In the courtship process this weekend, Gordon J. Humphrey, one of the two
Republican Senators from New Hampshire, was a very popular man. Mr. Humphrey has
not yet decided whom to support in the race.

He said that all the contenders have visited him in Washington, and he may take
his time deciding.

''I'm having too much fun being a bachelor,'' he said, grinning. ''It may be the
last time I'm ever pursued.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Donald rumsfeld and Jack F. Kemp (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FROM ARMS SELLING TO ENVIRONMENT, PANEL CONSIDERS THE ROLE OF CONGRESS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 46, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2089 words


Throughout 1987, public officials, scholars and other experts are gathering in
forums around New York City and the nation to discuss the Constitution on the
200th anniversary of its signing.

Last week, a panel moderated by former Mayor John V. Lindsay met at the City Bar
Association on West 43d Street to discuss the modern role of Congress, touching
on issues ranging from American arms sales to Iran to the mining of Managua's
harbor to environmental regulation.

The members of the panel were Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New
York, William D. Ruckelshaus, a Republican who served as Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency in both the Nixon and Reagan Administrations,
and John Brademas, president of New York University and a former Democratic
Representative from Indiana.

Following are excerpts from their remarks:

MR. MOYNIHAN

...No written arrangement for a government has ever in history endured two
centuries. And its unexampled endurance is indeed cause for much celebration.
But it also should be the occasion for some cerebration as well.

We may doubt that the bicentennial discussion will attain to anything like the
level of discourse two centuries ago. We are short on Madisons and Hamiltons and
Jays. But it is possible to hope that we may acquire a more general
understanding of what it was those men were discoursing about. Else all will be
lost to fireworks and faith healing. . . .

The first and foremost fact about the structure of the American national
Government is that of any significant modern state, democratic or totalitarian
or what you will, the United States alone has a legislature, which is to say the
Congress.

And this assertion tends to puzzle people. Surely there are others? What about
Parliament, they ask? Britain? Canada?

End of Legislative Role

Well, Parliament was something of a legislature in the 19th century, certainly
so in the 17th century. But party discipline has universally abolished that
role. The ''King in Parliament'' is more supreme than any monarch was.
Parliament serves as a nominating convention, its sole function being to choose
the executive, who rules with but little regard to members whose votes are
automatic. Thus, when the Prime Minister of Canada speaks on a matter of foreign
affairs, you may be sure the Canadian Parliament will support him. Otherwise he
would not be Prime Minister.

Only in America is the legislative branch separate from the executive branch.
They are not required to agree, but they must cooperate.

Why? Because the framers of the Constitution fixed it that way. It was no
happenstance; it was deliberate. . . .

Presidents find the role of Congress in foreign affairs continually troublesome.
Discord at home is the bane of policy abroad; bringing in the Congress brings
discord. And so we find again a group of ''the President's men'' trying to
bypass Congress in the conduct of foreign policy.

Bringing Ruin to Presidents

Of course, it is these men, unconfirmed and unelected, contemptuous of the
Constitution, who bring ruin to one President after another, Presidents, that
is, who allow them to do so.

Moreover, the ruin goes beyond the individual to the institution: those who try
to circumvent the Congress end up undermining the Presidency, because it is the
Congress that almost always prevails. . . .

There is yet a deeper concern about the doing in Iranamok or whatever. I think
we need to ask why were those in the White House basement so contemptuous of the
Constitution as to permit them to take actions, the inevitable result of which
would be to undermine the Presidency they mistakenly thought they were serving.

MR. RUCKELSHAUS

...I think when we discuss a concept like the role of Congress, we often confuse
it with the power of Congress. The power of Congress is more derived from the
laws, from the Constitution itself, and has to do with the grant that we, the
people, acting through the Constitution, have given to the Congress to function
in a particular way. The role of Congress has more to do with the advisability,
not the legality, of Congress acting in a certain way.

As to power, certainly, historically, in our country, Congress - and the
executive branch - have seen power flow back and forth. During periods of
crisis, things like war, the executive branch has tended to amalgamate more
power to itself, usually with the support of the Congress, the support of the
public. . . . In times of relative calm, more power, historically, at least, has
flowed back to the legislative branch.

I think we've seen some changes in that pattern since the Second World War.
Certainly power has moved back and forth between the two branches, but it has
seemed to me, at least, particularly during my time in serving in Washington,
both in the Nixon Administration and in the Reagan Administration, that the
power of the executive branch to accomplish its goal, to achieve its will, is
more associated with the personal popularity of the President, with the trust
that is given to the President by the people themselves, and in turn reflected
by the Congress. . . .

Power of Public Opinion

On the domestic side, the side that I am more familiar with in terms of my own
service in the executive branch, there's another element that needs to be
considered, in addition to the flow of power and the erosion of trust, and that
is if public opinion is strong enough on a particular issue, insistent enough,
massive action can occur whether or not the President is popular, and whether or
not, in more traditional terms, we assume therefore his popularity gives him the
ability to assert considerable power.

The environment is a very good example of such an issue. When I was first in the
Environmental Protection Agency, in 1970, and then again in 1983, I think it is
no secret that I'm revealing here that both Presidents I served did not have at
the top of their agenda environmental protection.

They had never paid much attention to it in their political career and it had
never been an issue that particularly gripped either one of these men, and yet,
in spite of - in the early part of Mr. Nixon's term, in his first term, after
1970 - a rising popularity, and certainly in the first term of this current
President's tenure, his popularity was as high as any President since the Second
World War. And yet, even so, neither individual could resist the public pressure
for doing something about the environment, and in fact doing something quite
dramatic about the environment, that resulted from public opinion. . . .

During the 1970's we had a series of laws, some 10 of them, that the
Environmental Protection Agency now administers, passed by the Congress,
starting with the Clean Air Act in 1970, when Mr. Nixon was at a rising point in
power. The next major piece of legislation was the Clean Water Act, which was
passed in August of 1972, vetoed by the President in October of 1972, and then
overwhelmingly overridden by a Congress of both Republicans and Democrats when
Mr. Nixon was at the peak of his power versus his Presidential opponent, Senator
McGovern.

Congress Asserting Its Role

Again, we had a reiteration of that in this last election. The President, faced
with a Clean Water Act that had been passed overwhelmingly by the Congress,
vetoed it the day after the election of 1986. The Congress came back and again,
with both parties voting overwhelmingly, overrode his veto.

The pattern of Congress's assertion of its role in its position of predominant
power is what really gives me concern under these conditions -under these
situations. They have passed laws that are prescriptive, as I mentioned, in that
they set standards. They set standards for sometimes specific sources of
pollution like automobiles. They named the pollutants in the statues. The Clean
Air Act names hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxides - pollutants I'm
sure you're all familiar with here in New York. . . .

The problem, in my view, is that because of the Congress's interpretation of its
own role, we have at the very least an inefficient system. Most laws -
environmental laws - that are passed in this country, are finally interpreted by
the courts. The typical pattern, and by typical I mean well over 80 percent of
the rules, standards, decisions made by the Administrator of E.P.A. - this is
true whether it's in a Republican or a Democratic Administration, it really
doesn't make any difference - are decided in the courts, where one or both sides
affected will challenge the decision. It will be taken to the courts and then,
over a three- to five-year period, a final decision will either be hammered out
or decided by the courts themselves.

At the very least that's an inefficient system. The distortion that sometimes
occurs as a result of the prescriptive nature of these statutes often causes the
executive branch to go after the wrong devils, pollutants that would be lower on
the list of health-related problems if we had more discretion.

MR. BRADEMAS

...The height of Congressional assertiveness in foreign affairs, in this century
at least, was reached between the two world wars when Congress, through the
Neutrality Acts, attempted to keep the country on an isolationist path. But as
we all know, Pearl Harbor really shattered, forever, I think . . . the view of
an America free of entangling alliances, and once again altered the relationship
between the two branches.

So in the postwar period we had an unusual time of collaboration between the two
branches - these two branches - of our national government. But after 1950,
power slipped precipitously away from Congress because in that year, you may
recall, without any Congressional declaration of war, President Truman ordered
American forces into Korea. And in the next two decades, as Vietnam replaced
Korea, Congress became little more than a cheerleader or rubber stamp for the
executive branch of the Government and delegated most of its war-making powers
to the Executive.

The Lessons of Vietnam

But if the war in Southeast Asia represented the nadir of Congressional
assertiveness in foreign affairs, it also marked the start of the end of
Presidential carte blanche. Because the people of the country and their
representatives in Congress, came to the judgment that the supposed advantages
inherent in the Presidential control, monopoly, of foreign affairs, had not
prevented, but had in fact contributed, to a long and tragic involvement in that
part of the country.

And then, were the lessons of Vietnam not enough, we saw what we have come to
know as the lessons of Watergate, of which Bill Ruckelshaus was a notable hero.
And we saw how there was a range of abuses in which the legitimate organs of our
national Government were subverted to partisan, and indeed, criminal ends.

And the result of all this, of course, was that Congress bestirred itself anew
to greater assertiveness in foreign affairs, and I shall not here recite the
whole litany of the statutes, the prescriptive statutes that Bill Ruckelshaus so
much abhors and that I strongly supported. You have to understand that if I
speak as a fierce separationist, which I am, it is because I served in the
Congress of the United States with Richard Nixon. That had a powerful impact on
my attitude toward the relationship between the two branches of government. . .
.

Removal From Constraints

Here you have seen, I think, in the Irangate situation a systematic effort . . .
a systematic effort on the part of the Administration to escape the system of
checks and balances, a situation in which a President and his counselors sought
to remove themselves from the Constitutional constraints of their office, of
their oath of office, and of the laws of the land.

If you ask me if I am saying that American Presidents ought not to be completely
trusted to make the right decisions or to be completely forthright with Congress
and the American people about the decisions that Presidents take, I reply, that
is correct. The Founding Fathers were right and in this respect I am very
conservative. They knew what they were talking about. The Founding Fathers were
right not to trust any of the three branches of government completely. After
all, even members of the House of Representatives have to get re-elected every
two years. And I should not be speaking to you here tonight as president of New
York University were that not the arrangement!

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: THE CONSTITUTION 1787-1987

GRAPHIC: Photos of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, William D. Ruckelshaus and
John Brademas (NYT)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GAMES MEN PLAY- ON FILM AND STAGE

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2476 words


EARLY IN ''DINER,'' HIS autobiographical first film, the writer-director Barry
Levinson showed a booth full of Baltimore buddies arguing the relative merits of
Frank Sinatra and Johnny Mathis songs as aphrodisiacs. Then he swung briefly to
the other side of the restaurant, and a table of older men, all aluminum-siding
salesmen. They told a story about conning the owner of a brick house into buying
siding, disparaged lawyers for not making ''an honest buck'' and then virtually
disappeared from the movie, for ''Diner'' belonged to the younger generation.

Now, with his new film ''Tin Men,'' Mr. Levinson has returned to Baltimore, and
even to the Hilltop Diner, to give the aluminum-siding salesmen their turn. From
the plot conceit of a feud between two of them - Bill Babowsky (Richard
Dreyfuss) and Ernest Tilley (Danny DeVito) - Mr. Levinson has built a full
portrait of a tiny world, a subculture of competition, extravagance, wit and
brutality.

And what Mr. Levinson says, subtly in the film and more overtly in a recent
interview, is that things are not so different on one side of the diner than the
other: Men will be men, or, perhaps, men will be boys. In both ''Diner'' and
''Tin Men,'' Mr. Levinson has penetrated what might be called the tribal side of
manhood, and he has penetrated it not only with humor and compassion but with
the highly critical eye that only a veteran of bars, locker rooms, poker games
and bachelor parties can possess. ''We do hang in packs,'' Mr. Levinson said.
''We do it for security and at the same time it creates this isolation. It's
quite a phenomenon.''

Mr. Levinson's mixed emotions about the male tribe in general and the tin men in
particular lift his film above the conventional and self-congratulatory ''buddy
movie'' - ''The Sting,'' for instance - and into a realm of more introspective
work. From Ernest Hemingway and James T. Farrell early in this century, there
have always been a significant few American writers who were fascinated by men
in packs, and capable of forging high art from primitive raw material. If in the
broadest sense Nick Adams and Studs Lonigan stand as the forebears of Mr.
Levinson's tin men and diner regulars, then the creations of David Mamet and
David Rabe - soldiers, salesmen, sneak thieves and Hollywood hacks - qualify as
their contemporaries.

''I'd always felt strongly about wanting to develop that other side of the diner
and the characters of the tin men,'' said Mr. Levinson, who is 44 years old.
''What was intriguing to me was that when my friends and I were around 18, those
salesman were the ages of all of our fathers. And as opposed to being more
conservative and more responsible, these guys seemed more like older editions of
us. They were loose. They were flashy. They were flamboyant. They appeared to
us, on the surface, to be fun-loving kinds of guys - a lot of pocket money and
off to the race track.''

That admiring image began to fade in 1982, when Mr. Levinson met some former tin
men who worked as extras on ''Diner.'' Back in his California home after the
film was completed, Mr. Levinson enlisted an old friend in Baltimore, Chip
Silverman, to do more research. Then he came back East to interview several
ex-tin men in depth. He heard not only the picaresque tales of ''Abe the Konk''
and ''Jake the Fake,'' of afternoons betting the ponies at Pimlico and evenings
fleecing the saps in the suburbs, but the less enchanting stories of their home
lives. And while the sales scams give ''Tin Men'' its gags, the domestic
failures give the film its guts.

''The tin men never talked about their private lives, their wives or anything,''
Mr. Levinson said. ''They liked to think of themselves as their own men, because
they didn't punch a clock. But they really weren't - they had bosses. And I
started to put it together. I found certain similarities with the guys in
'Diner,' the same problems in terms of women, the same kind of bravado in how
they deal with each other. You think, 'Wait a second, they're supposed to be
more grown up.' Then you realize that adolescent behavior isn't just for
adolescents.''

That should not necessarily surprise. American boys are socialized through group
activities, from Little League baseball to the mock-secret societies so adeptly
typified by the ''He-Man Woman-Haters Club'' of the Our Gang comedies. The adult
variations - the military unit or the golfing foursome - simply reflect the
youthful models. And in turn, the culture, particularly the popular culture,
holds the mirror to life. What is Bruce Springsteen's music if not the
soundtrack to the restless teen-age cruising it so often depicts? What is Oliver
Stone's ''Platoon'' if not a descendant of the World War II movies with their
calculatingly diverse bomber crews?

''Men in groups are everything in our society,'' said David Rabe, who has
explored the phenomemon in wartime settings in ''Streamers'' and amid the sexual
jungles of Hollywood in ''Hurlyburly.'' ''There's business. Armies are men.
Sports. Even the Iran-contra thing is a product of men in groups. There's
something about verifying masculinity by proving yourself, finding your place in
the world. It's a matter of toughness, taking punishment without crying. That's
what it comes down to.'' Mr. Mamet has dramatized men in pursuits as varied as
shipping ore (''Lakeboat''), chasing skirts (''Sexual Perversity in Chicago'')
and selling swampland (''Glengarry Glen Ross''). He does not believe, however,
that men tend toward groups any more so than women; rather, he says, they are
perceived now as being the more tribal sex.

''In any given age, we tend to forget what has come before,'' Mr. Mamet said.
''Until World War II, it was common to talk about women being more clannish -
the hen parties, bridge games, cousins clubs. And just as society as a whole
tended to talk about those hen parties almost scornfully, now it talks the same
way about men hunting or bowling. Either one, men or women, is laughable if you
want it to be. But each is valuable. You can have a group of women getting
together over coffee in the morning to talk about inflation or their husbands'
jobs. And it doesn't really matter what the text is. The subtext is that people
want support and validation for their lives.''

Mr. Mamet's observation applies almost as well to ''Tin Men'' as to his own
plays and screenplays. The women in Mr. Levinson's film work relatively
collegially in a Social Security office, celebrating birthdays with desk-top
cakes and sharing intimacies behind the room dividers. The tin men swap stories
of their favorite cons and teach newcomers what are quite literally the tricks
of the trade.

But their fellowship turns out to be something less than fraternal. ''Don't let
anybody push you around, B.B.,'' a colleague tells Babowsky at one point,
passing on the grail. Later in the film, Tilley's boss turns him over to a
commission investigating fraud by tin men, offering the matter-of-fact
explanation: ''You're the low man on the totem pole, Tilley. There's a lot of
guys earning a good living. No sense for it all to go up in smoke. You
understand, don't you, Tilley? It's just business.'' Stripped of his business
license by the commission, Tilley complains, ''Tell me, where's it written in
the Constitution that says you can't hustle for money?''

That vision of a kill-or-be-killed universe seems bound to bring ''Tin Men''
comparisons to ''Glengarry Glen Ross.'' In Mr. Mamet's play, the real-estate
salesmen framed the world in us-versus-them terms, stratified in large part by
their definition of masculinity. ''I swear, it's not a world of men,'' one
salesman complains. ''It's not a world of men. It's a world of clock watchers,
bureaucrats, officeholders.'' But when it came to a sales contest with a
Cadillac for the winner and a pink slip for the worst of the also-rans, the
battle became us-against-us, with one salesman breaking into the boss's office
to steal a list of prime ''leads.''

Mr. Levinson said he saw and ''loved'' the play, but also points to a key
departure between his approach and Mr. Mamet's. ''In 'Glengarry,' you saw the
men only at work,'' he said, ''and I was intrigued in not just dealing with the
salesmen on the job, but in their personal lives. So it wasn't a case of
struggling with how to deal differently with the same subject.''

Indeed, the greatest gulf in ''Tin Men'' is the one separating men from women.
In the first few scenes of the movie, Tilley smashes into Babowsky's brand-new
Cadillac, the two men brawl on the street and each vows retaliation. Over the
next few days, Babowsky kicks out the headlights of Tilley's car and Tilley
smashes the windows of Babowsky's. Then Babowsky sets out to seduce and steal
Tilley's wife, Nora (Barbara Hershey), romancing her the same way he would a
siding customer, and there Mr. Levinson picks up his larger themes. To Tilley
and Babowsky, Nora exists primarily as an instrument for inflicting pain on the
other. Even when Babowsky actually falls in love with her, and wants Tilley to
accede to a divorce, the men settle the issue by shooting pool.

The moment recalls two of the tragicomic set-pieces of ''Diner'' -the Baltimore
Colts trivia quiz one man subjects his fiancee to as a prerequisite for
marriage, and the tirade another unleashes when his wife mistakenly files a
James Brown record with rock-and-roll instead of rhythm-and-blues. It also
summons up ancestors like Paddy Chayefsky's teleplay ''Marty'' and Jules
Feiffer's film ''Carnal Knowledge,'' in which men's desire for women was
equalled only by their disdain for them, an attitude gladly reinforced by their
unattached pals.

''The cruelness of their behavior is what's fascinating,'' Mr. Levinson said of
his characters. ''It is infuriating, but it is something that exists. Sometimes
it is malicious, sometimes it is unintentional. In the case of Babowsky going to
see Tilley about the divorce, he tries to discuss it at first, and then it
slides into 'We'll resolve it with a game of pool.' It makes perfect sense to
them. Nora has no part in it - at least to them. That kind of unawareness is the
way they function.''

Mr. Levinson mentions another scene, very early in the film. Nora tells Tilley,
''If we went on a picnic, it would be fun.'' He responds, ''What's fun about it?
Ants get in the food, there's bees. I don't get it. We have to drive, it takes
maybe an hour to get there, then you sit in grass and eat. Why is that fun?''
When Tilley suggests just eating in front of the television set, Nora walks out
of the room, and Tilley is left wondering what he said wrong.

''It's not very hard to understand why men and women don't understand each
other,'' Mr. Levinson said. ''With the picnic, the woman is really talking about
spending time together, and the man is analyzing the technique and procedure of
the event. Whenever we get into arguments, we basically slide off to a
peripheral, tangential side of it, which is divorced from the issue at hand.''

At the same time, Mr. Levinson recognizes that in the age of the ''sensitive
man,'' the male writer who exposes these unpleasant truths often gets branded a
sexist or misogynist for his trouble - most clearly the case with Mr. Rabe for
''Hurlyburly'' and ''In the Boom-Boom Room.'' ''You're criticized for believing
in the things that you're just trying to illustrate,'' Mr. Levinson said. ''I
always felt that you sometimes learn more about the male-female relationship by
not showing it, by not having the man and woman together on camera the whole
time. You see how each group acts by itself. That's what I'm basically
exploring.''

He places his intimate observations within a larger and more unsettling context,
too. The immediate changes in ''Tin Men'' are personified by the Maryland
legislators investigating the aluminum siding business. (Such an inquiry
actually did occur in the early 1960's, and Mr. Levinson read the transcripts of
its hearings before writing the film.) But there is another, more cryptic
metaphor in the form of the black Volkswagen beetle that periodically crosses
the path of the tin men's sedans. What seems to be dying by the end of ''Tin
Men'' -which is pointedly set in the summer of 1963, before the Kennedy
assassination, the Vietnam War escalation, and the rise of modern feminism - is
a brash, bullying spirit that Mr. Levinson evokes in Cadillacs and Sinatra
songs, symbols of an America that was nothing if not macho.

His own feelings about the passing of that age, though, remain rather ambiguous,
and deliberately so. ''I don't try to pass any judgment in the movie - period,''
Mr. Levinson said. ''I don't try to say the tin men are the best guys or the
worst guys. Sometimes I see movies where the author has a holier-than-thou
attitude. I'd rather just present it. The tin men do have an astounding gift, in
that they are able to knock on someone's door whom they've never met before and
sell them something. It's an astounding talent that they're not entirely aware
of. Because if they were, they'd be doing something bigger than selling aluminum
siding. I mean, the whole country's based on sales.''

SUITED TO THE ROLE

Barry Levinson says he avoids inside jokes for their own sake, but his new film,
''Tin Men,'' effortlessly includes a number of them. At least two speaking
roles, and the actors who played them, are carried over from Mr. Levinson's
earlier film ''Diner'' -Michael Tucker as the salesman known only as Bagel and
Florence Moody as the waitress named (surprise) Florence.

The subtlest footnote of all, though, is the casting of J. T. Walsh as Wing, the
vindictive boss of an aluminum siding company. Theatergoers may well remember
that Mr. Walsh played an almost identical character, Williamson, in David
Mamet's ''Glengarry Glen Ross.'' The one difference is that there he ran a
real-estate office.

Mr. Levinson saw ''Glengarry'' on Broadway - but on a night Mr. Walsh was out of
the cast. It was Lou DiGiamo, the casting director for ''Tin Men,'' who
remembered Mr. Walsh in the role and invited him to read for Wing. And for Mr.
Walsh, whose theater credits include the Al Pacino ''Richard III'' and the first
New York production of Mr. Mamet's ''American Buffalo,'' ''Tin Men'' offered
that rare quality in modern American film: literacy.

''I was a little bit in awe of Barry's ability,'' Mr. Walsh said of the
writer-director. '' 'Tin Men' is much more complicated than the usual movie.
It's intelligent. The rhythms of the language are real. I thought, 'This movie
may not make any money, but it'll be fun to do.' ''

But for the time being, Mr. Walsh said, he's through with playing the mean boss.
In Mr. Mamet's forthcoming film, ''The House of Games,'' he portrays a con man.
''Besides,'' he said, ''my blue suit's wearing out.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of J.T. Walsh; Photo from ''Tin Men''

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DINING OUT;
VIETNAMESE CUISINE IN GREENWICH

BYLINE: By PATRICIA BROOKS

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 37, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


ON entering the white-walled, high-ceilinged upstairs dining room of La Maison
Indochine in Greenwich, one has the illusion of stepping into a cool oasis from
the steamy heat of Vietnam. Mother-of-pearl inlaid wood screens and Indochinese
paintings continue the Southeast Asian motif.

The menu is Indochinese, predominantly Vietnamese, without even a soupc,on of
French, despite the restaurant's Gallic name and the names given several of the
menu specialties. A few dishes reveal a Chinese accent, such as Chinese noodle
soup, wonton soup, and Indochine's midget spring rolls (cha-gio), with a ground
pork filling inside crunchy rice pancakes. Vietnamese dumplings (banh-xephap)
were similar to the Chinese dim sum dumplings called har gau (chopped shrimp in
a translucent wrapper), served from Hong Kong to Hanover. Our Chinese guest one
evening insisted the dumplings must have come from New York's Chinatown. In any
case, they were delicious.

The Vietnamese cuisine bears a strong relationship to Chinese. But there are
significant differences, such as the Vietnamese use of lemon grass as a
seasoning and a prevailing legerdemain in the use of spices. There are
undercurrents of heat, but they are applied with a deft, light touch.

The soups at La Maison Indochine illustrate this point. Especially good are the
Chinese noodles with slices of barbecued pork, egg noodles, scallions and
cilantro, and special soup of the chef (hu-tieu dac-biet), a clear liquid packed
with pieces of crab, chicken, shrimp, rice noodles, scallions and cilantro.
Another commendable starter was Vietnamese country pate (cha-chung), an unusual
layering of shrimp, crab and pork mixed with egg and steamed to a light,
omelet-like consistency. Bouchee royale was our only disappointing appetizer -
big, black Chinese mushroom caps were crammed with a bland, dense filling.

Consider among your entree choices grilled beef sate (bo nuong sate), served
with a very mild-mannered peanut sauce. Be forewarned that the dishes here tend
to be extremely mild unless you request them spicier. On a first visit we tend
to order the dish ''as is'' to test its normal degree of heat. Very often this
means that on a second visit, to avoid another case of the ''blands,'' we
request greater spiciness. We would recommend that, unless you thrive on gently
seasoned food, you request extra spiciness if you order the beef sate as well as
chicken sauteed with ginger (ga xao gung) - a marvelous combination of chicken,
ginger slivers, onions, red peppers and cilantro.

Two dishes came breathing gentle fire even without a special request: Spicy duck
sauteed (vit xao cay) - duck slices with onions, carrots and red pepper; and
beignets de crevettes (tom lan bot) -deep-fried shrimp in a light, crisply
delicious batter, served with a spicy, red pepper seed sauce. Pork in sweet and
sour sauce (heo xao chua ngot) is appealing, a far cry from the cloying cliche
encountered in many Chinese restaurants. The sauce was light, with a pronounced
sour balance to its very delicate sweetness.

There were a few misses during our various visits. Calamar au curry (muc xao
curry) was a skimpy rendering of squid with very little curry flavor. In shrimp
noodles with lemon grass (bun tom) the lemon grass was missing (though we liked
the texture provided by chopped cucumbers), as was the lime in grilled beef with
fresh lime (bo nuong-chanh). Steamed fresh fish (ca-hap) served in a casserole
with ginger and black bean sauce had the makings of a succulent dish, but the
Boston scrod served to us was ''over the hill.'' There are few desserts
available, but the fried whole banana makes a crisp-coated, sweet ending to the
meal, even though it is not served flambee as stated on the menu.

Our tab for a leisurely three-course dinner for two came to $34.45, with drinks,
tax and tip extra. If you haven't experienced Vietnamese food, La Maison
Indochine is a comfortable, attractive place to enjoy it.

LA MAISON INDOCHINE

Good

107 Greenwich Avenue, Greenwich. 869-2689.

Atmosphere: A large all-white upstairs dining room conveys a suggestion of
tropical coolness, with mother-of-pearl screens and wall decorations of
Indochinese scenes.

Service: A cheerful, accommodating headwaiter compensates for some staff members
who have problems comprehending English.

Recommended Dishes: Special soup of the chef, Chinese noodle soup, Indochine's
spring roll, Vietnamese dumplings, Vietnamese country pate, beignets de
crevettes, chicken sauteed with ginger, pork sweet and sour, spicy duck sauteed,
grilled beef sate, fried banana.

Prices: Appetizers $2.50 - $6.50, entrees $8.50 -$16.50.

Hours: Lunch 11 A.M. - 2:30 P.M. Tuesday - Saturday; dinner 6 - 10:30 P.M.
Tuesday - Sunday.

Closed Mondays.

Credit cards: MasterCard, Visa. Cards not accepted at lunch on bills under $50.

Reservations: Accepted.

Ratings:
Poor
Satisfactory
Good
Very good
Excellent
Extraordinary

These ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation
to comparable establishments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TERRORIST IN THE FAMILY

BYLINE: By ROBERT STONE; Robert Stone's most recent novel is ''Children of
Light.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1771 words


THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR
By Ward Just. 326 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $17.95.

WILLIAM NORTH, the title character in Ward Just's new novel, is at the age of 50
a career Foreign Service officer with the rank of ambassador.

He has seen service in all the difficult places with the exception of Indochina.
His ambassadorial posting was not to one of the old capitals of Europe but to a
small, new and poor country in black Africa. As Mr. Just's gripping and
insightful ninth novel opens, North is about to take up his duties as charge
d'affaires in Bonn.

During his tour of duty in Africa, Ambassador William North was the victim of a
grenade attack, and he carries fragments of shrapnel in his bones. He is not
embittered by his wounds, for he accepts that physical risk is part of the price
the American Foreign Service now requires. Nor is he disillusioned by the
inconsistencies and failures of America's global policy, although he's quite
aware of them.

Ambassador North is a man of sang-froid and intuition. Patriotism to him has an
elementary moral dimension, and he understands his life's work as the service of
the United States. He is a reader of Jefferson and of the school of history that
sees a modest progress in the development of ''Western values.'' He allows
himself to be moved, somewhat wryly, by the public monuments of Washington, and
he admires the British for playing cricket between barrages in Flanders during
the First World War.

Above all, Mr. Just's Ambassador North is a representative of the generation
that entered Government service during the Administration of John F. Kennedy.

His contemporaries are men and women elegantly educated at prep schools and Ivy
League universities that were citadels of postwar confidence. Inspired by the
great liberal ideologues - Reinhold Niebuhr, George Orwell, Albert Camus -
dazzled by the false dawn of Kennedy glamour, they would bring a new
sophistication to the beleaguered agencies charged with the conduct of the cold
war. But their good intentions were to be confounded by history.

Reflecting on the premature deaths of two members of his Foreign Service class,
North thinks:

''They were good, close friends and when they died it was as if part of [his]
own history had died. . . . They had become specialists in the problems of the
Third World or, more accurately, the problems of the United States in the Third
World. They had corresponded frequently, long droll letters; nothing had been as
expected. Their careers were so different from those of their heroes, Bohlen,
Thompson, and Kennan. The Third World, always simmering on the back burner.
Adlai had cared, but Adlai was dead. Things changed quickly: the Europeans
withdrew, the Russians advanced. Batista fled, the Congo fell apart. Sukarno,
Sihanouk, Nkrumah. There were new rules and when Kennedy died and the Vietnamese
won their war, newer rules. These were events to which North had been witness. .
. .'' COURAGEOUS, sentimental and stoically patriotic, William North has lived
to see his deepest principles thrown open to question. On the personal side, he
has a good marriage; his wife, Elinor, is a painter, humorous, a good sport and
a pal. In the person of his only child, however, personal and professional
griefs coalesce.

William North Jr. has been imbued by his parents with a loathing for injustice.

''Injustice enraged him. His favorite word, injustice, he had learned it at five
and it had been a family word, applied equally to underdone hamburgers, a Red
Sox loss in extra innings, a quarrel with the houseboy, a missed airplane
connection, or a death. Bill Jr. took everything personally.''

Now in his mid-20's, Bill Jr. lives in West Germany, the scene of his father's
next assignment. He's as at home in Germany as anywhere else, a bilingual State
Department brat. As the story opens, Bill Jr.'s lifelong rage against injustice
has taken the form of commitment to an ultraradical network of trans-European
terrorists. The younger North's values, however much they might be rooted in the
same moral concerns, are quite different from his father's, and so are his
heroes. He quotes approvingly the maxim of the Ukrainian Cossack anarchist
Nestor Machno: ''Kill all civil servants. Kill them without prejudice, no matter
what party they belong to or what government gave them their posts.''

The great Machno was given to hyperbole, but William North Jr. is not. This
stance, which sounds as though it might supply the single missing link between
the Red Brigades and the white-supremacist survivalists of Hayden Lake, Idaho,
is one he proposes to put into practice. Under his code name of Wolfgang, he
lives as an underground man, dodging the intelligence services of the West,
using and being used by those of the East. Another quotation he's fond of is
Lenin's remark to the effect that revolutionaries are dead men on furlough.

The rendering of Bill North Jr. and the interior landscape he inhabits is one of
the greatest achievements of ''The American Ambassador.'' He's a haunting and
persuasive character.

Vacationing on Martha's Vineyard preparatory to taking up his next post, North
Sr. suffers an attack of localized paralysis; one of the grenade fragments in
his body has lodged in his spinal column. While he's under treatment in a
Washington hospital, North finds that his son's politics have become a public
issue, a counter in the power games of the capital. An ambitious senator has
found out about North's terrorist son; the senator, always in search of an
issue, thinks he has one. It's suggested that young North, who grew up in and
around embassies, may represent a threat to diplomatic stations abroad. The
senator suspects a State Department cover-up, an instance of the State
Department mafia looking out for its own.

The Washington scene is portrayed with a particular vividness; there's a
wonderful immediateness to Mr. Just's depiction of both the city and its
denizens, the lawyers, bureaucrats, politicians and spear carriers who are
represented in the course of the narrative. MEANWHILE, in West Berlin, Bill Jr.
has acquired a sidekick, an emotionally crippled young German woman, whose short
life has been lived out amid the violence and intrigue at the edges of the cold
war. From the moment that young North picks her up - at a cafe in Paris where
she's been working as a model - Gert Mueller has found her proper role in life.
Nerveless, merciless, fearless, she's the ideal terrorist. She's also a born
worshiper and she worships young Bill North. For his part, Bill North Jr. has
plans toward the furthering of which he believes Gert will be useful. With his
father due to arrive in Bonn, he's decided to carry out the ultimate
assassination, an act of symbolic liberation by violence, which he thinks will
point an excellent lesson to suffering mankind. He's decided to kill his father.

In the final scenes, the paths of father and son converge near the Berlin Wall
and the two men seek each other out, each for his own reason.

Ward Just, who reported from Vietnam for The Washington Post, is extremely
knowledgeable about the territory that's covered in ''The American Ambassador,''
and the book is charged with authenticity. There is a wide variety of splendid
portraits foreign and domestic; Mr. Just can create character more effectively
in a paragraph than some do in an entire volume.

''The American Ambassador'' is a technically complicated novel, perhaps more
complicated than it need be, with time shifts that may distract some readers.
For the most part, however, the author's stream-of-consciousness devices serve
to bring key characters into focus and convey psychological atmosphere very
strongly. Mr. Just delineates the struggle of youth against age, the contempt of
idealism for experience, the rage of sons and the grief of fathers with a
considered hand. The conflicts to which this book bears witness have a tragic
dimension.

Ward Just, the author of the well-regarded novel ''The American Blues,'' has in
''The American Ambassador'' done his best work, and given us a splendid book
that is both thoughtful and fast-moving.

SHAPED BY VIETNAM

PARIS -- Ward Just, a friendly, disheveled man with a ready chuckle, gave up
daily journalism as a Washington Post reporter and war correspondent 17 years
ago to write serious fiction. But he admits the world he knew then, though no
longer inhabits, is the world he writes about still.

''It's burned into my mind. The milieu I knew as a reporter is the milieu I
write about - the world of journalists, politicians, diplomats and soldiers,''
he said over a glass of Cahors wine in the small, white Montmartre apartment
where he and his wife now live. Then he added a word of caution. ''But I write
about people who are just this side of famous. Then there's a chance they will
come alive. If you bring a secretary of state or a President into a novel, the
reader always identifies him with Kissinger or Nixon or someone. The roman a
clef is the bane of my life.''

Mr. Just is delighted that his new novel, ''The American Ambassador,'' will be
his first book to be translated into French. He described the work as ''a
meditation on the nature of patriotism - a story about loyalty and betrayal.''

These are themes he has explored before (for instance in his first novel, ''A
Soldier of the Revolution''), and he attributes his fascination with them to the
two years he spent covering the Vietnam War, from 1965 to 1967.

''That was the reference point of my life,'' Mr. Just maintained, recalling how
after Vietnam he felt frustrated covering national politics back in the United
States or writing editorials. ''I realized that nothing I would do in the U.S.
could be the equivalent of that. Yet I didn't want to become a vagabond war
correspondent forever,'' he explained, ''so I turned to fiction.''

Mr. Just said he is ''doing some typing these days, not real writing,'' trying
to put form on ''an idea for a new novel so vague that I can't even describe
it.'' He plans to make Paris his home now, though with regular trips back to the
United States.

Mr. Just travels light, but never forgets his Oxford English Dictionary or his
thesaurus. ''Reading a dictionary gives you a sense of the weight of words,'' he
explained, adding that when his writing is going best he makes the most use of
both works. In Europe Mr. Just plans to move around the Continent, duplicating
the foreign correspondent's life he has never forgotten. ''But each evening
instead of filing to my paper, I'll be filing into my brain.''

- PAUL LEWIS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Ward Just; Drawing (page 22)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: March 15, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1461 words

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List FICTION
 1          1      6  WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon.
                     (Morrow, $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences
                     that befall a woman and her family after her
                     appointment as Ambassador to Rumania.

 2          2      7  THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King.
                     (Viking, $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged
                     king, two princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.

 3          3     33  RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam,
                     $19.95.) The West tries to stave off the Russians in
                     World War III.

 4          7      4  OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $17.95.)
                     Tracking down a mysterious disease that strikes
                     certain physicians and their patients.

 5          5      9  NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon &
                     Schuster, $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans
                     from being discovered by the Germans.

 6          6      8  THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday,
                     $17.95.) A financial wizard undertakes to defuse the
                     crisis besetting Wall Street and the American
                     economy.

 7 *        4     27  IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                     horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in
                     a small Maine town.

 8         12      4  DREAMS ARE NOT ENOUGH, by Jacqueline
                     Briskin. (Putnam, $18.95.) A California family
                     dynasty out to conquer the world.

 9          9     20  FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts.
                     (Naval Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over
                     Vietnam.

10         10     24  THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy.
                     (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Complex family
                     relationships in South Carolina and New York City.

11                 1  BOLT, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $17.95.) The
                     jockey-hero of ''Break In'' has to contend with a
                     romantic crisis, a family feud and an international
                     arms-selling intrigue.

12          8     19  WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.)
                     Iran during the month following the Shah's
                     departure.

13         15      3  THE DINNER PARTY, by Howard Fast.
                     (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) The feelings of family
                     and friends - which affect Government operations
                     - surface at a get-together in Washington.

14  *      14      6  PATIENCE OF A SAINT, by Andrew M. Greeley.
                     (Geis/Warner, $18.95.) A hard-bitten
                     newspaperman learns a lot about his family and
                     decency while on the trail of a wily politician.

15         11      9  BANDITS, by Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House,
                     $17.95.) A gang of three plots to heist millions being
                     sent to the contras in Nicaragua.

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List NONFICTION

 1          1     11  A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein.
                     (Macmillan, $16.95.) A chronicle of one season
                     spent with the coach Bob Knight and his Indiana
                     University basketball team.

 2          3      4  THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by
                     Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.)
                     From the Boston slums of Irish immigrants to the
                     White House: three generations of a family.

 3          7      3  COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/
                     Morrow, $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the
                     visits of ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his family's
                     place in upstate New York.

 4          2     45  FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/
                     Doubleday, $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations
                     from the television star and father of five.

 5          4      5  ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph
                     Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $18.95.) A case
                     involving the murder of a Pennsylvania high school
                     teacher and the disappearance of her two children.

 6          5      5  THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf,
                     $24.95.) Australia from penal colony to its gradual
                     emergence as a flourishing nation.

 7          6     15  A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins
                     Publishers, $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as
                     recorded in pictures by 200 photojournalists.

 8         10     53  YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss.
                     (Random House, $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden
                     Years Clinic in pictures and rhyme; the first Dr.
                     Seuss book for adults.

 9 *        8      9  THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT
                     LIFE IN THE UNIVERSE, by Jane Wagner.
                     (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb observations on life
                     today; script of the show starring Lily Tomlin.

10 *       11      6  REAGAN'S AMERICA: Innocents at Home, by
                     Garry Wills. (Doubleday, $19.95.) The 40th
                     President as the product and embodiment of an
                     American mythology.

11          9      2  INTIMATE PARTNERS, by Maggie Scarf.
                     (Random House, $18.95.) Changing patterns in love
                     and marriage.

12         15      2  LIFE WISH, by Jill Ireland. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                     The author tells of her battle against cancer.

13                15  DANCING ON MY GRAVE, by Gelsey Kirkland
                     with Greg Lawrence. (Doubleday, $17.95.) The
                     ballerina recalls her checkered career.

14         13     23  THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam.
                     (Morrow, $19.95.) The crisis in the American
                     automobile industry and Japan's role in it.

15         14     43  JAMES HERRIOT'S DOG STORIES, by James
                     Herriot. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Fifty tales by a
                     Yorkshire veterinarian about his favorite animal.

               Weeks
This     Last     On
Week     Week   List ADVICE, HOW-TO AND MISCELLANEOUS

 1          2     23  MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO
                     LOVE THEM, by Susan Forward and Joan Torres.
                     (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope with overbearing
                     men.

 2          1     20  THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE,
                     by Jeff Smith. (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be
                     prepared at moderate cost.

 3          3     39  THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn.
                     (Norton, $15.95.) A regimen based on the
                     Vanderbilt University Weight Management
                     Program.

 4          4     79  WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                     DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
                     standard reference work in a 1983 revision.

 5          5     57  THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.
                     (Morrow, $14.95.) A television chef's inexpensive
                     dishes.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

SECRECY AND POWER: The Life of J. Edgar Hoover, by Richard Gid Powers. (Free
Press, $27.95.) A balanced, lively analysis of Hoover's 48 years as Director of
the F.B.I., a great investigative agency he virtually created and sometimes
abused.

HARDBALL: The Education of a Baseball Commissioner, by Bowie Kuhn. (Times Books,
$19.95.) The memoirs, pungent with difficult owners and other Dickensian
characters, of the lawyer who presided over baseball's commercial recovery for
15 years.

THE RUG MERCHANT, by Phillip Lopate. (Viking, $16.95.) Cyrus Irani, the hero of
Mr. Lopate's sad, tight, lyrical novel, struggles against New York life to
retain his dignity and his shop.

THE RED AND THE BLUE: Cambridge, Treason and Intelligence, by Andrew Sinclair.
(Little, Brown, $17.95.) A light but reliable overview of the penetration of
upper-level British life, especially Cambridge University, by Soviet agents in
the 1920's and 30's.

WINSTON CHURCHILL'S AFTERNOON NAP: A Wide-Awake Inquiry Into the Human Nature of
Time, by Jeremy Campbell. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) Subtle perspectives on
time and its perception, mostly concerned with biological time.

PLAYBOYS AND KILLJOYS: An Essay on the Theory and Practice of Comedy, by Harry
Levin. (Oxford University, $18.95.) A distinguished critic examines the
assumptions, distinctions and mechanisms at the heart of comedy.

THE RED WHITE AND BLUE, by John Gregory Dunne. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.)
Left-wing politics, big business, Hollywood, the Roman Catholic Church, Vietnam,
Central America and much, much more are entangled in a pungent, violent,
distinctly unsympathetic fictional treatment of America's last 20 years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 15, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

        Weeks
This       On
Week     List Fiction
 1          2  THE BOURNE SUPREMACY, by Robert
              Ludlum. (Bantam, $4.95.) A plot to seize Hong
              Kong and bring China into conflict with the West.

 2          7  I'LL TAKE MANHATTAN, by Judith Krantz.
              (Bantam, $4.95.) A rich, beautiful young woman
              conquers the world of magazine publishing.

 3          8  THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood.
              (Fawcett, $4.95.) In the Republic of Gilead, men
              and women perform the services assigned them.

 4          2  PRIVATE AFFAIRS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket,
              $4.95.) A couple's marriage is seriously strained.

 5          2  JOANNA'S HUSBAND AND DAVID'S WIFE, by
              Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey. (Dell, $4.50.) Two
              sides of a marriage revealed in diary entries.

 6         52  THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
              Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
              brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

 7         15  LIE DOWN WITH LIONS, by Ken Follett. (Signet/
              NAL, $4.95.) An Englishwoman in Afghanistan.

 8          1  THE GAMBLE, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove,
              $3.95.) The stormy romance of a saloonkeeper and
              a temperance crusader in a small Kansas town.

 9          2  TO TASTE THE WINE, by Fern Michaels.
              (Ballantine, $4.50.) An English beauty's
              passionate affair with a handsome Australian.

10          7  SEASONS OF THE HEART, by Cynthia Freeman.
              (Berkley, $4.50.) A businesswoman is torn
              between devotion to her husband and her mentor.

11          7  THE IMMIGRANT'S DAUGHTER, by Howard
              Fast. (Dell, $4.50.) A woman involved in politics.

12          2  THE LEBARON SECRET, by Stephen
              Birmingham. (Berkley, $4.50.) Love and conflict
              among a wealthy family of California vintners.

13          1  WORD OF HONOR, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner,
              $4.50.) A former officer is falsely held responsible
              for an atrocity committed by his men in Vietnam.

14 *       10  THE STORYTELLER, by Harold Robbins.
              (Pocket, $4.50.) A poor boy from Brooklyn sets out
              to make it big in the world of glamour as a writer.

15         16  THE TWO MRS. GRENVILLES, by Dominick
              Dunne. (Bantam, $4.50.) Scandal in high society.

16 *       16  THE MAMMOTH HUNTERS, by Jean M. Auel.
              (Bantam, $4.95.) Life in the prehistoric world.

        Weeks
This       On
Week     List NONFICTION: General

 1          3  NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.
              (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
              author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 2          5  WISEGUY, by Nicholas Pileggi. (Pocket, $4.50.)
              Life in a Mafia family.

 3 *       50  OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam,
              $4.50.) The actress's midlife ''journey to find her
              true self.''

 4        177  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
              (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
              spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 5         10  THE MAN WHO MISTOOK HIS WIFE FOR A
              HAT, by Oliver Sacks. (Perennial/Harper & Row,
              $7.95.) Strange neurological disabilities.

 6         16  DANCING IN THE LIGHT, by Shirley MacLaine.
              (Bantam, $4.50.) The entertainer wins an Oscar,
              survives a stormy romance and has new visions.

 7         19  WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.
              (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's experiences
              flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.

        Weeks
This       On
Week     List NONFICTION: Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1         41  WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin
              Norwood. (Pocket, $4.50.) How to avoid or end
              addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.

 2          7  FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn
              Diamond. (Warner, $4.95.) A diet for weight loss
              and physical fitness.

 3          6  THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.
              (Ballantine, $4.95.) A television chef's inexpensive
              dishes.

 4         18  RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States,
              Canada, Mexico. (Rand McNally, $5.95.) For 1987.

 5         41  ADULT CHILDREN OF ALCOHOLICS, by Janet
              Geringer Woititz. (Health Communications,
              $6.95.) Advice about a family problem.

 6          8  J. K. LASSER'S YOUR INCOME TAX. (Prentice
              Hall, $8.95.) The 1987 edition.

 7 *        8  THE ARTHUR YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1987.
              (Ballantine, $10.95.) Aid from an accounting firm.

 8 *        1  GARFIELD FOOD FOR THOUGHT, by Jim
              Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) Comic strips.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT DO WOMEN WANT?

BYLINE: By William E. Geist; William E. Geist writes the About New York column
for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 74, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 900 words


The question before us is this: Do men dress to attract women?

The answer, of course, is: Yes, but it doesn't seem to be working.

Men spend billions of dollars on clothes each year, trying to dress for success
on the job and for success with women, yet we sense that somehow it's just the
clothing industry that's enjoying the success.

For one thing, we aren't really sure what women want. We buy men's fashion
magazines that tell us we can attract women by wearing Don Johnson outfits, but
these ''Miami Vice'' duds don't seem to work any better than the leisure suits
the magazines once had us buying - let alone the Nehru jackets.

We are told in advertisements that after-shave lotion will give us ''instant sex
appeal,'' but it seems the more we put on, the farther away the women go. ''Why
else,'' I was once forced to ask myself aboard an elevator, ''would she push the
Emergency Stop button on 2 and walk up to 19?''

The alternative to dressing to attract women is undressing to attract them, a
fashion strategy that seems less wise with each passing meal. Have you been to
the beach lately? It takes a strong constitution.

Despite torrential publicity about the fitness craze, the population is aging
and seems to be expanding. Jaymar-Ruby Inc., a men's clothing company, is
selling an awful lot of Sansabelt slacks these days, an awful lot.

Fashion tends to perplex most of us. Some men understand it, but I never fell in
with that crowd and their debates over the right fabric for their pocket
squares.

The fashion magazines help, but when we see a nice casual ''stay at home''
outfit, too often the caption reads: sport coat, $980; sweater, $665; trousers,
$300; shirt, $125; Italian loafers, a war-reparation figure. It's enough to make
a man long to be back in the Army, where a higher authority decided what you
should wear and issued it to you. A certain kind of woman has always gone for a
man in uniform, even in the 1960's. I noticed this in Bangkok.

A lot of men don't like shopping for clothes and trying things on. And it's
embarrassing when we see something we like in a newspaper or magazine and rush
to the store to buy it, only to realize we can't pronounce the name: ''Could you
direct me to the, uh . . . (''Comme des Garcons'' is what we want) . . . nearest
exit?''

Fashion used to be easy when we were younger. You'd just go to your closet and
ask yourself, What would Elvis wear?

But we've moved on now, most of us settling for bland respectability: pin-stripe
suits, wing-tip shoes, polo shirts - you know. If such clothing attracts women,
it is undoubtedly the wrong kind of women, the kind who probably wear the same
clothes you do: pin-stripe suits, polo shirts, wing-tips. Moreover, a lot of
this neuter-wear is purchased for men by women, and certainly not to make the
men more attractive to other women. ''No, really, darling, you look just . . .
fine.''

This move to a conservative fashion mode - in politics, style of dress, etc. -
would seem to be a reaction to recent traumatic events in this nation's history.
I speak not of Vietnam or Watergate, of course, but of the Leisure Suit.

We were told, if only by our mothers, that we looked ''nice'' in our leisure
suits, a fashion trend that came into being so we would have something to wear
during a new chronological period called ''Leisure Time.'' Before leisure time,
humans were just sort of ''off work.'' It was crazy.

People didn't know what to do - no one had told them - and instead of
participating in ''Sanctioned Leisure Time Activities,'' such as hang gliding
and wind surfing, they completely wasted their ''time off'' by playing cards,
horsing around with the kids, washing the car or even just sitting on the porch
- and without the benefit of leisure wear. Some people just wore their old
clothes. It wasn't pretty.

We took it on good faith that we looked sharp in our leisure suits:
top-stitched, double-knit polyester, perhaps in a robin's-egg blue or banana,
although orange was a favorite among state legislators. We thought women would
swoon at our heavy gold chains and splashy shirts, open to the mesosternum, with
plane-wing-size collars. We assumed that what would drive women wild would be
wearing a leisure suit with a white-belt-and-white-shoes set, a look that came
to be known as the Full Cleveland.

We were shocked and dismayed to learn that in the final analysis our leisure
suits had actually been repugnant to women all along -although a few
occasionally seemed to dig them, shooting furtive glances at us in line at the
Ponderosa Steak House.

Then one day it was - slam, bam! - all over. No more leisure suits.

We were at a loss for how to attract women until Don Johnson and his sidekick,
Michael Thomas Philip, or some combination thereof, came on the scene. They wore
a day's growth, dyed T-shirts with sport coats, and no socks with their shoes.
The women were all over them.

Men here in the industrial Northeast had trouble with that look. For one thing,
it's cold up here. For another, life is more formal in New York, and the
no-socks thing just didn't look right with wing-tips.

I recently wore my Full Cleveland leisure suit outfit to a costume party, and
thought I was pretty clever.

Two things happened. No one laughed, which was a switch from when I wore it
seriously in the 70's. And women didn't talk to me, which was no switch at all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
'TRACERS' AT PURCHSE

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 18, Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 831 words


BECAUSE professional theater is in short supply in the county, it follows that
when a production as potent as the much-acclaimed ''Tracers'' passes through -
even if it is just for one night - attention must be paid.

An ensemble piece collectively created by eight Vietnam veterans out of their
own war experiences, ''Tracers'' had its original production at Los Angeles in
1980, was then presented by Chicago's noted Steppenwolf Theater and ran for six
months at Joseph Papp's Public Theater in Manhattan in 1985, under the auspices
of the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company.

It has since been seen in London and in Australia. With three members of the
original, Los Angeles cast - all of whom are credited as co-authors -
''Tracers'' will be presented next Sunday at the Performing Arts Center of the
State University of New York at Purchase, in Theater A at 7 P.M.

''Tracers'' - the title refers to cartridges with an orange tip that make red
streaks in the sky - was conceived and directed by John DiFusco, who is
rejoining the company for the current tour that begins Thursday in Vermont and
ends April 12 in Massachusetts.

Reached at his home in Los Angeles, Mr. DiFusco recalled the evolution of
''Tracers.'' ''After I returned from Vietnam, I was a theater major at
California State University and I carried around the idea of getting together a
group of actors who were Vietnam veterans. After my younger brother was killed
in a motorcycle accident, the ephemera, the vulnerability of life flashed before
me again -and wouldn't go away. Then I knew I had to get it together and make a
statement,'' Mr. DiFusco said.

On the lookout for actors who were Vietnam veterans, he placed an advertisement
in a Los Angeles theatrical trade newspaper. Thirty men showed up. Six were
chosen. For six months, through rap sessions and various psychodramatic and
improvisatory techniques, ''Tracers'' came to life. Of the first cast, Merlin
Marston (as Little John) and Harry Stephens (as Professor), in addition to Mr.
DiFusco (as Doc) will appear in Purchase. Although each actor plays a designated
character, the form of ''Tracers'' is freeflowing, at once cinematic and musical
- a sort of rock and roll collage. ''It isn't really a story play, but the
events -the story scenes - really happened,'' Mr. DiFusco explained. The
language in ''Tracers'' is explicit; the images, graphic; the sound design,
explosive - taped music includes performances by Bruce Springsteen, the Doors,
Jimi Hendrix and Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young -and the overall theatrical
effect is startling. In fact, ''fear of the hard-edged language and
controversy,'' according to Mr. DiFusco, led a cable television network and the
Public Broadcasting System to turn down proposed telecasts of the unexpurgated
''Tracers.''

The current tour will likely be the last go-around for ''Tracers'' with an all-
Vietnam veteran cast. ''We're all getting a little old for this thing,'' the
39-year-old Mr. DiFusco said, recalling how he resisted offers from producers
who wanted to put on the play with ''name actors.'' Only the Steppenwolf
production veered from the Vietnam-veteran casting rule.

On the heels of the success of the film ''Platoon,'' an account of the Vietnam
experience of its author and director, Oliver Stone, and a front-line contender
for the March 30 Academy Awards, a spate of films and television mini-series
with Vietnam scenes are expected. Among them are such titles as ''Hanoi
Hilton,'' ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' (with Robin Williams) and ''Home Before
Morning'' (with Sally Field). And in the spring, Stanley Kubrick's ''Full Metal
Jacket'' and Francis Coppola's ''Gardens of Stone'' are Vietnam sagas scheduled
for release.

About all that, Mr. DiFusco commented: ''I saw 'Platoon' twice and I know
Oliver. I liked it a lot the first time, but then I was disturbed by what seemed
familiar. This is the same truth we've been telling for years, so it's a strange
combination I feel: I'm glad this is all happening, but I'm bitter because,
well, I'm still pretty poor and I think 'Tracers' was the original motivator of
a lot of stuff that's coming out. It bothers me to go to a party and see three
producers and three writers running around telling me about their Vietnam
screenplays. I don't know whether that's healthy; it depends on whose hands it's
in. Oliver Stone is responsible; he's a Vietnam veteran; I don't know about the
others.

''All of a sudden, it's fashionable to be a Vietnam veteran,'' Mr. DiFusco
added. ''What, finally, has to be addressed is the idea of killing: you're
either killed or haunted by killing. When young people become fascinated with
something like 'Rambo' and cheer every time Stallone blows away an Asian
Communist or a Russian, that's dangerous; they'll end up strung out, like we
were, wondering 'What did I do?' and 'How do I fit back into society?' ''

For ticket information about ''Tracers,'' call 253-5900. Tickets are $18 and
$15.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AIDS: THE VICTIMS;
AIDS, AN UNKNOWN DISEASE BEFORE 1981, GROWS INTO A WORLDWIDE SCOURGE

BYLINE: By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1272 words


More than 32,000 Americans have been diagnosed with AIDS and nearly 60 percent
of them have died, sowing sorrow and fear among millions.

But the epidemic has only just begun, medical experts warn. Federal scientists
project that by the end of 1991, the total number of cases will reach 270,000,
with 179,000 deaths unless better treatments are found. In the year 1991 alone,
some 54,000 Americans are expected to die of acquired immune deficiency
syndrome, an annual loss comparable to the death toll of the entire Vietnam War.

The epidemic surfaced in 1981 as a puzzling surprise. Doctors in California and
New York reported that a few dozen homosexual men had died of Kaposi's sarcoma,
a rare form of cancer, and suffered abnormalities of the immune system.
Physicians in New York soon realized that they had seen a number of similar,
unexplained cases in the previous several years.

Soon It Hit Drug Users

Ominously, more such cases were appearing in homosexual men each month. And
soon, AIDS appeared among users of illegal intravenous drugs, especially black
and Hispanic addicts in New York, Newark and other Northeastern cities who died
of a previously rare pneumonia and other diseases brought on by the collapse of
the body's disease-fighting ability.

At first, no one knew whether the incurable disorder was caused by an infectious
agent or by some other factor common to the life styles of homosexual men and
drug addicts.

Drawing on recent advances in the search for cancer viruses, researchers in
France isolated a new virus from AIDS patients in 1983. By early 1984, American
and French scientists had built a convincing case that the virus was the cause
of AIDS.

''Our best guess is that the AIDS virus first infected some homosexual men,
probably in New York and San Francisco, in the mid-1970's,'' said Dr. Harold
Jaffe, chief AIDS epidemiologist at the Federal Centers for Disease Control in
Atlanta. In the same period, research indicates, the AIDS virus was spreading in
parts of Africa. The origin of the virus has not been established.

Careful analysis of disease patterns showed that in the United States the virus
was spreading through sexual intercourse, most often anal intercourse between
homosexual men, and in blood, as on contaminated needles shared by drug addicts
and from infected mothers to their babies, before birth. Until early 1985, when
a screening system virtually eliminated the danger, the virus was also spread by
contaminated medical transfusions and in a clotting factor given to
hemophiliacs.

In Africa and in Haiti, a small Caribbean country that for unknown reasons was
also hit hard by AIDS, evidence indicated that the virus was transmitted
frequently through heterosexual intercourse.

Studies found no evidence that the virus had passed from person to person
through close, nonsexual daily contact in the home, school or workplace. That
finding has stood the test of time.

The Warnings Came Too Late

As evidence grew about how AIDS spreads, health officials issued increasingly
urgent warnings about the potential dangers of homosexual intercourse and
sharing of intravenous needles. Yet for many, knowledge and changes in behavior
came too late. In the early 1980's, the virus swept through the homosexual
community, probably infecting half or more of homosexual men in cities like New
York and San Francisco. Drug addicts in the Northeast in particular were
likewise invaded by the AIDS virus in enormous numbers.

As more women became infected, usually either from contaminated needles or
because they had intercourse with a drug user or a bisexual man, so rose the
toll among newborns. Nearly 400 children have developed AIDS after being born
infected with the virus. The majority of these young victims have been black or
Hispanic children from poor urban areas.

Today, Federal officials estimate, up to one and a half million Americans carry
the AIDS virus in their bodies. Perhaps one-fourth of them will develop AIDS
within five years of their infection, and only time will tell how many will
eventually become ill. All carriers of the virus, whether they develop AIDS or
not, are presumed to be infected for life and able to pass the virus to others
through sexual intercourse or in blood.

With time, the disease has spread well beyond the cities where it first became
entrenched; AIDS has now appeared in every state. A central concern today is how
widely it has also spread, or might in the future, among heterosexuals not
involved with illegal drugs.

So far, nine of ten AIDS patients in the United States have been homosexual or
bisexual men or intravenous drug users. Federal experts estimate that from 4
percent to 7 percent of all adult patients were infected through heterosexual
intercourse.

Of these suspected heterosexual cases nearly half, 2 percent of the nation's
total cases, involve immigrants from Africa or Haiti, where vaginal intercourse
is believed to be a common means of transmission. Another 2 percent of all cases
involve men and women who became infected through heterosexual intercourse with
a partner from a known risk group - a bisexual man, a drug addict or a person
infected by blood products. In addition, officials believe, a portion of the 3
percent of the nation's cases in which the source of infection is undetermined
may reflect heterosexual transmission.

Urgen Calls for Education

Although there is no evidence that the AIDS virus is coursing through the
heterosexual population, many experts warn that it could easily spread among
those with many sex partners, prompting urgent new calls for nationwide
campaigns to educate people about the risks. Research has clearly shown that the
virus can be transmitted both from man to woman and from woman to man in vaginal
intercourse.

By far the greatest danger, most experts believe, is to those whose lives
intersect with the world of drug addiction. ''Infected drug users are the main
portal of transmission to other parts of the heterosexual community, and their
newborns,'' Dr. Jaffe said in an interview. If the epidemic does spread more
widely, the inner-city poor will probably be the foremost victims; the black and
Hispanic poor will suffer even more disproportionately from AIDS than they
already do.

A Global Disaster

As the United States struggles to come to terms with the unfolding tragedy, the
disastrous global dimensions of the AIDS epidemic are becoming clearer. The news
from Africa has grown steadily worse: the disease is rampant in ever more
countries, the toll in lives is already high, and surveys reveal startling rates
of AIDS virus infection - close to one in 10 adults in some cities. Evidence
suggests that at least one other virus, related to the originally discovered
AIDS virus, might also be causing disease in parts of Africa.

Stating that he could ''not imagine a worse health problem in this century,''
Dr. Haldan Mahler, director of the World Health Organization, recently warned
that AIDS was ''knocking unpleasantly on the doors of Asia,'' and that it
already had a foothold in Brazil and elsewhere in Latin America. In Europe,
meanwhile, officials say that the AIDS virus has spread rapidly among drug
addicts and homosexual men, and countries there are bracing for a flood of
patients and deaths.

Worldwide, W.H.O. estimates, some 10 million people may already be infected with
the AIDS virus. Unless powerful preventive measures are enacted, according to
the international agency, as many as 100 million people could be infected within
five years. ''We're running scared,'' Dr. Mahler said recently.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of 1983 Gay Freedom Day Parade (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Let's Rethink the National Security Council

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 797 words


To the Editor:

Michael Janeway is certainly right (Op-Ed, March 4) in pointing out that the
Tower Commission report was seriously flawed in endorsing the present National
Security Council system. The commission deserves our full praise for examining
the Iran-contra affair as thoroughly and objectively as possible under the time
constraints it faced. But its endorsement of the system that produced this
sordid episode detracts from the future usefulness of the report. The National
Security system requires substantially more attention than this cursory
examination.

The historical record indicates this is not the first time the National Security
Council staff became operational rather than simply performing its statutory
functions. Henry A. Kissinger may not have been a rogue elephant like Lieut.
Col. Oliver L. North, but he certainly took on operational assignments that went
far beyond his advisory capacity, and so did most of his successors.

Now this may be an essential function of a National Security Adviser to the
President, but it is technically at odds with the legislative grant of
authority, and if necessary, the law should be amended to incorporate it.

But nothing of this nature should be considered before a careful examination of
our national security needs is undertaken to answer the question the Tower
Commission raised but inadequately explored. It is more than 25 years since
Senator Henry M. Jackson and his subcommittee took a deep look at this problem,
and it is time the process was repeated.

The Tower Commission's effort to accomplish this quickly by asking former
Presidents and members of the N.S.C. what they would propose is only the
beginning of such an investigation. Should a responsible examination of this
critical agency be satisfied by asking the principal dramatis personae how they
evaluate the process by which they made their most important decisions?

Could one expect an objective analysis of the N.S.C.'s role in the secret
Cambodian bombings and the later incursion from former President Nixon and his
National Security Adviser, Henry Kissinger? And should military historians judge
the N.S.C.'s role in determining strategy and tactics in the Vietnam War on the
basis of an evaluation by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff? The notion
is absurd on its face.

These individuals have much to contribute, but to rely on their testimony
exclusively is the better part of folly. Who has a greater interest in
protecting their role in history?

The Tower Commission has given little attention to the role of Congress in
determining national security policy. The Framers divided these responsibilities
between Congress and the Presidency because they realized that total power in
the hands of either branch of government, particularly in the area bordering on
war and peace, would be dangerous to our freedom. But lodging the N.S.C. in the
executive branch, as necessary as that once seemed, has come very close to
eliminating this very desirable division of power with its essential checks and
balances.

For example, the N.S.C., with its expanding staff and numerous inter-agency
committees, has become the place where much of the vital information collected
by the Central Intelligence Agency and other intelligence agencies, by the
military and the State Department is exchanged. Such information is essential
these days before an informed opinion can be developed on national security
policy.

Clearly, a commission appointed by the President to explore the Iran-contra arms
scandal with the objective of putting the Government back in order could not
devote the time and resources necessary to address this critical problem. But
instead of postponing the question, the report all but forecloses it by
prematurely validating the ''N.S.C. system'' and condemning only its abuse.

There is ample evidence in this debacle, and in earlier failures such as
Vietnam, that exclusive executive branch control of national security policy is
not necessarily in the national interest, to say nothing of its constitutional
shortcomings. Of course, there are serious security problems in further
dissemination of such information, and a Congressional hearing is not the ideal
setting for interaction between the branches.

But if we were inventive enough in 1947 to create an agency to advise the
President on such policies, is it beyond our capacity to provide the
constitutionally equal partner in the process with sufficient information to
function as the Constitution provides and as experience justifies it should?

WILLIAM M. GOODSMITH
Providence, R.I., March 5, 1987
  The writer, emeritus associate professor of American studies at Brandeis
University, is author of ''The Growth of Presidential Power.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HOLLYWOOD'S EARLY LINE: IT LOOKS LIKE 'PLATOON'

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1197 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, March 15


If the Hollywood grapevine is correct -and it usually is - ''Platoon'' will
sweep the Oscars two weeks from now.

Each year, during the month after the nominations are announced, a consensus
settles over the movie industry. The golden statues are intended to honor the
finest movie and the best performances. But good, better, best are relative and
vary according to the prejudices of the beholder.

The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Science's 4,356 voting members tend to be
middle-aged or older since they earn admittance through achievement and retain
their memberships for life. ''Blue Velvet,'' the favorite 1986 movie of younger
film critics, got only one Oscar nomination.

'' 'Platoon' is not the kind of picture the academy normally votes for,'' said
the secretary of the academy, Charles Powell. ''It's not an uplifting film, not
a romance, not an epic like 'Gandhi.' Nor is it the good little picture the
academy discovered, like 'Marty.' I felt the academy would resist voting for
'Platoon.' But Orion has a great campaign for the movie. They're selling the
great quotes from the reviews and even making the picture look a little
upbeat.''

Feels 'Platoon' Will Win

Hal Elias, a retired producer of short subjects who has been on the academy
board of governors for 36 years, said he also felt that ''Platoon'' would be the
winner ''because it's been so acclaimed.''

Other people speak of momentum. Released last Christmas, ''Platoon'' is still
attracting audiences and attention. The movie's chief competition is Woody
Allen's ''Hannah and Her Sisters,'' which reached theaters more than a year ago,
in January 1986. The last movie released before October that won best picture
was Mr. Allen's ''Annie Hall'' in 1977.

With its star, Charlie Sheen, on the cover of People and the movie being used as
a metaphor for America's experience in Vietnam on Op-Ed pages, ''Platoon's''
momentum is still growing. ''It's gone beyond a hit movie and become a major
cultural phenomenon,'' said Anne Thompson, a freelance writer on film..

''Platoon,'' which has eight nominations, is likely to win numerous Oscars.
''It's like voting strictly Democratic,'' said the president of distribution and
marketing at Lorimar, Ashley Boone. ''If people are overwhelmingly in favor of a
movie, they are likely to mark it up and down the ballot.''

Won Directors Award

When Oliver Stone, the director of ''Platoon,'' won the Directors Guild award -
which almost always foreshadows the Oscar - at a banquet on March 7, the
applause was so enthusiastic that Mr. Stone seems almost certain to take the
Academy Award as best director and is now a frontrunner in the original
screenplay category, too. As to such technical awards as sound and film editing,
''Most academy voters don't know what good sound is,'' Mr. Powell, the academy
secretary, said. ''They say, 'I liked the picture' and vote for it.''

Both Willem Dafoe and Tom Berenger, the good and evil sergeants of ''Platoon,''
have been nominated for supporting actor. Both actors got equally good reviews.
But it is Mr. Berenger Hollywood feels will win the Oscar, partly because his
performance is a quantum leap beyond anything he has done before and partly
because his twisted and scarred character carries the moral weight of the movie.

Sentimental voting is most prevalent in the acting categories. Elizabeth Taylor
won for ''Butterfield 8'' in 1960 because she had nearly died from pneumonia
that winter. James Stewart won for a slight role in ''The Philadelphia Story''
in 1940 - beating Henry Fonda (''The Grapes of Wrath'') and Charles Chaplin
(''The Great Dictator'') - because he had lost the year before for ''Mr. Smith
Goes to Washington.'' The 1969 Oscar for ''True Grit'' was a tribute to John
Wayne's long career.

Right now there is a feeling that the academy can't keep on giving Paul Newman
nominations - he has been nominated seven times - without ever handing him the
award. Because Mr. Newman, who is nominated for ''The Color of Money,'' lives in
the East and has kept himself aloof from the industry, the sentiment for him is
qualified. ''He doesn't have a lock, but maybe, just maybe, this is Paul
Newman's year,'' one voter said.

It is not possible to buy an Oscar -once the nominations have been made, academy
members try to see all the performances - but heavy advertising can buy
nominations. More often, a small movie misses out because it has no budget to
place glossy ads in Variety and the Hollywood Reporter.

''I thought it would be easier to win the Oscar than to get a nomination,'' said
James Woods, who was nominated for his performance as an over-the-edge
journalist in ''Salvador.''

Woods a Dark Horse

Mr. Woods is a very dark horse, partly because the shrill, slashing ''Salvador''
is definitely not the kind of movie academy members take to their bosoms.
However, he has had some good luck to bolster his chances. CBS scheduled his
heartbreaking performance as the schizophrenic brother of James Garner in the
television movie ''The Promise'' last December, a little while before academy
nominating ballots were sent out. Because ''Salvador'' is the other 1986 movie
written and directed by Oliver Stone, it has been tinged by an afterglow from
the spotlight shining on ''Platoon.'' And although ''Salvador'' quickly
disappeared from theaters, it is featured this month on Z, the local pay cable
movie channel in the area where most academy members live.

The effect of ''Platoon'' on future films is not dependent on its winning
Oscars. Because of the movie's commercial success, more scripts about the
Vietnam War are being looked at by the studios. But the making of a realistic
movie about the Vietnam War is also part of a change in American attitudes. The
script for ''Platoon'' was written 11 years ago and peddled from studio to
studio for more than half a decade. The cultural changes that enabled
''Platoon'' to be made have already triggered other films. It usually takes
between 18 months and two years for a movie to go from beginning idea to
finished film; Vietnam is an idea whose time came about 15 months ago.

Stanley Kubrick's ''Full Metal Jacket'' is scheduled to reach theaters in June.
Mr. Kubrick built Vietnam on stages in London for his movie about an 18-year-old
Marine recruit who is flung into the 1968 Tet offensive.

Francis Coppola's ''Gardens of Stone'' is set in Washington in 1967. Its central
characters are an idealistic young soldier, the sergeant who takes a paternal
interest in the soldier and a reporter opposed to the war with whom the sergeant
falls in love. Lionel Chetwynd's ''Hanoi Hilton,'' which deals with American
prisoners of war in the infamous Hoa Lo prison, will open in Los Angeles and New
York on March 27.

And ''Hamburger Hill,'' which is based on the screenwriter Jim Carabatsos's
experience in Vietnam, had no distributor until after ''Platoon'' was released.
''Then nearly every studio called us,'' said Barbara Boyle, executive vice
president of production at RKO Pictures, which produced the movie. ''Because of
'Platoon,' the studios realized there was commercial potential in this subject
matter.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tom Berenger

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEWS;
JAMES WOODS 'IN LOVE AND WAR'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 596 words


THE movie ''In Love and War,'' on NBC tonight at 9 and starring James Woods and
Jane Alexander, is a puzzling exercise in emotional manipulation. Based on a
true story, which was told in a book of the same title by Jim and Sybil
Stockdale, Carol Schreder's teleplay offers a Vietnam War hero whose credo is
apparently ''my country right or wrong,'' and his wife who, in her eight-year
campaign to save her prisoner-of-war husband, finds herself affiliated with such
pacifist groups as Women's Strike for Peace. There is, in short, a little
something here for every political persuasion and, carefully avoiding
complicated specifics, that's clearly what this waffling treatment wants. Shot
down and captured in 1965, Navy Comdr. Jim Stockdale was the highest-ranking
American officer imprisoned in North Vietnam. Although tortured and interrogated
almost daily, he was able to organize a system of communicating with his fellow
prisoners, a system that raised morale and kept the prisoners of war from
cooperating to any great extent with their captors. Isolated and physically
abused, Commander Stockdale is the epitome of the brave military man, always
recalling his father's advice as he entered Annapolis: ''Do your best to be the
best midshipman here.''

It is a stirring story but, this being the Vietnam War, there are the inevitable
ambiguities. A significant preface to the story shows the commander in the Gulf
of Tonkin in 1964, a first-hand witness to the phony attack scenario that would
win the Johnson Administration a Congressional resolution for heavy military
reprisals. Commander Stockdale knows that the entire Tonkin episode is based on
a lie. Later, in prison, this knowledge puts a different sort of dramatic
coloring on his refusal to answer questions about the Gulf of Tonkin incident.
At the same time, the script makes an apparent effort to impugn the motives of
prominent antiwar Americans, from members of Congress to news commentators, who
are seeking to get at what is, after all, the truth.

Back home, Sybil Stockdale is telling her side of the story to a psychiatrist.
''I guess you want to know why I'm here,'' she says, but then never quite
explains why, other than being understandably upset about the fate of her
husband. The Stockdale's book notes that Mrs. Stockdale had two serious
breakdowns. But, rallying the wives of other prisoners, she confronts the United
States Government, contradicting official stories that the prisoners are being
treated humanely and revealing that some P.O.W. families are having money
difficulties because of ridiculous red tape. No one seems to care. Mrs.
Stockdale will do much to change the situation.

The film - directed by Paul Aaron for Tisch/Avnet Productions - shuttles between
the American prisoner in North Vietnam and his distraught wife back home, and
the effect creates two stories that rarely seem connected.

Mr. Woods, a fine actor who has been nominated for an Academy Award for
''Salvador'' and will undoubtedly get an Emmy nomination for ''Promises,'' is
harrowingly persuasive in the prison scenes (one of his interrogators is played
by Dr. Haing S. Ngor of ''The Killing Fields''). And Ms. Alexander is quietly
effective. But neither actor is served well by the fuzzy script, and when they
do get to play a few brief scenes together, Mr. Woods and Ms. Alexander convey
the unfortunate impression that they have just met in passing on the set. They
do not make a very credible husband and wife. But then this version of ''In Love
and War'' is not very credible on several levels.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of James Woods

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


Images and Realities ''Contact: Photojournalism Since Vietnam,'' an exhibit of
110 photographs at the International Center of Photography-Midtown, chronicles a
decade of photojournalism by the photographers of Contact Press Images.

Photographs include Mary Decker grimacing in pain after her fall in the 1984
Olympic 3000-meter final, frenzied crowds bidding goodbye to Pope John Paul II
as he leaves Guatemala and President Reagan and June Scobee raising their
anguished faces to the sky at the memorial service for the Challenger
astronauts.

Contact Press Images, celebrating its 10th anniversary, was founded by the
photographer David Burnett and Robert Pledge, now Contact's editorial director,
to give photojournalists a chance to create and produce their own stories.

Photographers represented in the exhibit, through April 18, include Mr. Burnett,
Alon Reininger, Gianfranco Gorgoni, Dilip Mehta, Annie Leibovitz, Jose Azel and
Frank Fournier.

The gallery, 77 West 45th Street, is open Monday through Friday from 11 A.M. to
6 P.M., Saturday from noon to 5 P.M. Tomorrow, Mr. Azel and Bill Allard will
discuss ''Color and Light in Photojournalism'' from 6:30 to 8 P.M. Admission,
free. Information: 536-6443.

Sweet Harmony

Two jazz clubs in Manhattan offer regular Monday evening programs that feature
groups built around a seasoned musician.

At the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, this evening, the veteran pianist
Walter Bishop Jr. will lead his group of ''All Stars,'' including vocalist
Kathryn Farmer with Jo Jones Jr. on drums and Paul Brown on bass. Show times are
9 and 11 P.M. and 1 A.M. There is a $7.50 music charge and a $5 minimum; for
seats at the bar, there is a $5 minimum but no music charge. Information:
475-8592.

At Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, near 18th Street, the regular Monday night
fare is the Les Paul Trio. Mr. Paul, the veteran guitarist, is accompanied by
various guest artists. The sets here are at 9 and 11 P.M. Admission is $10 and
the minimum is $7.50. Information: 533-7902.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 16, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
AN OLD SALT TAKES HELM AT TEXAS AIR'S BRITT UNIT

BYLINE: By Daniel F. Cuff and Lawrence M. Fisher

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 324 words


The pilots at Britt Airways had better look smart. Norman K. McInnis has been
named president of the commuter airline.

Mr. McInnis is a 30-year Navy veteran, having spent his time as a carrier pilot,
commanding officer of three carrier squadrons, captain of the Ticonderoga
aircraft carrier and chief of staff of Carrier Division 3 in the Tonkin Gulf.

''I tell all these young aviators down here that I can beat them at anything
they can do,'' he said, ''and then if I can't, they can say, 'I beat him but I
worked my butt off doing it.' ''

The energetic and salty Mr. McInnis insists that he is ''55 years old,'' but
also says he flew in all his country's wars from World War II through Vietnam,
although he did not fly combat in Vietnam.

Britt Airways, based in Terre Haute, Ind., was sold in 1985 by its founder and
owner, Bill Britt, to People Express, and when the Texas Air Corporation
acquired People, Britt became part of Texas Air, which also runs Continental and
Eastern.

Mr. McInnis succeeds Mr. Britt, 60, who retired March 1. The new president will
report to Neal Meehan, president of Texas Air's commuter airline division.
''Norm McInnis brings a wealth of aviation experience to the Texas Air family,''
Mr. Meehan said in a statement.

Britt, Mr. McInnis said, has 47 airplanes and carries a million people a year
''or almost that many - we've got to get back to that number,'' he added. It
operates out of Philadelphia serving Eastern as a feeder and out of Chicago
serving Continental.

Britt had a problem last April, when the Federal Aviation Administration barred
59 of 90 co-pilots from flying until they were retrained after some of them
failed performance checks.

After leaving the Navy with the rank of captain, Mr. McInnis became president of
Royale Airlines, a commuter line based in Shreveport, La., and then spent 15
months as vice president and general manager at Precision Airlines in
Manchester, N.H.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 17, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ASTRONOMERS COME IN FROM THE COOL NIGHT AIR

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 2; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1854 words

DATELINE: LA SILLA, Chile


ASTRONOMY is in the throes of a technological revolution that is imparting
assembly-line efficiency to the art of observing the heavens, allowing
astronomers to abandon observatories perched atop remote mountain peaks for
comfortable office buildings thousands of miles away.

Measurements scientists are making of the spectacular exploding star that
appeared over the Southern Hemisphere three weeks ago mark a triumph of machines
and systems that have come into being only recently. Ultrasensitive detectors,
computer automation and remote controls are enabling a new generation of
telescopes to soak up and digest the faintest light from the edge of the
universe, translate the glow into streams of numbers, and tease unsuspected
truths from the resulting mountains of data. Astronomers have learned to conduct
these operations, moreover, from control rooms linked by satellite to telescopes
on distant continents.

Astronomical observatories have been pressed to make especially quick,
comprehensive measurements of Supernova 1987A, which bloomed in the Greater
Magellanic Cloud on Feb. 24 at a distance of about 160,000 light years from
earth. Not since the year 1604 had a supernova occurred so nearby, and
scientists around the world moved swiftly to chronicle the hour-to-hour changes
in the cosmic blast. Supernova explosions unfold so fast that without the new
equipment at their disposal, observatories would have been hard put to keep
pace.

The innovations are especially conspicuous at three major observatories in
northern Chile, all of which have made large contributions to the current
supernova investigation. One of these facilities, the Cerro Tololo Interamerican
Observatory, is equipped with a telescope whose light-gathering mirror is four
meters in diameter, and is thus the most powerful telescope in the Southern
Hemisphere.

Cerro Tololo's director, Dr. Robert E. Williams, believes that continuing
technological developments in astronomy will be rapid. ''In the decade that
Cerro Tololo has been in operation,'' he said, ''we have witnessed some of the
most dramatic changes in the history of astronomy. The changes will continue to
come thick and fast.''

Some of the most important advances have resulted from the invention of ever
more sensitive light detectors capable of translating single photons of light
coming from distant galaxies into electrical pulses that can be counted and
interpreted by computers.

For more than two centuries after Sir Isaac Newton invented the reflecting
telescope - the type of telescope still used by most observatories - astronomers
observed with their eyes. With the invention of photography in the 19th century,
however, astronomers began to realize that a light-sensitive emulsion exposed
for hours at a time to light from a faint celestial object can ''see'' the
object much more clearly than can any observer's eye.

The photographic plate eventually replaced the human observer almost altogether.
The generation of large reflecting telescopes built between World War I and 1948
depended almost exclusively on photographic observations, and photographic
plates are still widely used by many observatories.

But a big change began in the early 1970's when observers realized that new
electronic devices called photomultipliers might be more efficient than ordinary
film for recording the images of distant galaxies.

Using the photomultiplier, a photon from space is focused by a telescope and
strikes a light-sensitive electron tube, thereby triggering a cascade of
electrons. Electromagnets guide the electron beam to hit a film of fluorescent
chemicals (similar to the phosphors used in television picture tubes), where the
energy of the electrons is converted back into light.

This stimulated light from the picture tube, far brighter than the original
light coming from the depths of space, is then used to expose a photographic
plate.

New Tools for Exploration

These image tubes, as they are called, opened a new realm of exploration to
astronomers, but further developments followed rapidly.

In the mid-1970's, Stephen Shectman, a post-doctoral fellow at the University of
Michigan, invented a way to combine several image tubes in series, thereby
producing a stepwise cascade of amplifications, the final result of which is an
image vastly brighter than the original light image.

Using this device with the 200-inch (5-meter) Mount Palomar telescope, Dr.
Shectman and his colleagues made the important discovery in 1981 that the
universe contains enormous empty regions, curiously devoid of the galaxies that
exist in profusion elsewhere.

Dr. Shectman, now a member of the Carnegie Institution of Washington, which
operates Las Campanas Observatory near here, went on to invent a version of his
system that could record in the spectrum of light coming from an object in two
dimensions, measuring both the energy and the positions of spectral features.

Two-dimensional images contain far more information than the one-dimensional
displays of his earlier instruments, and Dr. Shectman's two-dimensional imager -
which he whimsically named ''2D-Frutti'' -has been installed since 1983 at many
large observatories.

Meanwhile, the impetus of the Vietnam War gave rise to various increasingly
sensitive military night-vision devices and to a silicon chip called the Charge
Coupled Device or C.C.D., an ultra-sensitive light detector. When photons of
light strike a C.C.D., electrons are released from the silicon atoms in its
crystal stucture, thereby implanting electrical charges in the crystal.

Highly Sensitive Instruments

Appropriate microcircuits can read the number of charges that accumulate in each
''pixel'' or square in a grid on the chip, and from these counts, a computer can
reconstruct the amount and distribution of light that has hit the chip. Some
C.C.D.'s are so sensitive they can count nearly every photon that hits them.
These chips are rapidly finding their way into major observatories, including
the three in northern Chile.

To reduce the electronic ''noise'' generated by the devices themselves, the
devices are often chilled by liquid nitrogen (to minus 320 degrees Fahrenheit)
or even liquid helium (to minus 452 degrees). Electronic noise is produced by
the movement of atoms, and the colder an atom is, the less it moves.

Thus cooled, C.C.D.'s can measure the very faint infrared radiation that has
been traveling from objects since not long after the ''Big Bang'' explosion
thought to have brought the universe into being between 10 billion to 20 billion
years ago.

The power of the C.C.D. has been enhanced still further by computer techniques
to reduce noise. Before and after each series of observations using a C.C.D.
detector, astronomers record the electronic output of a darkened C.C.D. The
digitized noise patterns thus obtained from the blank chip are stored on
magnetic tape, and when a celestial image digitally recorded by the chip is
processed, a computer corrects the image by subtracting the numerical equivalent
of the chip noise.

Identifying Elements in Stars

The new imaging technology applies as much to the spectrums of distant objects
as it does to their direct images. When heated to incandescence in the furnaces
of stars, each element marks the spectrum of light it emits with a
characteristic set of lines, and these lines can be observed by breaking the
light apart with a prism or diffraction grating. These spectral lines identify
elements in stars, galaxies, gas and dust clouds, a fact of crucial importance
to astronomers.

Spectroscopy has permitted astronomers to understand the chemical makeup of
stars and other celestial objects. (The element helium, for example, was
discovered in 1868 by spectroscopic analysis of the light coming from the sun;
only 27 years later did scientists learn that helium also existed on earth.)
Spectrographic analyses have also permitted astronomers to calculate the
velocities and directions of movement of distant objects. Spectral lines shifted
from their usual places toward the red end of the spectrum, for example,
indicate that the object emitting the light is moving away from earth; the
effect is analogous to the lowering in pitch of the sound of a rapidly receding
automobile horn.

The American astronomer Edwin Hubble used this knowledge a half century ago to
discover that the farther away a galaxy is from earth, the faster is it receding
from us. From this came the momentous conclusion that the universe must be
expanding.

Since the largest telescopes in Chile and elsewhere in the world have begun to
convert most of their observations into electrical pulses and charges on
magnetic tape, astronomers are no longer chained to their instruments.

End of an Era

One of the first major observatories to be electronically linked to observers in
another continent will be the European Southern Observatory here, whose
director, Dr. Lodewyk Woltjer, predicted that the day of the globe-trotting
astronomer will soon be past.

''We have already conducted successful experiments in which one of our
telescopes here was directly controlled by astronomers at our headquarters in
Garching near Munich'' in West Germany, he said. ''When our 3.5-meter New
Technology Telescope is completed here next year, it will be entirely run by
observers in Europe, and ther instrument will send data from its observations
directly to Garching.''

''Thus, an observer at Garching will actually see the object he is studying on a
display screen, and by touching the interactive screens in the control room, he
can guide a telescope halfway around the world to do his bidding,'' he said.
''He could even start to work in daylight while it's still night in South
America. All this will greatly reduce scheduling problems and jet lag.''

The installation of computerized controls at observatories in the past several
years has also reduced the time-consuming drudgery associated with focusing
large telescopes, finding and tracking stars, and surveying sections of sky for
specific kinds of objects.

A few commands selected from a menu on a computer screen do it all; the tap of a
space bar on a keyboard produces the C.C.D. image of a galaxy 10 billion light
years away, and the touch of another key unreels a paper printout of the image.
Not long ago, an astronomer could obtain his printed image only after the
observatory darkroom had processed his plates.

''This has meant that astronomy has become much more productive,'' said Dr.
Williams of Cerro Tololo. ''Major discoveries are coming oftener than they did a
couple of years back.''

''But all this has exacted a cost from those of us who still love the night sky
for its own sake,'' he added. ''Even now, once in a while, I'll expose some
photographic plates manually, sitting up in the prime-focus cage of the
four-meter telescope. From up there inside the telescope, I can feel the cool
night air and look directly into the sparkling depths. That kind of feeling is
what drew a lot of us to astronomy in the first place, and it will be hard to do
without it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Diagrams of how light is processed for long-distance transmission (Jean
Wisenbaugh); Photo of Dr. Wayne Christiansen (NYT/Malcolm W. Browne)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 18, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'Les Miserables' Team Plans Its Next Project

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 159 words


Now that their pop-opera adaptation of ''Les Miserables'' has successfully
conquered the West End and Broadway, the composer-lyricist team of Claude-Michel
Schonberg and Alain Boublil are turning to an almost equally familiar story for
their next project.

''Miss Saigon,'' a Vietnam War-era update of Pierre Loti's 1887 novel ''Madame
Chrysantheme,'' will be produced in the fall of 1988, according to Cameron
Mackintosh, who also produced ''Les Miserables.''

''Madame Chrysantheme,'' the story of a tragic affair between a geisha and a
naval officer, was the uncredited source of David Belasco's 1900 play ''Madame
Butterfly,'' which in turn gave Giacomo Puccini the scenario for his opera
''Madama Butterfly.''

Mr. Mackintosh said he did not know if the new show, which is budgeted at about
$7 million, would open in London or in New York. Mr. Boublil and Mr. Schonberg
had begun ''Miss Saigon'' last summer and it was nearly complete, he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THAILAND PRESSING OUSTER OF LAOTIANS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1090 words

DATELINE: PAK CHOM, Thailand, March 18


A year after shutting down several reception centers for Vietnamese boat people,
and less than three months after closing the Cambodian refugee camp at Khao I
Dang, the Thai authorities appear to have turned their attention to the 84,000
or more Laotians in crowded Mekong Valley and other Thai-Lao border camps.

Last Sunday before dawn, Thai security forces raided a refugee camp at Ban
Vinai, 10 miles south of this Mekong River town. At least 100 Laotians, possibly
130 or more, may have been detained to be forcibly repatriated, according to the
refugees.

International refugee officials in Bangkok, who asked that deportations stop,
said these are the first forced repatriations from Ban Vinai since the camp
opened in December 1975.

Thailand, which has sheltered hundreds of thousands of Indochinese refugees
since Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos fell to Communist forces in 1975, agreed to set
up refugee centers in return for international promises of resettlement. Thai
officials believe these promises have not been fulfilled by more developed
nations.

''If they send me back, I am dead,'' Yang Tong Khai said today, as he stood in a
Thai police compound and nervously refolded his identity papers.

Seized at Ban Vinai

Mr. Yang, a 49-year-old ethnic Hmong from Laos, says he was one of dozens of
men, women and children seized at Ban Vinai.

The armed troops and the police who entered Ban Vinai, according to refugees and
relief workers (relief workers were barred from the camp on the day of the
raid), were looking for ''illegals.'' These are exiles who found ways to get
into Ban Vinai after 1983, when Thailand officially closed the camp to new
arrivals. In 1985, Thais also began screening Lao exiles to determine if they
could prove they were entitled to refugee status.

''We thought this might be coming sooner or later,'' a refugee worker from Ban
Vinai said today of the raid, adding that from Jan. 1 the Thai authorities had
stopped the practices of allowing refugees to be paid for small jobs or to sell
their handicrafts.

''But we never expected this to come so soon,'' he said. ''Or in this manner.''

Reporters Not Allowed

Today, the Ban Vinai camp commander, Prasit Sarathum, would not allow reporters
to enter the camp to interview him about the Sunday raid because they did not
have camp passes. These normally take a minimum of several weeks to aquire
through the Thai Interior Ministry.

But the police officers here in Pak Chom, where about 70 of the people seized at
Ban Vinai have been brought, allowed visitors to meet the detainees, almost all
of them Hmong hill people.

They are being held in an open field behind the police station, overlooking the
Mekong and the Laotian hills beyond. Women and small children are shaded in a
thatched pavilion under trees. The Laotians are comfortable, but frightened.

Many of the people rounded up had been at Ban Vinai camp, about 350 miles north
of Bangkok, for several years. Unable to qualify for food rations or housing
because they had arrived after 1983, they were cared for by family and friends
who had preceded them into exile.

Population Estimates Differ

Estimates differ on the number of unregistered people living in Ban Vinai. The
Thai authorities say there may be 10,000, with more arriving from Laos almost
daily. Aid agency officials believe there are between 3,000 and 6,000 in a camp
population thought to be around 42,000.

The Thai authorities have largely turned a blind eye to the ''illegals,'' and
Ban Vinai functioned almost as a Laotian hill tribe city that just happened to
be in Thailand - until Sunday.

The refugees interviewed today said they thought that 79 Laotians, also Hmong,
have already been sent back into the custody of Lao security forces since the
raid. The refugee authorities had earlier reported only 38 forced returnees, but
numbers differ in almost every aspect of the deportations.

Thai officials have also said that 97 more Laotians were apprehended Tuesday
trying to get to Ban Vinai and were returned immediately to Laos.

Soldier Fears Death

Mr. Yang, a former soldier in the Royal Lao Army before 1975 and a member of the
anti-Communist guerrilla movement since, has been told he will be among the next
to go. He feels certain he will be imprisoned, and probably killed. He has not
been permitted so far to make his case to any international aid agency.

In Bangkok, Gerald Walzer, the representative of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, issued a statement today saying that he had met with
senior Thai Government officials on hearing of the deportations.

He said he had ''expressed deep concern about these involuntary returns of
asylum seekers.'' He also appealed ''for assurances that there would be no
further forced returns, and that claims to refugee status of asylum seekers now
detained by the authorities would be examined under the established
procedures.''

''The U.N.H.C.R. has no information on how the those returned to Laos have been
received by the authorities there,'' the statement said.

Mr. Yang first entered Ban Vinai in 1979, he said. But in 1980 he was ordered to
return secretly to Laos by Vang Pao - the Laotian guerrilla leader who commands
his forces from exile in the West, ususally the United States.

Guerrilla forces have moved back and forth into Laos in the past, according to
refugees and the Thai police officers in the Mekong Valley. Cambodian and
Burmese guerrillas also move in and out of Thai territory. Relations have been
improving between Thailand and Laos, however, and Thailand has been encouraging
Laotians to return home.

Mr. Yang said that in 1984, he tired of the fighting with the guerrillas and
fled back to Thailand and Ban Vinai, where his family still lived. But by then,
he had lost his residence status there.

''Tell people this,'' he said today. ''Tell them, don't send me back. Please
kill me here. That would be better.''

U.S. to Protest to Bangkok

WASHINGTON, March 18 (Reuters) - The Reagan Administration sharply criticized
Thailand today over the forced return of 38 Hmong tribesmen to Laos and said it
would lodge a formal protest with Bangkok.

''We are protesting this action to the Thai Government as a serious breach of
human rights,'' the State Department spokesman, Charles E. Redman, said.

''We view this incident as possibly the most serious instance of forced
repatriation from Thailand since 1979,'' when a flood of Indochinese refugees
swamped the country, Mr. Redman said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Laotians seized in security raid (NYT/Barbara Crossette)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


MANHATTAN '45. By Jan Morris. Illustrated. 273 pages. Oxford University Press.
$17.95.

MANHATTAN in the year 1945: one sees the city in grainy black-and-white
photographs, a city of elegant spires and skyscrapers; sleek, shiny cars and
smartly dressed couples swing dancing to the tunes of Mercer and Styne. The war
has just ended, and all the gaiety, hope and confidence of the nation is
mirrored in the hustle and bustle of this glittering metropolis - a city, as Jan
Morris observes in her new book, that stood uncontestably, at that moment, as
''the head, the brain, the essence of America.''

It's a wonderful idea for a book - a retrospective look at New York. And while
the year 1945 seems, at first, a little arbitrary, the reasons for Miss Morris's
choice soon become clear. The year marked not only the end of the war, but also
the beginning of a new era of American omnipotence. The deprivations of the
Depression and the war lay in the past; the disillusionments of the
assassinations, Vietnam and Watergate were, as yet, glimmers on a distant
horizon. For a shining moment, everything seemed possible.

''The moment of grace soon passed - it lasted no more than a few years, and by
the mid-1950s was fast becoming hardly more than a regretful memory,'' Miss
Morris writes. ''New York was never to lose its excitement, its power to move,
its limitless energy; but never again, perhaps, would it possess the particular
mixture of innocence and sophistication, romance and formality, generosity and
self-amazement, which seems to have characterized it in those moments of
triumph.''

There are moments in ''Manhattan '45'' when the author's breathless prose and
unabashed nostalgia for old New York result in a sentimental whitewashing of
reality: racial tensions, immigration quotas and poverty are all shrugged off as
matters properly belonging to a later day; and we are expected, instead, to
believe in a ''comradeship which, especially in moments of particular amusement,
relief or difficulty, bound New Yorkers together.'' Still, Miss Morris points
out that her book aims less to give us a thoroughgoing analysis of the city than
to simply celebrate one of its former incarnations; and in that capacity, it
surely succeeds.

As such previous travel books as ''Destinations'' and ''Journeys'' have
demonstrated, Miss Morris has a gift for capturing the mood, the feel, the
specific emotional gravity of a particular place; and in these pages, she
manages to conjure up the ambiance of that vanished era, and in doing so, to
also feed us an enormous amount of information and facts.

We learn, for instance, that zoning laws decreeing that ''buildings above a
certain height must recede from the vertical to leave more open sky'' resulted
in ''the ziggurat form which was so characteristic of Manhattan in 1945.'' We
learn that when a B-25 bomber flew into the 80th floor of the Empire State
Building, a stenographer fell 76 floors in an elevator, and survived. And we
learn that in 1945 at least one bank still employed a ladies' maid to serve its
customers tea.

Although much of the Manhattan described here is readily familiar, we become
most aware, in reading this book, of how much things have changed. In 1945, Miss
Morris notes, one was still aware that Manhattan was indeed an island and an
important port - given a lower skyline then, the city was still bathed in the
pale river light of morning; port news and gossip filled the newspaper columns,
and hotels for ''passengers arriving out of the hinterland'' crowded the
waterfront.

In fact, in those days, travel still possessed a distinct glamour and
excitement: photographers, in search of celebrities, gathered each evening at
Grand Central Terminal to see the Twentieth Century Limited off on its run to
Chicago; and even the subways of the day boasted directors' cars, ''fitted out
with a kitchenette and monogrammed china, and used to give visiting grandees the
run of the underground.''

A Gallup poll reported that 90 percent of all New Yorkers considered themselves
happy in 1945, and foreigners visiting the city, Miss Morris adds, frequently
remarked upon the formality and good manners of the natives. In those
pre-expense account days, she writes, ''experienced head waiters could tell
almost to a shrimp cocktail how much a customer was worth,'' and the social
pecking order noted not only the possession of a box at the Metropolitan Opera,
but the location of that box (''the ones on the south side being the more
desirable'') as well.

In the course of her walking tour through the Manhattan of 1945, Miss Morris
gives us cameo portraits of various New Yorkers - including Mayor La Guardia,
the master builder Robert Moses, Sherman Billingsley of the Stork Club and such
lesser known personages as Joseph Ferdinand Gould (a Village eccentric who
claimed to have translated Longfellow into seagull language) and the Collyer
brothers (who stashed 14 grand pianos amidst the squalor of their Harlem
brownstone). In addition, she leaves us with various mental images of New York:
New York as ''the town of all towns,'' the new world capital of commerce and
art; New York as ''the City of the Future,'' a marvel of technology and
invention; New York as the ''Wonder City,'' the place where nothing is
impossible - in short, New York as ''the most hopeful city on earth,'' ''the
most demanding; the most tolerant'' and ''the most competitive.''

None of these epithets is terribly original, none tells us anything we didn't
know before. The charm of this book, however, lies not in any single observation
or description, but in Miss Morris's affectionate orchestration of the familiar.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jan Morris (Margaret Munves)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 19, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Eight Seized in Scheme To Bring Heroin to U.S.

SECTION: Section D; Page 27, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 227 words


An inmate at a Federal prison, a prison guard and six others were charged
yesterday with operating a heroin smuggling organization that was preparing to
bring hundreds of pounds of the drug into the United States from Thailand, the
authorities said yesterday.

The inmate, 60-year-old Leslie Atkinson, who is serving a 44-year sentence for
smuggling heroin into the country in body bags containing the corpses of
American soldiers killed in Vietnam, was accused in a Federal indictment of
organizing a drug ring from the Federal Correctional Institution at Otisville,
N.Y.

In a 15-month investigation by Federal agents and New York City police officers,
the authorities said they tapped telephone calls Mr. Atkinson made from the
prison and intercepted letters he mailed to set up the distribution network. A
prison guard at Otisville, Samuel Arrante, 36, was accused of carrying Mr.
Atkinson's letters out of the prison to avoid detection in the prison mail
system.

An undercover agent, posing as a corrupt German diplomat, was sent by Mr.
Atkinson to Thailand where he obtained more than five pounds of heroin on March
11. The agent turned the shipment over to Mr. Atkinson's nephew, Philip Wade
Atkinson, 40, at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, where he was immediately arrested.
He lives at 116-40 227th Street in St. Albans, Queens, the authorities said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Thai Officials Deny Violating the Rights Of Laos Tribesmen

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 280 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 19


Thai officials denied today that they violated the rights of Hmong tribesmen by
forcing them to return to Communist-ruled Laos, as the United States has
asserted.

A Foreign Ministry spokesman said the Hmongs were anti-Communist guerrillas, not
refugees, and had been given the choice of going to jail in Thailand or going
back to Laos.

The spokesman, Somphand Kokilanon, said: ''Thailand does not want to be
misunderstood by Laos as helping the rebels. We don't want to jeopardize
improving Thai-Lao relations.''

The United States Government and Western relief officials have said Thailand
forcibly returned the Hmongs and handed them over to Laotian soldiers, and the
State Department spokesman, Charles E. Redman, said Wednesday that American
officials ''view this incident as possibly the most serious instance of forced
repatriation from Thailand since 1979.''

''We are protesting this action to the Thai Government as a serious breach of
human rights,'' Mr. Redman said.

The tribesmen, a minority hill people in Laos, have long opposed Communist
forces in Laos and they fought with American forces during the Vietnam War.

Thai officials said 32 Hmongs were evicted from the Ban Vinai refugee camp in
northern Thailand Sunday after they entered the camp illegally. Refugee
officials put the number at 38. A United States Embassy official said William A.
Brown, the United States Ambassador to Thailand, met today with Deputy Foreign
Minister Prapass Limpabandhu and expressed ''strong concern'' over the incident.

The top representative in Thailand of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Gerald Walzer, also lodged a protest with the Thai Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Nina Darnton

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1548 words


OLIVER STONE'S ''Platoon,'' which won the second prize at the Berlin Film
Festival a few weeks ago, has been stirring controversy at home and abroad. By
trying to re-create the Vietnam War from the perspective of the American
soldiers who fought and died in it, the film seems to have rekindled - a decade
and a half after the war's end - the passions, moral conflicts and deep
divisions that tore at American society during the war years.

There have been reports of incidents at local theaters in which audience members
booed or cheered as the film progressed, often quarreling with one another and
sometimes carrying the dispute into the streets after the film had ended. At a
recent showing in New York, a witness reported, a fistfight broke out after the
film between a man who was a Vietnam veteran and another who was against the
United States involvement in the war. In a subdued Greenwich, Conn., theater
recently, there was some laughter during the scene in which American soldiers
brutalize and murder Vietnamese villagers. ''Why are you laughing?'' a woman
angrily shouted from the audience. ''This isn't funny.''

At the Berlin Film Festival, ''Platoon'' received a mixed response, according to
festivalgoers. Some audience members cheered, while others booed loudly, and
Oliver Stone was asked some questions that reflected a strong anti-American
perspective. ''Why do you make a film about Vietnam?'' one European reported
asked during a press conference. ''Why don't you make a film about Nicaragua?''
Mr. Stone did make the film ''Salvador,'' about an American journalist covering
the fighting in El Salvador, but that was apparently not close enough for his
questioner. When one character in the film suggests that after successful
American aggression for so many years, maybe it's America's turn to lose, the
audience burst into loud applause and cheering.

Members of the award jury said the same attitudes were reflected among the
jurors. One European juror said that some of his colleagues believed there was
really not much difference between ''Platoon'' and ''Rambo'' - that if a movie
is about male camaraderie in a unit that forms a fighting machine, it tends to
glorify the American military regardless of what the characters say or do.

Others said that although the competing films were of high quality, the voting
criteria were almost exclusively political rather than esthetic. First prize was
given to the Russian film ''Tema,'' about an author who suffers from writer's
block. The initial informal vote was 9 to 2, with the two American jurors,
Kathleen Carroll, the critic for The Daily News in New York City, and the
director and screenwriter Paul Schrader the two dissenting voices. It is
customary to make the vote unanimous, but the final tally was 10 to 1; Mr.
Schrader refused to change his vote.

Mr. Schrader, who confirmed the voting results, said, ''There was a strong
feeling that Gorbachev is sending a signal to the Russian people to be more
imaginative and wants the artists to lead the way. His policy of 'glasnost' was
appreciated by the Europeans and they wanted to support him. The winds of
glasnost were blowing through the jury room. I think they will at Cannes, too.
What surprised me was how successful Gorbachev has been in swaying European
public opinion to the Soviet's winds of change, and their response is very
deeply felt. If 'Platoon' had been a Russian film and 'Tema' had been American,
the vote would have been just as lopsided in the other direction.''

''Platoon'' won second prize, but, according to other jurors, the arguments that
swayed the jury (which initially favored the Japanese film ''Umito Dokuyaku''
(about Japanese medical experiments on downed fliers during World War II) were
not focused on the film's artistic merit. The choice was based instead on
arguments advanced by Klaus Maria Brandauer, the actor, Mr. Schrader and Ms.
Carroll about the film's sociological impact - arguing that it could not be
slighted because of the effect it was having on Americans' perceptions of the
Vietnam War. In 'Roger Rabbit,' Hoskins Co-Stars With Cartoons Bob Hoskins,
nominated for an Academy Award for his portrayal of George, the former convict
who falls in love with a beautiful prostitute in ''Mona Lisa,'' is currently
filming ''Who Framed Roger Rabbit?,'' which also stars Christopher Lloyd, Joanna
Cassidy, Stubby Kaye and a cartoon character named Roger Rabbit.

The film, based on the novel by Gary Wolf, is a thriller that operates on the
convention that cartoons are real, and that cartoon characters have a separate
life that continues when they are off screen. Well, why not - it's fiction,
right? The movie will be appreciated by animation fans because cartoon
characters from different studios will appear together on screen. Disney's
Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck mingle with Warner's Bugs Bunny and Max Fleischer's
Betty Boop.

In the film, Roger Rabbit is accused of murdering his director, and hires Mr.
Hoskins as a private detective to find out who framed him and who actually
committed the crime. The movie is directed by Robert Zemeckis (''Back to the
Future,'' ''Romancing the Stone'') and produced by that master of illusion,
Steven Spielberg.

Asked how he liked working with cartoon characters as acting partners, Mr.
Hoskins said: ''It's verging on insanity. I'm in every scene. I spend all my
time talking to characters like Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck and Betty Boop and
Roger Rabbit who are not there. I look at and respond to whomever my imagination
conjures up for me. I spend my time fighting weasels and being thrown out of
clubs by gorillas.'' It is, he insists, a ''brilliant'' script.

Mr. Hoskins's next project is more conventional. It is ''The Lonely Passion of
Judith Hearne,'' co-starring the very real Maggie Smith, who plays a lonely
woman trying to get her life straightened out. Mr. Hoskins portrays her lover,
whom he characterizes as ''a bit of a phony.''

After that, he will direct his first feature, ''The Raggedy Rawney,'' which he
co-wrote with Nicole de Wilde, an Australian writer. It is a story about gypsies
struggling to survive in wartime. Mr. Hoskins plays the lead role, the father of
a young girl.

Mr. Hoskins said that the immediate effect of his ''Mona Lisa'' accolades was
that he was unemployed for nine months. ''If you are in a very successful movie,
the first thing that happens is that everyone sends you all their duds thinking
you can save their movie,'' he said. Finally, he chose ''Prayer for the Dying,''
co-starring Mickey Rourke, which will be released in the next few months. The
film, based on a book by Jack Higgins, is a thriller about an Irish Republican
Army member, played by Mr. Rourke, who confesses his violent acts to a priest,
portrayed by Mr. Hoskins. For 'Kangaroo,' Judy Davis Learned a German Manner
Judy Davis, the Australian actress who plays Harriet in the film version of D.
H. Lawrence's ''Kangaroo,'' had an unusual acting challenge. A native
Australian, she had to portray a foreign and critical observer of her own
country. She had to perfect a German accent as well as the manner and style of a
highly sophisticated European intellectual, a person reared at a considerable
cultural and geographic distance from herself. And she had to play opposite her
real-life husband, Colin Friels, who was portraying the Lawrence character. In
the end she met the challenge so well that she was awarded her country's top
prize for best film actress, and garnered favorable reviews in the American
press.

The story of ''Kangaroo,'' based on six weeks the Lawrences spent in Australia,
concerns a writer who is fed up with England and seeks a fresh start in
Australia, where he gets involved in a right-wing political group whose leader
tries to persuade him to be its spokesman.

''It's tremendous fun to play a person so different, from another country, with
another accent,'' the actress said. ''You don't often get the opportunity to do
it. ''

Ms. Davis said that she studied for the part by taking German lessons from a
friend who emphasized why a German speaker would mispronounce certain English
sounds. She also listened to tapes made by a German woman who had learned
English in Australia. ''Of course, Frieda Lawrence learned her English in
England,'' Ms. Davis said, ''so I had to try to remove the Australian sound.''
She said she had four months to perfect the accent: ''I think I was very lucky,
because by the end of the four months, I was comfortable in it. Otherwise, there
is a danger that you will concentrate too much on an accent and the accent will
dominate. You'll end up playing an accent instead of a person.''

Although ''Kangaroo'' is a work of fiction, Ms. Davis chose to base the
character of Harriet very closely on Frieda Lawrence. ''If the character of
Harriet had been stronger, I might not have played Frieda,'' she said. ''But in
this work Lawrence's prime concern is not his character's relationship with his
wife but with Australian politics. Harriet is not so strongly drawn, but Frieda
is a very strong, really a wonderful character. So I felt the need to go to
Frieda to get more information. I was probably playing an essence of Frieda,
rather than an impersonation of her.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 20, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section C; Page 27, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 920 words


UP 'TIL NOW: A Memoir. By Eugene McCarthy. 273 pages. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
$16.95.

DON'T open Eugene McCarthy's memoir, ''Up 'Til Now,'' expecting breast-baring by
the author. For much of the way, it's rather disembodied, as though written by
an admiring interviewer who has chosen to use the first person - the
reminiscences of Eugene McCarthy as told to Eugene McCarthy.

Revelations aside, however, we do get an entertaining and not uninstructive
review of the career of the Democrat who led the challenge to Lyndon B. Johnson
and the Vietnam War in 1968. It began with his election to Congress in 1948,
fresh from teaching at a Roman Catholic college in St. Paul and pretty much
ended 20 years later with the nomination of Hubert H. Humphrey to run against
Richard M. Nixon. You may be left with the impression that politics went
downhill after the nation failed to elect Mr. McCarthy that year.

''Up 'Til Now'' is in part the story of the powerful personalities who dominated
Washington during the memoirist's time there, especially Harry S. Truman, whom
he credits with running ''the last truly constitutional presidency,'' and Sam
Rayburn, the much-admired Speaker of the House. In Mr. McCarthy's respectfully
conservative view of the way Government should function, these liberals operated
in accord with American institutions, unlike Mr. Johnson, who he maintains
undermined the integrity of both the Congress and the White House by his
''possessiveness and personalization.''

He eulogizes the Senate's more independent spirits, exemplifed by Wayne Morse
and Paul H. Douglas, and takes as his own guide Plato's caution that the
guardians of the state should never become boon companions, which plainly suits
his aloof temperament. He calls Adlai E. Stevenson, whom he nominated memorably
if unavailingly at the 1960 Democratic convention, ''the purest politician of
our times.'' Yet he is skeptical of perennial reforms of the political process:
''If you purify the pond, the water lilies die.''

There are diversions along the way. In a 1952 debate, for example, the young
Congressman's opponent, ''a leading Republican lawyer and party official named
Warren Burger,'' argued that security risks should be hacked out of Government
with a ''pick-axe, not with a scalpel.'' Some years later, Senator McCarthy had
the pleasure of voting against Mr. Burger's nomination as Chief Justice of the
United States.

Mr. McCarthy has lost none of his talent for tartness, employed here mainly on
members of his own party, beginning with Robert F. Kennedy, who, by this
account, reversed his decision not to challenge President Johnson in 1968 only
after noting the success of the ''Clean Gene'' forces in the New Hampshire
primary. The author has a politician's memory for affronts. He calls the Kennedy
campaign against him ''cheap and petty.''

To describe the Democratic Party in its present incarnation, he borrows a word
from academe, ''entropic,'' meaning having ''no goal'' and ''no path of
effective action.'' He calls the Carter Administration ''a vague of
contradictions, of vacillation, of moralizing in a cloud of adverbs.'' He
accuses his fellow Minnesotan, Walter F. Mondale, of pandering to unions,
teachers and the National Organization for Women in the 1984 campaign: ''Be my
client. I will represent you.''

Addressing today's problems, Mr. McCarthy offers a fairly familiar indictment.
He finds the nation ''overfed,'' ''overfueled,'' ''overheated, overcooled, and
overlighted,'' ''overdrugged,'' ''overadvertised,'' ''overincorporated'' and
''overdefensed.'' These are the only pages of this book that one might call
overwrought.

In his final chapter, he comes through as essentially a Midwestern populist with
isolationist overtones. He sees the United States being turned into ''a colony
of the world,'' as foreigners buy up industries: ''With investment comes
control.'' He is troubled by the American role as a supplier of raw materials
and military forces to foreign lands and laments that the country has lost
control of its own borders, currency and trade balance. He is worried about the
condition of the English language and doesn't much care for bilingualism.

His recommendations, though hurriedly offered, are specific enough to prompt the
reader to ask what Mr. McCarthy has been doing to implement them. To deal with
unemployment, he would reduce the workweek or workday. He would protect farmers
against ''shortsighted policies,'' such as using food as a weapon of foreign
policy, as President Carter did when he cut off grain sales to the Soviet Union
after its troops moved into Afghanistan. He attributes part of our trade problem
to the disproportionate share of military costs borne by United States taxpayers
and would impose ''a defense import tax'' on countries such as Japan and West
Germany that rely on the United States for protection against military
aggression. He wants more generous deductions for house-building and buying and
higher taxes on such antisocial commodities as cigarettes, liquor and big cars
as well as on accumulated capital. He challenges the arms buildup and calls for
limits on affirmative action.

Whatever the book's disappointments as a memoir, those who supported Mr.
McCarthy 20 years ago may close ''Up 'Til Now'' regretting that he has since
largely withheld from the political stage his intelligence, concern,
independence, style and, not least, his flair for making points by quoting
classic philosophers and contemporary poets.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Eugene McCarthy (Bret Littlehales)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

2 IN IRAN AFFAIR PREPARE DEFENSES CITING PATRIOTISM

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1831 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 21


Two of the principal figures facing possible indictment in the Iran-contra
affair are preparing defense strategies stressing that they were patriots
carrying out President Reagan's policies, according to their friends and
associates.

The two - Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North and Rear Adm. John M. Poindexter -have
declined to testify before Congressional investigators trying to unravel the
story of the Iran arms deals.

But the pressure to say something about the sales and the diversion of profits
to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as contras, has begun to mount, as some friends
and associates of the two men are summoned to make depositions to Congressional
committees and others await the possibility of subpoenas to a grand jury.

Friends Describe Talks

About a dozen friends and associates said in interviews that each man, in
guarded conversations intended to reassure those close to him, has made it clear
that he believes he was working with the knowledge of superiors and acting in
the interests of national security both before and after the Iran affair became
public.

Both continue to insist to friends that they will be exonerated if all the facts
are known.

Admiral Poindexter was said to be bitter, and Colonel North was described by one
source as ''hurting.''

'Truth Has Not Been Told Yet'

''The truth has not been told yet,'' said one person involved in the effort to
supply the contras. ''But over the next several weeks as the pressure of the
press and of conscience mounts, there will be some people who will come forward
and tell us the facts.''

Admiral Poindexter, described by military colleagues as an intellectual officer
who would not be likely to take national security policy into his own hands, is
said to be bitter about his treatment by the White House.

Some friends say they believe he has information that would be damaging to the
President, but they offered no firm information to support this belief.

He had aspired to a senior Pentagon job after his stint on the National Security
Council, but he now works as director of Navy long-range planning, a job friends
say he would never have taken if he had not been forced out of the White House.

To some people, Colonel North has become something of a folk hero since the Iran
arms dealings became known. Thousands of letters of support, many addressed
simply to ''Ollie North, Marine, Washington, D.C.,'' reach him without
difficulty, his friends say.

They say he is bursting to tell his story, confident that his superiors knew
exactly what he was doing and that the facts will exonerate him. He is
frustrated that it has taken so long to get the details out, friends say, but is
cautious about what he says even to them because he believes his telephone is
tapped and his house is under surveillance by the Federal authorities.

Secord Said to Be Out of Money

A third figure in the case, Richard V. Secord, a retired Air Force general, is
the figure least known to the public. His friends, who describe him as an
efficient manager who knows how to cut through bureaucracy, believe that he was
working under secret contract with the Government. They say that he has told
them he did nothing to dishonor himself or the military, and that he is out of
money and worried about the strains his involvement in the Iran-contra affair
have placed on his family.

As a private businessman, General Secord's legal situation is different from
those of Colonel North and Admiral Poindexter. One major unresolved issue in the
inquiry, however, is to what extent General Secord's commercial activities in
the arms deals and the contra supply effort were explicitly authorized by
Government officials.

Vindication Predicted

''They were doing what they thought the President wanted done,'' a former
Government official who has worked with all three men said. ''When the story is
told, Secord will be vindicated and so will North and Poindexter.''

The former official, like most of the other friends and associates of the three
men who agreed to be interviewed, spoke on the condition that he not be
identified.

Admiral Poindexter's lawyer could not be reached for comment. Colonel North's
lawyer said he would not comment on any aspect of the case, and General Secord's
lawyer did not return repeated calls to his home and office.

The President, responding to questions at his news conference Thursday night,
said neither Admiral Poindexter nor Colonel North ever told him directly or
indirectly that money from the Iran arms sales had been diverted to aid the
contras. He said he did not know whether the two men believed they were doing
his bidding.

Called 'Very, Very Bitter'

Admiral Poindexter became the President's national security adviser in December
1985 but was forced to resign Nov. 25, after the revelations about the arms
sales and the reported diversion of money to the contras.

A senior Government official who had worked closely with him at the National
Security Council described Admiral Poindexter as ''very, very bitter'' about his
situation and particularly about charges that he acted in the Iran-contra affair
without the knowledge of his superiors.

''On the day he resigned, he didn't even think about getting a lawyer,'' said a
friend who has kept in frequent touch with him since then. ''He just wanted to
give the President a free hand to unravel all this.''

Colonel North, a relatively low-ranking National Security Council aide who
eventually took over duties relating to hostage matters, counter-terrorism and
Central America policy, was dismissed on the same day Mr. Poindexter left the
White House. A cache of electronic mail retrieved by investigators indicates
that he advised his superiors of everything he did, in considerable detail.

Colonel North's direct superiors at the National Security Council were first Mr.
McFarlane and later Admiral Poindexter. The admiral's superior was the
President. It is not clear to whom General Secord reported, but National
Security Council documents compiled by the Presidential commission indicate that
he kept Colonel North informed of his activities. His friends say he was under
secret contract to the Government, which if true could mean he reported to other
officials as well.

One of Colonel North's close friends told of a recent conversation in which the
colonel, now assigned a routine desk job at Marine Corps headquarters, revealed
resentment about his treatment by the White House. ''He said, 'I spent all these
years trying to protect the system, and now the system is trying to persecute
me, not exonerate me,' '' the friend said.

''Ollie is hunkered down for the duration,'' the friend said. ''But he is not
going to fall on his sword.''

General Secord, a former deputy assistant secretary of defense who retired from
the Air Force in 1983, is part owner of a northern Virginia company that sells
security systems. His business partner, Albert Hakim, an Iranian-born arms
dealer who is now an American citizen, has been granted limited immunity by the
Congressional investigating committees.

According to Congressional investigators and a special Presidential review
board, General Secord was a key figure in selling arms to Iran, assisting in
negotiations for the release of American hostages in Lebanon and setting up the
contras' supply network. ''He responded to a call from McFarlane, Poindexter and
North,'' said a former colleague and friend.

Could Face Prosecution

Although the Congressional committees have set plans for granting limited
immunity to Colonel North and Admiral Poindexter in exchange for their
testimony, both men, like Mr. Hakim, could face prosecution if evidence has been
uncovered independently by the special prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh. Federal
law enforcement officials, speaking generally about Mr. Walsh's strategy, have
said he is studying a range of possible charges including obstruction of
justice, conspiracy to defraud the Government and making false statements to the
Government.

The question of Congressional immunity for General Secord remains unresolved.
But in the meantime, the Senate investigating committee has voted to begin
contempt proceedings against him, hoping to force him to open records of Swiss
bank accounts he controlled. The committee and the special prosecutor believe
those accounts may be central to tracing the money involved in the arms
transactions and the contra aid network.

In discussing the cases of Colonel North and Admiral Poindexter, both Vietnam
veterans, friends point to their war experience and fervent anti-Communism as
key factors in their zeal to aid the contras.

''I think Ollie was haunted by the memory of Vietnam, the sense of loss and
betrayal that he and a lot of Americans felt when we unilaterally withdrew,'' a
Government official said. ''I think he was afraid we would do to the contras
what we did in Vietnam.''

North Termed Confident

Friends describe Colonel North as confident, in good humor and bursting to give
his account. Several friends who saw him recently made a point of noting that he
had prepared a 40-page summary of what he knew and had been prepared to deliver
it during an appearance before the House Foreign Affairs committee in December.

But on the ride to Capitol Hill, his lawyer handed him instead a typed statement
saying he would be taking the Fifth Amendment, according to this account. One
close friend said Colonel North would prefer to offer his testimony in a
''judicial setting'' rather than a Congressional one. ''He wants to lay it out
in full context, so there won't be any distortion,'' the friend said.

Among his associates, Admiral Poindexter is known as an officer who rigorously
abides by the military chain of command and does nothing without authority from
above. It is for this reason, friends say, that he is especially stung by the
charges that he did not properly serve the President.

Others say he is also upset at the loss of his three-star admiral rank, an
automatic demotion when he left the National Security Council post. Action by
Congress would have been required to keep him at the three-star level. Normally
that would have been routine, but the White House chose not to seek it, judging
that Congress would not be disposed to grant the higher rank.

General Secord, 55, is said by friends to be concerned about his legal bills.

''He told me he's broke,'' said a former Air Force officer who has been close to
General Secord for years. ''He's paying his lawyer a $60,000 retainer, and his
company will probably go out of business. Hell, I wouldn't contract with him.
The Government is going to be all over his back.''

General Secord has assured friends and fellow officers that he has done nothing
to dishonor himself or the military, according to Harry Aderholt, a retired Air
Force general who heads an organization of former Air Force covert operations
specialists known as the Air Commandos Association.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North arriving at his lawyer's office
(NYT/Paul Hosefros) (Page 14)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Drive To Excel

SECTION: Section 6; Page 98, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 165 words


As Bronx Science graduates, we were excited to read about the continuing
academic success of its students, such as that demonstrated by David Kuo. During
the 1960's, we were part of the unexciting group that Milton Kopelman dismisses
as suffering from ''. . . the sameness. . . .''

We marched against the Vietnam War, demanded changes in rigid school policies
and wrote love songs on our guitars. Many of us took the opportunity offered by
''Science High'' to study world literature and advanced languages, in addition
to the sciences. Most did not elect to leave high school early and ignore the
humanities. For the principal of one of the greatest high schools in the world
to suggest that middle-class Jewish students ''in the old days'' were any less
intellectually exciting than the students of the 1980's is embarrassing and
degrading.

PAULA ALGRANATI IZENSTEIN, M.D. '68
JUDITH REISZ BULLOCK '65
STEVEN WENNER, M.D. '66
MARC GOLDEN, M.D. '65
  Longmeadow, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: March 22, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


$
        Weeks
This       On
Week     List Fiction
 1          8  I'LL TAKE MANHATTAN, by Judith Krantz.
               (Bantam, $4.95.) A rich, beautiful young woman
               conquers the world of magazine publishing.

 2          3  THE BOURNE SUPREMACY, by Robert
               Ludlum. (Bantam, $4.95.) A plot to seize Hong
               Kong and bring China into conflict with the West.

 3          3  PRIVATE AFFAIRS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket,
               $4.95.) A couple's marriage is seriously strained
               when they strike it rich in journalism.

 4      3      JOANNA'S HUSBAND AND DAVID'S WIFE, by
               Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey. (Dell, $4.50.) Two
               sides of a marriage revealed in diary entries.

 5          9  THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood.
               (Fawcett, $4.95.) In the Republic of Gilead, men
               and women perform the services assigned them.

 6          3  THE LEBARON SECRET, by Stephen
               Birmingham. (Berkley, $4.50.) Love and conflict
               among a wealthy family of California vintners.

 7          3  TO TASTE THE WINE, by Fern Michaels.
               (Ballantine, $4.50.) An English beauty's
               passionate affair with a handsome Australian.

 8         53  THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
               Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
               brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

 9         16  LIE DOWN WITH LIONS, by Ken Follett. (Signet/
               NAL, $4.95.) An Englishwoman in Afghanistan,
               caught between the C.I.A. and the K.G.B.

10          8  SEASONS OF THE HEART, by Cynthia Freeman.
               (Berkley, $4.50.) A businesswoman is torn
               between devotion to her husband and her mentor.

11          2  WORD OF HONOR, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner,
               $4.50.) A former officer is falsely held responsible
               for an atrocity committed by his men in Vietnam.

12          2  THE GAMBLE, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove,
               $3.95.) The stormy romance of a saloonkeeper and
               a temperance crusader in a small Kansas town.

13          8  THE IMMIGRANT'S DAUGHTER, by Howard
               Fast. (Dell, $4.50.) The last volume of the Lavette
               saga tells of a woman involved in today's politics.

14         11  THE STORYTELLER, by Harold Robbins.
               (Pocket, $4.50.) A poor boy from Brooklyn sets out
               to make it big in the world of glamour as a writer.

15          1  DEEP LIE, by Stuart Woods. (Avon, $4.50.) A
               thriller with spies, sex and Soviet submarines.
        Weeks
This       On
Week     List Nonfiction: General

 1          1  THE TOWER COMMISSION REPORT. (Times
               Books/Bantam, $5.50.) The full text of the
               President's Special Review Board, with an
               introduction by R. W. Apple Jr.

 2          4  NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst.
               (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life is a series of losses, the
               author says, and we must confront them to grow.

 3        178  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
               (Touchstone/S&S, $9.95.) Psychological and
               spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 4         11  THE MAN WHO MISTOOK HIS WIFE FOR A
               HAT, by Oliver Sacks. (Perennial/Harper & Row,
               $7.95.) Strange neurological disabilities.

 5          6  WISEGUY, by Nicholas Pileggi. (Pocket, $4.50.)
               Life in a Mafia family.

 6 *       51  OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam,
               $4.50.) Her ''journey to find her true self.''

 7         20  WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham.
               (North Point, $12.50.) A woman's experiences
               flying in Africa and across the Atlantic in the 30's.
        Weeks
This       On
Week     List Nonfiction: Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1         42  WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin
               Norwood. (Pocket, $4.50.) How to avoid or end
               addictive, unhealthy relationships with men.

 2          8  FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn
               Diamond. (Warner, $4.95.) A diet for weight loss
               and physical fitness.

 3          2  GARFIELD: FOOD FOR THOUGHT, by Jim
               Davis. (Ballantine, $5.95.) Comic strips.

 4 *       42  ADULT CHILDREN OF ALCOHOLICS, by Janet
               Geringer Woititz. (Health Communications,
               $6.95.) Advice about a family problem.

 5          7  THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith.
               (Ballantine, $4.95.) A television chef's dishes.

 6          1  WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE? by
               Richard Nelson Bolles. (Ten Speed, $8.95.) Job and
               career advice; 1987 edition.

 7         19  RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States,
               Canada, Mexico. (Rand McNally, $5.95.) For 1987.

 8          9  THE ARTHUR YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1987.
               (Ballantine, $10.95.) Aid from an accounting firm.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.

 * An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GEORGE AND NINA, POWERLESS TO BE HATCHED

BYLINE: By SUSAN FROMBERG SCHAEFFER; Susan Fromberg Schaeffer, whose most recent
book is ''The Injured Party,'' is currently working on a novel about Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1171 words



THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION
By Stephen McCauley. 316 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $17.95.

IN his very funny, exceptionally vivid first novel, Stephen McCauley seems to be
asking whether it is possible to come of age at all in what we may eventually
term the addled 80's. His narrator, George, a young man from whose point of view
we see everything, is a self-described ''glutton for unqualified affection'' who
comes from Boston to New York because he was ''convinced everybody ended up
there at some point in life anyway, and I figured I should get it out of the way
while I still had the energy.'' George drops in and out of graduate school, gets
a job at a frighteningly upscale kindergarten and moves in with Nina, an
almost-psychologist (she has yet to write her dissertation) trying to reconcile
her belief in Freud with her belief in feminism. Nina finds herself pregnant and
asks George (who is not the father) to help her raise the baby. George at first
accepts but later declines. Meanwhile, George and Nina, who have taken ballroom
dancing lessons together, eventually discover they love each other, although
they are not in love: George is homosexual. Both have affairs, although not with
each other, and by the end of the novel they are no longer living together.

On the one hand, nothing happens in this novel; on the other hand, everything
does. Stephen McCauley's characters are the children of the feminist, Marxist
and psychoanalytic movements, and ideas, unbalanced by common sense or happy,
anchoring experience, seem to be their undoing. ''Do you realize,'' Nina asks
George, ''that I've spent my whole life worrying about my weight. . . ? I became
a feminist thinking I'd stop caring once and for all, and instead I just became
guilty on top of everything because it still mattered to me.'' Howard, the
father of Nina's child (he adores Nina, and calls her, variously, the Pudding,
the Butterbean, the Puddle, the Brisket and the Munchkin) blames himself when
Nina decides to ''terminate'' him: ''It's all my own fault. The first woman I
meet who's strong and independent and has an opinion on everything under the
sun, who'll always challenge me to a solid argument, who loves a good hearty
meal, and what's my first thought? I want to make her my wife. I want to marry
her and make her my wife the way my mother was my father's wife. His possession.
There's no point in trying to kid myself or her anymore. I want the kind of
relationship we're both ideologically opposed to. I'd want to get rid of me,
too.'' George, Nina and Howard all share a determination not to repeat the truly
stunning mistakes of their parents, but, confounded as they are by the twin
shipwrecks of the past and the present, this seems impossible. Thus they
mistrust ''relationships,'' ''commitment,'' being in love, and probably love
itself. They flee intimacy, seek intimacy, move to Manhattan, move out of
Manhattan, ignore cooking (George produces a memorable tuna and raisin
casserole), are obsessed by cooking, attempt to ignore their families or to
belong to them. Throughout, they grimly observe the foibles of society around
them. ''I crumpled on the sofa,'' says George, ''with a New Yorker and read the
ten thousandth installment of someone's Third World childhood.'' Of Tundra, his
teaching colleague in the kindergarten, he says, ''[She] was a round, bellicose
hippie with one of those infamous bedspread wardrobes: long skirts, short
dresses, wide floppy pants all cut from the same paisley-on-beige cloth, giving
her the appearance of a walking sofa bed.'' Nina wonders where she will wind up
at 80. George concludes, ''We're born alone and we die alone and in between we
sit in bed alone and watch Mary Tyler Moore reruns.'' In short, they are all, in
their own relentless, hopefully cynical way, in search of meaning. AT one point,
it seems that this desperate search for meaning has led George and Nina to
reinvent courtly love: ''There isn't much to say about my relationship with Nina
except that we loved each other and took care of each other and behaved a little
like best friends. . . . I suppose the best way to describe our friendship is as
a long and unconsummated courtship between two people with no expectations.'' In
other words, what seems ideal must remain at a safe distance because all
expectations are (probably) doomed to failure.

It is one of the great strengths of ''The Object of My Affection'' that the
characters do not find meaning (although they do seem to glimpse it), do not
reach that safe harbor where, ''relieved to be spared the burdens of youth and
nonconformity'' (these burdens ''replaced,'' according to Mr. McCauley, by
''squalling babies''), they stop looking at the world with astonishment,
amusement and healthy contempt. We leave Mr. McCauley's characters half hatched
from their shells, suspiciously regarding the world, too far out of the egg to
go back, too alarmed by the world to step out into it. We last glimpse them
flailing about in a world where homosexuality is less of a problem than being a
feminist who likes long, painted fingernails. The water that so often threatens
to go over their heads begins lapping at our feet, too, and this is Mr.
McCauley's triumph: he brings his characters, his world astonishingly,
captivatingly alive. In a work of fiction, he collapses the barriers between
''fiction'' and ''life.'' ''The Object of My Affection'' is surely one of the
best books about what it is like to be young in these crazy times.

CHARACTERS FOUND NEAR HOME

George and Nina, the main characters in Stephen McCauley's first novel, ''The
Object of My Affection,'' initially appeared in a short story he wrote about
four years ago when he was a student in Columbia University's graduate writing
program.

''My teacher, Stephen Koch, suggested I try expanding it,'' said Mr. McCauley,
talking on the telephone from Boston, where he lives and works. The 31-year-old
author works at a local travel agency and writes a travel tips column for The
Boston Phoenix - ''but I hate to travel, I find it disorienting.''

Mr. McCauley, who was ''in and out of a few psychology graduate programs'' after
being graduated from the University of Vermont, finished his novel last year. He
says he didn't have to travel far to find his characters. ''George has my
personality, though not much of my life, and Nina is a composite of my
friends.''

His characters' search for affection and their painful struggles - to strike a
balance between self-interest and commitment, to reconcile principles with
emotions - are also familiar, he said. ''There is a sort of confusion in
people's lives today - there are so many options, '' he said. ''Perhaps my
generation has been brought up to think you have a right to want what you want
and to do it all, and I don't think you can. You have to give up some piece of
yourself. You can't be selfish when you raise a child or are with another
person. You can't act purely on whimsy.''
  - DEBORAH STEAD

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: March 22, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1495 words



An error occurred in the processing of a table at this point in the document.
Please refer to the table in the online document.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR, by Ward Just. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) It's youth
against age, idealism versus experience, in this intelligent novel about mortal
struggle between a Kennedy-era old-style liberal diplomat and his terrorist son.


A MORE PERFECT UNION, by William Peters. (Crown, $22.50.) A judicious and
sensible week-by-week review of the work of the framers at the Constitutional
Convention of 1787.

OVERHEAD IN A BALLOON: Twelve Stories of Paris, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House,
$16.95.) Ms. Gallant, a Canadian, has lived in France since 1950. Paris shines
in these stories about a dwindling upper class and a fragile bohemia; even more
brilliant are the author's humor, sophistication and generosity.

ON BOXING, by Joyce Carol Oates. (Dolphin/Doubleday, $14.95.) Ms. Oates brings
to boxing the same intelligence she applies to her fiction, with its human
struggle, its intimate combats in public, its disappointments, its triumphs and
failures of will.

THE PRIEST AND THE POLICEMAN: The Courageous Life and Cruel Murder of Father
Jerzy Popieluszko, by John Moody and Roger Boyes. (Summit, $17.95.) Poland's
tragic and enigmatic recent history, conveyed through the lives of a
Solidarity-minded priest and the security police captain convicted under the
Communist regime of his 1984 murder and kidnapping.

THE TRAVELER, by John Katzenbach. (Putnam, $18.95.) A woman detective pursues a
handsome, charming serial killer on an insane journey around America with a
kidnapped college student in Mr. Katzenbach's truly bleak, truly unsettling
thriller.

THE PROPHETEERS, by Max Apple. (Harper & Row, Cloth, $16.95; Perennial Library,
Paper, $7.95.) Such national icons as Howard Johnson, Walt Disney and Clarence
Birdseye inhabit Mr. Apple's pleasantly crazed fable of prophets out for profit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MARVIN KALB TO DIRECT CENTER AT HARVARD GRADUATE SCHOOL

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 527 words


Marvin Kalb, a diplomatic reporter for television and moderator of NBC News's
program ''Meet the Press,'' has accepted appointment as the first director of
the Joan Shorenstein Barone Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy at
the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University.

Mr. Kalb, who will leave NBC, said yesterday that he would assume his new
administrative duties on June 1 and would simultaneously be named a professor of
press and public policy for an endowed chair at Harvard.

''We have now, in our political process, reached a point where the press,
politicians, and the formulation of policy have become so intertwined that we
are dealing with one large process,'' Mr. Kalb said in describing the direction
in which he intends to take the new center.

Mr. Kalb said that among his top priorities were a scholarly analysis of the
impact on television news of a new emphasis on profits by the networks and a
course on ''The Presidency and the Press.''

No Programs in Journalism

Creation of the Barone Center, which was dedicated last September, was a
departure for Harvard, which does not have undergraduate or graduate programs in
journalism.

The center is essentially endowed by a $5 million gift from Walter H.
Shorenstein of San Francisco in honor of his daughter, a producer for CBS News
who died of cancer two years ago.

Mr. Kalb, who is 56 years old, was chosen to be the Barone Center's first
director by a committee that included David Broder, a political columnist for
The Washington Post, Albert Hunt, Washingon bureau chief for The Wall Street
Journal, and Howard Simons, curator of the Nieman Foundation at Harvard.

Lawrence K. Grossman, president of NBC News, described Mr. Kalb's departure as
''bittersweet news.''

Mr. Kalb, who has a master's degree in Russian and Chinese studies from Harvard,
was poised to begin work on a dissertation to complete a doctorate there when he
was abruptly invited to go to Moscow with the State Department in 1956.

After a year and a half as a diplomat, he joined CBS News at the request of
Edward R. Murrow, the broadcast journalist who Mr. Kalb says remains his idol.

Many Journalism Awards

Mr. Kalb spent 23 years at CBS News, most of it as a diplomatic correspondent.
In 1980 he was named chief diplomatic correspondent for NBC News and moderator
of ''Meet the Press.''

By Mr. Kalb's count, he has been covering the State Department for 24 years,
which he says is longer than anyone now on the job.

He has won many journalism awards, including George Foster Peabody awards for
two documentaries: ''The Man Who Shot the Pope'' in 1983 and ''Vietnam: Lessons
of a Lost War'' in 1986. Also in 1986, he won the Du Pont Columbia Award for
''Stars Wars: Defense in Space.''

Mr. Kalb is also the author or co-author of five books of nonfiction and two
novels, including one, ''The Last Ambassador,'' written with his brother
Bernard, the broadcast journalist and a former State Department spokesman.

Mr. Kalb said he would continue work with Elie Wiesel, winner of the 1986 Nobel
Peace prize, on a television documentary series on the Ten Commandments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Marvin Kalb (NYT/Ken Heinen)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK: PENTAGON;
Lehman's Sea-War Strategy Is Alive, but for How Long?

BYLINE: By BERNARD E. TRAINOR

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1358 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Secretary of the Navy John F. Lehman Jr. unveiled a daring maritime strategy a
few years ago.

According to this strategy, should war ever break out with the Soviet Union, the
Navy plans to send submarines and aircraft carrier battle groups directly north
into the north Norwegian Sea and the Barents Sea, home waters of the Soviet Navy
above the Arctic Circle.

At the same time, a United States Marine contingent would be rushed to northern
Norway to keep the Russians from seizing airfields there that would be crucial
for supporting the Navy.

A primary goal of this offensive would be to destroy Soviet nuclear missile
submarines situated in the area and to prevent other Soviet submarines from
pouring into the Atlantic to sink ships taking critical supplies and
reinforcements to Western Europe.

Another major goal would be to threaten the Soviet homeland on its northern
flank and thus weaken an anticipated Warsaw Pact attack against NATO defenses
along the border between West and East Germany.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and the Joint Chiefs of Staff and NATO
have never formally ap-proved the Lehman strategy, which has drawn its share of
critics and, in fact, remains a hot topic of conversation in the capital.

Yet, despite the debate, the concept seems to have taken on a life of its own
and is now widely viewed as official United States and NATO strategy. Some 4,000
United States marines are conducting maneuvers in Norway this week to sharpen
their ability to carry out their intended role.

But will the Lehman strategy continue to be viewed as viable after Mr. Lehman
steps down next month after heading the Navy and Marine Corps for six years? The
answer is far from clear.

The incoming Secretary, James Webb, a former marine who fought in Vietnam,
declined to comment on the Lehman strategy, saying it would be inappropriate for
him to express his views before being confirmed in his new post. But some of Mr.
Lehman's critics do not hesitate to speak out.

They say the real reason the Secretary of the Navy came up with his plan was not
so much to contain the northern Soviet threat as to justify his program to build
a 600-ship Navy.

That program, they concede, appears to be too far along to be seriously
threatened once he has left. But they hasten to point out that the new Chief of
Naval Operations, Adm. Carlisle A. H. Trost, was not Mr. Lehman's choice for the
post and appears less vocal in support of the Lehman strategy than was his
predecessor, Adm. James D. Watkins, now retired. Unacceptable Dangers?  Some
civilians who are skeptical of the strategy, such as Richard D. Delauer and
Robert W. Komer, both former Defense Department officials, consider it suicidal
in the face of the Soviet air and sea power concentrated in the Barents Sea.

Other critics contend that many admirals see unacceptable dangers in the Lehman
strategy but have not spoken out because it buttressed the push for a modernized
Navy and, more important, because they did not want to jeopardize their careers
by disagreeing with the Navy Secretary.

''They may not say it publicly, but many aircraft carrier skippers pale at the
thought of taking their giant ships into the waters of the Barents,'' said John
M. Collins, senior specialist in national defense at the Library of Congress.
''They know they will be facing Soviet attack submarines and land-based airpower
operating under conditions most favorable to the Soviets and least favorable to
us.''

Senior Navy officers deny there is serious internal opposition to the maritime
strategy. They say it is not a full-steam-ahead doctrine but a dynamic and
evolving concept of naval warfare that is supported by, among others, Admiral
Trost.

'Not a Recipe for Soup'

''This is not a recipe for soup to be blindly followed,'' said one officer. ''We
are not going to rush blindly north regardless of circumstances. But neither are
we going to signal the Soviets exactly what we will or will not do.''

The detractors outside the Navy, this officer added, do not fully understand the
flexibility of the strategy. And it is just as well, he argued, if the Soviets
do not either.

According to Vice Adm. Henry Mustin, the Navy's deputy for operations, the
maritime strategy is basically one of deterrence. ''In the event of a
confrontation with the Soviets,'' the admiral said, ''we propose to take certain
steps to demonstrate to the Russians that their powerful northern fleet would be
bottled up and destroyed in its Arctic bastion should the shooting start. If our
preventive moves convince the Soviets they won't be able to come south to cut
NATO's lifelines to the United States, they may think twice about going to war
in Europe.''

Whether such preliminary moves by the Navy would, in fact, deter or, on the
other hand, prompt a reaction by the Soviets is frequently debated in Washington
military circles.

The former Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Watkins, in an article published
by the Naval Institute while he was in office, indicated that if deterrence
failed and war broke out, a combination of land and sea actions would take place
to allow naval forces to move into the Soviet Union's home waters.

Submarines and anti-submarine patrol aircraft would try to destroy the Soviet
undersea threat to the American aircraft carriers that would be moving up into
the Norwegian and Barents Seas. Soviet surface ships, which are viewed as a
lesser threat, would be dealt with by a combination of attacks by air and sea.

It is the proposed destruction of the Soviet submarine fleet that makes the
maritime strategy unacceptable to some critics. They doubt that the Navy could
tolerate the losses necessary to carry out such a campaign. More important, they
say, no distinction is made between the sinking of nuclear missile submarines,
known as ''boomers,'' and conventional submarines.

The Russians maintain the bulk of their strategic nuclear missile reserves
aboard submarines stationed below the Arctic ice cap, where they are largely
undetectable. They are protected by undersea minefields, attack submarines and
anti-submarine aircraft.

The idea of an attack on the Soviet nuclear missile reserves always prompts a
spirited argument between those who maintain that such attacks will trigger a
nuclear war and those who maintain that as long as land-based Soviet ICBM's are
not attacked, the Russians would rather lose the submarine missile submarines
than use them in a mutually suicidal nuclear exchange.

For its part, the offensively oriented United States Marine Corps applauds the
maritime strategy and sees itself playing a key role as its landward extension
in Norway. Brig. Gen. Michael K. Sheridan, senior planner for the Corps, says
that north Norway is the key to the strategy. ''If NATO can't hold on to the
north,'' he said, ''the strategy won't work because the Soviets will counter any
Navy moves by launching devastating attacks out of Norway and the Soviet Union's
Kola Peninsula.

''On the other hand, if we hold north Norway, the advantages are ours. We can
use our early warning radar and command and control system to spot and
counteract Soviet bombers flying out of the Kola before they get within missile
range of the carriers. We can also use Air Force and Marine and allied aircraft
in Norway to work with the carrier planes both in defense of Norway and to
protect our anti-submarine aircraft.''

Question for the Marines

The big question for the marines is whether they can get to Norway in time to
assist the Norwegians in a successful defense of the north in the event of a
NATO-Warsaw Pact war.

To this end, the marines have been stockpiling heavy weapons and equipment in
Norway. In case of a crisis, the marines and their accompanying tactical
aircraft would then hope to fly quickly to Norway, pick up their equipment and
move into designated defensive positions along the Norwegian border.

The marines trained for Arctic warfare who flew to Norway from their home bases
in the United States last week are testing the rapid reinforcement concept and
gaining more experience in cold-weather maneuvers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of the National Military Command Center (UPI)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Designated White House Savior

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 379 words


Some Presidencies, like Lyndon Johnson's in Vietnam, failed through tragedies
too deep for any individual to avert. Others have gone awry through such
egregious blunders that it seems an ounce of common sense in the President's ear
would surely have saved him. What if Presidents were to install not just a
biographer, as Mr. Reagan has done with Edmund Morris, but a designated savior
in the White House, charged to speak only in the presence of what he deemed a
historic goof.

''If you must invade Cuba, don't try it without air cover,'' the official
blunder-blocker might have said to President Kennedy. To Mr. Nixon: ''This
third-rate burglary is going to become an impeachable offense.'' To Mr. Ford:
''Pardoning this felon will prove unpardonable.'' To Mr. Carter: ''For this
rescue mission to work, we need a miracle.'' And to Mr. Reagan: ''Trading arms
to the Iranians for hostages is totally contrary to your stated policy.''

Why would Presidents intent on bold action listen to such naysaying? Suppose
they were encouraged to appoint someone of undoubted stature. Imagine this
certified eminence sitting impassively in the Oval Office, saying not a word for
month after month. Then, one awesome day, he clears his throat. Wouldn't that
get the Chief Executive's attention? Presidency after Presidency has stumbled
not through the machinations of enemies but from colossal misjudgments. ''If but
one of the major policy mistakes we examined had been avoided,'' the Tower
Commission repined, ''the nation's history would bear one less scar, one less
embarrassment, one less opportunity for opponents to reverse the principles this
nation seeks to preserve and advance in the world.'' Even if the official
mistake-minder's cautions were ignored, at least the peal of his helpless
laughter might stir useful doubts.

But history, however fixable it may seem, cannot be changed so easily. Think how
soon the designated savior would acquire a staff of his own, and an avid taste
for being Washington's insidemost insider. He would grow to share the
President's peeves and obsessions. And come the day when the President committed
a blunder of catastrophic girth, the official witness, grown as oblivious to
error as his master, would require a savior of his own.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS OF THE TIMES;
The Same Country?

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


How is our Asian ally doing against a tenacious Communist insurgency? Says a
just-returned diplomat to Congress: The authorities are dealing ''realistically
and effectively'' with the threat and the situation is ''very positive.'' Warns
a Pentagon policymaker: The government has ''regrettably failed'' to develop a
comprehensive counterinsurgency plan and ''distrust and apathy pervade
civil-military relations.''

The country is the Philippines, whose president yesterday called for a military
victory over the insurgents. The conflicting testimonies came from Assistant
Secretary of State Gaston Sigur Jr. and Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard
Armitage in recent testimony before a House Foreign Affairs subcommittee. But if
it sounds a bit familiar to old Asia hands, that could be because of its uncanny
similarity to another conflict of years gone by, with bureaucratic roles
reversed.

In September 1963, President Kennedy sent Joseph Mendenhall, a diplomat, and
Victor Krulack, a Marine general, on a mission to South Vietnam. As Arthur
Schlesinger recounts it, in ''A Thousand Days,'' the man from State returned
warning of imminent collapse, while the general reported that things were going
well.

President Kennedy then asked a question that also must have occurred to House
panelists:

''Were you two gentlemen in the same country?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A WINTER OF CROWDS AT MOVIES

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 609 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, March 22


Led by ''Platoon,'' ''Outrageous Fortune,'' and such unstoppable 1986 movies as
''Crocodile Dundee'' and ''Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home,'' the 1987 winter box
office has been remarkable. For six weeks in a row, ticket sales have set
records for this time of year.

The movie industry is usually in the doldrums during February and March. The
Christmas movies have ended their runs, and major studios are saving their more
commercial films to release during the spring or summer holidays.

This year, according to an industry analyst for the trade paper Variety, Art
Murphy, ticket sales are running ahead of 1984, when the movie industry sold
more than $4 billion worth of tickets for the first and only time.

A Wide Variety of Movies

''It's the product,'' Mr. Murphy said. ''The old wheeze is that when people see
one good film, they are willing to take a chance on another film. Most books,
plays, movies and television shows don't work. Recessions in the movie industry
come because the garbage is higher than usual, with the 10th space-age knockoff
and the 24th copy of 'Animal House.' It then takes the studios 18 months to come
up with a new product line.'' According to Mr. Murphy, the last box-office
recession ended in June 1986.

Among the other winter box-office hits is the horror film ''Nightmare on Elm
Street 3: Dream Warriors,'' which grossed $25 million in its first 17 days.

''Lethal Weapon,'' which stars Mel Gibson as a cop and Vietnam veteran who is
going over the edge because his wife has been killed, has led the box office for
the last two weeks and actually sold more tickets its second weekend than its
first, a clear sign that moviegoers are recommending it to their friends.

An Unexpected Success

''Mannequin'' is the sleeper, the movie that has unexpectedly lured audiences. A
Pygmalion-like tale about a store dummy that turns into a woman, ''Mannequin''
is pleasing teen-agers and sold nearly $25 million worth of tickets during its
first month.

''If there were five 'Mannequins,' they'd be beating each other over the head,''
said the president of Lorimar Motion Pictures, Craig Baumgarten. ''But there's a
wide variety of movies out there.''

Mr. Baumgarten said he felt that the current robust box office was at least
partly the result of the videocassette revolution. ''The success of Home Box
Office in 1979 and 1980 really built the movie audience,'' he said. ''Now home
video is doing the same thing, building us a broader audience of people who
accept movies.''

Good Movies, Good Marketing

''The first prerequisite is a good movie,'' said the president of marketing at
Universal Studios, Edward Roginski. He also praised the marketing campaigns on
''Lethal Weapon'' (Warner Brothers) and ''Outrageous Fortune'' (Disney).

''Although both movies got good reviews, they were positioned from the beginning
as audience films,'' he said. Most of the reviews quoted in the ads were not
from print journalists -who are perceived as elitist - but from such television
personalities as Joel Siegel of ''Good Morning America'' and Oprah Winfrey. And
they included such quotes as ''I cheered and stomped.''

''They successfully positioned 'Lethal Weapon' as a populist film akin to '48
Hours,' and 'Outrageous Fortune' as a populist-buddy-action-comedy,'' Mr.
Roginski said.

But box-office records do not mean fairy-tale endings for all movies. The
season's biggest loser is Sylvester Stallone's arm-wrestling movie, ''Over the
Top.'' Nearing the end of its run, ''Over the Top'' has sold less than $15
million worth of tickets. Mr. Stallone was reportedly paid $12 million to star
in the film.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mel Gibson

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 23, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: ROBERT JOY IN ''THE NERD''

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


CONNOISSEURS of nerdiness - a group that includes anyone who ever passed through
an American high school -will recognize all the symptoms in Robert Joy's
performance in ''The Nerd'' at the Helen Hayes Theater. Mr. Joy wears
horn-rimmed glasses, a short-sleeved white shirt and a clip-on black tie. One of
his shirt pockets is stuffed with a small spiral notebook, the other with an
ink-stained penholder packed to capacity with ball-points. The nerd speaks in a
giggly, high-pitched voice and may be the last person in the country still
showing off his impersonations of the Jimmys, Durante and Cagney. His favorite
snack is Redi-Whip sprayed directly into the mouth and his favorite instrument,
played with the elaborate aid of sheet music, is the tambourine.

In other words, he's a fellow who could drive a person crazy, and that is pretty
much Mr. Joy's assignment in this comedy by Larry Shue. Act I of ''The Nerd''
recounts what happens when Mr. Joy, whose character is known as Rick, travels to
the Terre Haute home of an old Vietnam war buddy, an architect named Willum
(Mark Hamill), and settles in for an extended stay. Act II describes the
farcical pranks by which Willum and his pals try to evict Rick once their
hospitality and patience run out.

As readers of the National Lampoon and Mad magazine know best, nerds are
eternally ripe for comic ridicule. Mr. Shue, who also wrote ''The Foreigner''
before dying in a plane crash in 1985, provides pockets of ace material in his
first act. Mr. Joy is at his goofiest when he destroys his fellow dinner guests'
appetite for hors d'oeuvres by impersonating the squawking chickens that might
have laid the deviled eggs. Soon after that, Rick insists that everyone play an
exasperating parlor game featuring incomprehensible rules, paper-bag masks, eye
poking and the mutilation of footwear.

Along the way, Mr. Shue provides some bright one-liners as well, on such
eclectic topics as Marjorie Main, Saturday-morning television animation, the
fifth act of ''Hamlet'' and the least likely flavor for ice cream. But its plot
similarities notwithstanding, ''The Nerd'' does not prove to be ''The Nerd Who
Came to Dinner.'' Mr. Shue aspires instead to the formulas of the old-time
television sitcom. When Willum's best-laid plans for playing host to his pompous
boss (Wayne Tippit) are upended by Rick's accidental sowings of chaos, we're
back in the cartoon world of Lucille Ball and Gale Gordon.

Fair enough, but network sitcoms run a half-hour, and ''The Nerd'' is five times
that length, including intermission. It takes the playwright nearly 30 minutes
to bring on Rick in Act I. Much of that warm-up is devoted to laborious,
ultimately inessential exposition about Willum's architectural and romantic
interests -far too much of it delivered by telephone answering machine. The
prolonged, intentionally ''infantile'' slapstick shenanigans of Act II turn out
to be more exhausting than hysterical, especially as rudimentarily staged by
Charles Nelson Reilly.

As an actor, Mr. Reilly was once one of Broadway's choicest nerds -the boss's
nephew in the musical ''How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying.'' As
the director of ''The Nerd,'' he has coaxed a very good performance out of Mr.
Joy, but one wonders whether a dynamic, full-fledged comedian might have more
successfully carried the show. (''The Nerd'' was a vehicle for Rowan Atkinson in
London.) Mr. Joy is a gifted actor working hard, sometimes too hard, to create
the kind of clownish turn that Art Carney spun effortlessly when playing such
classic nerds as Ed Norton in ''The Honeymooners'' and Felix Unger in the
original Broadway ''Odd Couple.''

The supporting cast, which includes Patricia Kalember as a voguishly feminist
love interest and Pamela Blair as Mr. Tippit's all-too-repressed wife, is
appropriately amiable. Mr. Hamill is an assured straight man until he must
strain to metamorphose into a rampaging, snorting pig. (Don't ask why.) The
sharpest performance is from Peter Riegert, who continues to display his
remarkable knack for making insolence as likable as it is dyspeptically comic.
His omnipresent role is that of a demanding drama critic - a character, however
welcome, who turns out to be as superfluous appearing in ''The Nerd'' as he
would be attending it.

Clunky Capers

THE NERD, by Larry Shue; directed by Charles Nelson Reilly; set by John Lee
Beatty; costumes by Deborah Shaw; lighting by Dennis Parichy; sound by Timothy
Helgeson; production stage manager, Robert T. Bennett; associate producers,
Gintare Sileika Everett, Allan Matthews and Yentl Productions. Presented by
Kevin Dowling, Joan Stein, Melvyn J. Estrin, Susan Rose, Gail Berman and Lynn
Dowling, in association with F. Harlan Batrus, Gina Rogak and George A.
Schapiro. At the Helen Hayes Theater, 240 West 44th Street.

Willum Cubbert...Mark Hamill; Tansy McGinnis...Patricia Kalember; Axel
Hammond...Peter Riegert; Warnock Waldgrave...Wayne Tippit; Clelia
Waldgrave...Pamela Blair; Thor Waldgrave...Timmy Geissler; Rick
Steadman...Robert Joy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of scene from 'The Nerds' (Gerry Goodstein)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG TO SEEK REPUBLICAN NOMINATION FOR PRESIDENCY

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1180 words


Alexander M. Haig Jr., who called himself the ''vicar of American foreign
policy'' as Secretary of State in the first 18 months of the Reagan Presidency,
said last night that he would be a candidate for the Republican nomination for
President.

In a speech to some 1,200 backers who each paid $500 to hear him speak at a
''Salute to America'' black-tie, fund-raising dinner in his honor at the
Waldorf-Astoria, Mr. Haig said, ''What I offer is leadership.''

Mr. Haig served in key military and diplomatic posts under the last four
Presidents, and, as White House chief of staff in l974, played a key role in
persuading President Nixon to resign.

Mr. Haig said that a President leads best when he understands what he called the
''three pillars of trust'' on which the office rests: that he ''acts in the
national interest,'' that he ''speaks the truth as he knows it'' and ''that he
offers direction and hope to overcome the challenges of the day - that he has a
vision.''

High Praise for Reagan

He had high praise for Ronald Reagan as the President ''who helped America to be
proud again,'' and also appeared to allude to the current Iran arms affair when
he said that ''a President leads when he understands that openly communicated
policies, even if secretly arrived at, are the only policies that merit enduring
support.''

He also said that ''a President leads when he realizes that his popularity is
his greatest power, but also his greatest temptation.''

Although the Waldorf dinner had all the trappings of an announcement gala,
complete with the Peter Duchin orchestra and a comedy turn from Mort Sahl, a
Haig supporter, the formal announcement will come today.

''Tomorrow,'' he said in the penultimate line of his address, ''I will announce
my candidacy for the Republican nomination to run for President of the United
States.'' He received a standing ovation from the tuxedoed and sequined guests.
Phyllis McGuire performed a sing-a-long version of ''God Bless America,'' and
dedicated a version of the McGuire sisters' hit, ''Something's Gotta Give.'' to
Mr. Haig.

The former four-star general made a tentative run for the Presidency in the
closing months of 1979, but concluded that he had no chance of gaining the 1980
nomination. In 1981 he ruled himself out of the running in 1984, but he has made
it increasingly clear over the last year that he was disposed to run, declaring
last fall that while he conceded he was ''a dark, dark horse,'' he would
probably run.

Although his preannouncement address last night was measured, if history is a
gauge he is likely to be a tough, and unpredictable campaigner.

Tenure as Secretary of State

Mr. Haig's 18-month tenure as Secretary of State was tumultuous. He came to the
job with a reputation as a ''political general.'' All four of his general's
stars were placed on his shoulders by Richard M. Nixon, the last two
simultaneously when Mr. Nixon named him Army vice chief of staff in January
1973, jumping him over some 240 higher-ranking officers.

While he never commanded a division, General Haig's credentials as a fighting
man were never questioned by those who knew his record. In the Korean War he
went ashore at Inchon as an aide to General of the Army Douglas MacArthur and
won decorations for valor in both Korea and Vietnam.

But it was as a political infighter that Mr. Haig has been most visible.

In a stint at the Pentagon, he was a military adviser to Army Secretary Cyrus
Vance, and when Mr. Nixon became President in 1969, General Haig became military
adviser to the national security adviser, Henry A. Kissinger. In that period, it
was disclosed years later, after the Watergate scandal, General Haig took part
in wiretapping and monitoring of suspected disclosers of information,
journalists and perceived Nixon enemies.

After a year he was named Deputy Assistant to the President for national
security affairs.

Close Relation With Nixon

In that role General Haig developed a personal and working relationship with
President Nixon, a relationship that often seemed to pit him against his nominal
boss, Mr. Kissinger. Among other things, Mr. Haig served as a frequent
diplomatic and military emissary to Vietnam.

In mid-1973, a few months after Mr. Nixon awarded him his fourth star, the
President, his Administration all but in collapse over Watergate, called on
General Haig to succeed H. R. Haldeman as White House chief of staff.

As chief of staff he became a kind of deputy President, a regent to a President
increasingly unable to govern. Loyal to the end, he urged Deputy Attorney
General William D. Ruckelshaus to dismiss Archibald Cox, the Watergate special
prosecutor, because President Nixon, ''your Commander in Chief, has given you an
order.'' Nevertheless General Haig was credited with being the individual
responsible for what has since been recognized as a brilliant and delicate
initiative to persuade Mr. Nixon to resign.

The general spent the next five years as commander of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization. He resigned his post in 1979 and left the military. The following
year he was selected by Ronald Reagan to become his Secretary of State. Asked in
confirmation hearings about Watergate, Mr. Haig described the Nixon era as a
period of loyalty and public service, ''an obligation to do the best I could.''

In 1981, after John Hinckley shot and wounded President Reagan outside a
Washington hotel, Mr. Haig sped to the White House to announce on
television,''As of now, I am in control here.'' His remarks were not well
received.

He resigned as Secretary of State in June 1982, maintaining that the
Administration had moved away from the ''careful course'' that he said he and
the President had initially laid out.

Republican Presidential Contender

Alexander Meigs Haig Jr.

Current Job: Head of Worldwide Associates Inc., a Washington-based consulting
company.

Date of Birth: Dec. 2, 1924, Philadelphia.

Education: B.S., United States Military Academy, West Point, 1947. M.A. in
international relations, Georgetown University, Washington, 1961.

Religion: Roman Catholic.

Military Service: 1947-73, 1974-1979. Served in Korea 1950-51, Vietnam 1966-67.
Decorated with Distinguished Service Cross, 2 Silver Stars, 3 Distinguished
Flying Crosses, 2 Bronze Stars for valor, Purple Heart. Retired in 1979 with
rank of general, having served for five years as Commander in Chief, U.S.
European Command, and Supreme Allied Commander, Europe (SHAPE).

Married: Patricia Antoinette Fox, May 24, 1950.

Children: Alexander P., 34; Brian F., 33; Barbara E., 30.

Previous Government Positions: Assistant to the President and chief of White
House staff, 1973-74; Secretary of State, 1981-82.

Other Major Positions: President and chief operating officer, United
Technologies Corp., 1979-81.

Author: ''Caveat: Realism, Reagan and Foreign Policy'' (1984).

Poll Standing: Strength among Republicans in most recent New York Times/CBS News
Poll: 2 percent, sixth out of nine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 24, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DESPITE ARMS BUILDUP, EXPERTS SAY U.S. IS NOT READY FOR WAR

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 965 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 23


Day after day, admirals and generals and senior civilians have been trooping up
to Capitol Hill to testify that American military forces are still not ready for
sustained combat despite the expenditure of $1.5 trillion in the last six years.

In recent hearings on the military budget, the witnesses from field commands and
the Pentagon have been repeating an annual lament: While the forces are better
off today than they were a year ago, so much has been spent on new weapons that
not enough has been left for ammunition and spare parts.

They have also testified that medical care for those wounded in battle would be
so inadequate that it would be what soldiers call a ''war stopper,'' meaning
defeat without actually losing on the battlefield.

Finally, the witnesses have once again asserted that even if everything else had
been squared away, the United States could not get enough forces and
reinforcements to the battlefield because of shortages in sea and air transport.


Where Money Should Go

At issue here is less a question of how much to spend on the the military and
more a question of where the money should be spent.

The armed forces have experienced these shortages because the Reagan
Administration and Congress have favored investment in high-cost weapons, such
as the MX nuclear missile and a 600-ship Navy, over more mundane items such as
ammunition and transport planes.

Politically, highly visible arms programs have much more appeal, particularly in
bringing jobs to election districts, than do funds for spare parts and other
operating expenses.

Adm. Ronald J. Hays, the commander of United States forces in the Pacific
region, reflected the the tone of the budget season as he testified before the
Defense Policy Panel of the House Armed Services Committee last Wednesday.
''Even though impressive gains have been realized in the past few years,'' he
said, ''staying power remains a serious conventional warfighting concern.''

''We need more war reserve stocks of modern munitions to gain and maintain air
superiority and secure our lines of communication,'' he said. ''We lack adequate
quantities of repair parts, particularly those that feed our high-technology
systems.''

Problems Faced by Allies

''Of course,'' Admiral Hays continued, ''having large stores of supplies and
repair parts means little unless we can move them when and where needed.''

Finally, he said: ''Our allies are in no better shape to sustain war fighting.
Most have less than adequate logistics, transportation and service support
structure.'' He cited Japan, South Korea and the Philippines, with which the
United States has mutual security treaties.

Maj. Gen. Thomas G. Darling of the Air Force, deputy commander of the Atlantic
Command, was not quite so pessimistic when he testified earlier this month
before the Senate Armed Services Committee's Subcommittee on Readiness.

''The readiness of our component forces is at its highest point in many years,''
General Darling said. But he added that shortages in Air Force munitions would
hold down the capacity of these forces through the 1987 fiscal year.

'A Casualty Nightmare'

Moreover, budget reductions that cut funds for spare parts over the last two
years will reduce the amount of time that pilots train in the air by 19 percent
in 1991, he said. And because of equipment shortages, the Atlantic Command's two
brigades of reserve Army troops would be unable to sustain themselves in combat,
he said.

On medical readiness, Dennis Shaw, a senior Pentagon official dealing with
reserve affairs, reminded the committee's Subcommittee on Manpower and Personnel
last Wednesday that a lack of adequate care early in the Korean War caused ''a
casualty nightmare.''

''As many soldiers died as were wounded in the first month of the war,'' he
said, which was the highest ratio of killed to wounded personnel since the Civil
War. ''It is not unlikely that history will repeat itself in a future, short
notice, conventional conflict if planning is based on optimistic casualty
estimates.''

As the three-year Korean War progressed, however, medical care improved
markedly. Combat medical care in the Vietnam War was even better, with more than
95 percent of the wounded surviving. However, after that, Pentagon officials say
medical readiness was allowed to wither.

Shortages of Doctors

Dr. William Mayer, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs, said
at the same hearing that medical readiness in the forces on active duty had
improved but that some shortages would not be overcome for several more years.

He cited shortages of doctors and medical technicians and said the lack of air
transport ''has always been a critical factor in our medical readiness
shortfalls.'' But he said large commercial airliners would be added to the
civilian reserve fleet for medical evacuation in wartime.

Lawrence Korb, who was the senior Pentagon official responsible for readiness
until he was eased out in 1985 for being too outspoken, asserted in an article
last week that the Reagan Administration had not faced up to the end of growth
in military budgets.

Mr. Korb, who is dean of the Graduate School of Public and International Affairs
at the University of Pittsburgh, and Stephen Daggett, an analyst with the
Committee for National Security, said in The Defense News, ''A continuation of
bureaucratic business-as-usual, therefore, will be disastrous.''

They concluded: ''A failure to follow through on planned increases in funds for
ammunition, spare parts, base improvements and additional personnel will mean
that the new weapons purchased earlier in the decade will not be adequately
supported, and much of the Reagan Administration's military buildup will, in
effect, be squandered.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 25, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OFFICIAL DEFENDS VOLUNTEER ARMY AGAINST A POSSIBLE PLEA FOR DRAFT

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 24


A senior Defense Department official today gave Congress what Pentagon officials
characterized as a Republican defense of a volunteer military force against an
expected call by some Democrats for a return to the draft.

David J. Armor, who is Deputy Assistant Secretary for Force Management and
Personnel, contended that with ''our 13-year record of success with the
volunteer force, it seems unlikely that a legitimate case can be made for
returning to conscription.''

Influential Democrats such as Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, who is chairman of
the Armed Services Committee, former Gov. Charles S. Robb of Virginia, who is
chairman of the Democratic Leadership Council, and Senator Ernest F. Hollings of
South Carolina have indicated that they would favor resuming the draft.

No Public Debate

But debate over the draft has so far rumbled below the surface and has not
erupted into a public issue. Senator Nunn, for instance, has said he expects the
draft to be ''a principal issue'' in Congress this year with the Democrats in
control. But a spokesman said today the Senator had no immediate plans to hold
hearings on it.

On the other hand, officials aware of Mr. Armor's thinking said the Republicans
expected the Democrats to make an issue of the draft in the Presidential
election campaign next year and that Mr. Armor was trying to establish a public
record that could be used in debate.

President Reagan and Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger have opposed the
draft, although they compromised on a 1980 campaign pledge to repeal draft
registration and retained it at the urging of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. But no
existing law permits conscription itself.

A spokesman for the Democratic Leadership Council said today, ''We would like to
see it become one of the issues on the agenda.'' He said many Democrats wanted a
draft because of a decline in the male population of military age, rising costs
of recruiting, and what they consider to be an undue burden on blacks for
defending the nation.

The Coalition for a Democratic Majority, led by Representative Dave McCurdy of
Oklahoma, has proposed a program of volunteer national service, as has former
Senator Gary Hart of Colorado, a candidate for the Democratic Presidential
nomination in 1988.

Draft Ended in 1973

Those proposals, like one being prepared by the Democratic council, include
vague provisions for military service. The coalition, for instance, has said
that if a revival of the draft was needed, ''the system of citizen soldiers
would already be in place.''

The military relied on the draft for most of the period from 1939 to 1973 until
President Nixon let it expire after the end of the Vietnam War. President Carter
persuaded Congress to reinstate draft registration in 1980, after the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan.

Mr. Armor, in what officials said was the most extensive defense of the
volunteer force in the six years of the Reagan Administration, argued that
recruiting would be difficult in coming years because of a decline in the youth
population, but would not be impossible.

Testifying before the Senate Armed Services Subcommittee on Manpower and
Personnel, Mr. Armor said, ''The majority of this population decline is already
behind us and has had relatively little impact, thus far, on our ability to
recruit high quality volunteers.''

From 1964 to 1973, he said, 72 percent of recruits were high school graduates;
in 1986, 92 percent were graduates, compared with 75 percent among the nation's
youth.

Criticism Is 'Unfounded'

Mr. Armor said, ''critics of the volunteer force have charged that the white
middle class is not doing its part for defense.''

That criticism, he argued, ''is largely unfounded.'' During the draft, 17
percent of those coming into the service were black, compared with 12 percent in
the youth population, according to Pentagon figures. Last year, 19 percent of
the recruits were black, compared with 15 percent of the youth population.

Turning to cost, Mr. Armor asserted that ''there is no evidence that a return to
conscription would save money.'' Cutting pay for first term service men and
women, as critics have sometimes proposed, would save little because those wages
amount to only ten percent of personnel costs and only two percent of the
military budget, he said.

In contrast, Mr. Armor contended, a draft would cost an additional $1 billion in
training costs because 100,000 two year draftees would be needed to replace
three- and four-year recruits.

Finally, Mr. Armor argued, ''major controversy has erupted nearly every time a
draft has been considered.'' He pointed to the outcry during the Vietnam War.
But he said recent data ''show that the public is pleased with the current
condition of the military.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 25, 1987, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Philip Rhinelander, 79, Dies; Former Dean at Stanford U.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 182 words

DATELINE: STANFORD, Calif., March 24


Philip Rhinelander, former head of general education at Harvard University and a
former Stanford University dean, died of cancer last Friday at his campus home.
He was 79 years old.

Mr. Rhinelander, a philosopher who was the Olive H. Palmer Professor of
Humanities emeritus at Stanford, came from Harvard to Stanford as dean of the
School of Humanities and Sciences in 1956. He held that post for five years.

He was known to thousands of students at Harvard and Stanford for his course on
the problems of good and evil.

One of his Stanford students, James Stockdale, who was a prisoner of war in
Vietnam, credited Mr. Rhinelander's course with helping him survive his
imprisonment.

Mr. Rhinelander, who was born Jan. 1, 1908 in Cambridge, Mass., got a bachelor's
degree in classics and philosophy and a doctorate in philosophy from Harvard.

He taught at Harvard and eventually became the chairman of the Committee on
General Education and director of general education.

Mr. Rhinelander is survived by his wife, Virginia, two brothers, a son, three
daughters and 13 grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 26, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ON MY MIND

BYLINE: By A. M. Rosenthal;
New Villains at the Movies

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 781 words


The movie at the local 14-screen cinema enclave ended just in time to get home
and catch the last half of ''60 Minutes.''

In the space of a couple of hours, I saw the demonization of a specific group of
Americans in the movies, a public relations version of Fidel Castro's Cuba on TV
and on both, reminders of the importance of show business on the historical
vision.

The movie was ''Lethal Weapon'': police action thriller, black cop and white cop
playing foil to each other, lots of crackling lines, some tender moments, a
wonderful chase scene and corpses exploding like firecrackers all over the
place. It is an enormous hit and about four million people saw it in its first
week.

It is so enthusiastically violent that it is almost amusing - except when the
bad guys come on. These are really bad guys. They run a heroin ring worth
billions of dollars a year.

And they are among the cruelest villains portrayed on the screen. They look and
talk and act like Gestapo psychopaths. They show their obedience to their
leader, himself a movie image of a Nazi commander, by sticking their arms into
flaring cigarette lighters.

They torture the heroes. The white cop screams under their electric shock
treatments, applied right there in front of you. The black cop is tied, beaten
bloody. Then they drag in his lovely young daughter, dress torn off, and bind
her to a pole, trying to break him by preparing to rape her.

It turns out they are not Nazi madmen at all but veterans of the C.I.A. and the
United States Special Forces in Vietnam, once known as Green Berets.

The Special Forces were double volunteers - first for paratrooping, then
fighting guerrillas. Although they were not trained to be Boy Scouts there was a
particular effort made to weed out social misfits. Each man spoke a foreign
language and many had advanced medical field training.

The most chilling thing about the movie is that it assumes that just as you
don't have to explain being a member of the Gestapo was evil you don't have to
explain about the C.I.A. or particularly Special Forces veterans. Kill, torture,
maim: that is what they do, in the service or out.

The leader of the heroin mob is one of the more monstrous screen characters
since Laurence Olivier stuck his Nazi dentist drill into Dustin Hoffman's mouth.
All you are told about him is he was a Special Forces general; that explains
all.

Toward the end, the good guy white cop, also a Special Forces veteran, fights
the cruelest Special Forces torturer in brutal combat a breath away from death.
That is supposed to show that their killer training in the outfit made them
essentially the same.

Richard Donner, the director, said the movie, written by Shane Black two years
ago when he was 21, was about ''pulp'' characters, not history. He did say he
now felt somewhat guilty when I raised the point that the C.I.A. and the Special
Forces, accused of producing psychotic American killers, were real
organizations. Mr. Donner was willing to consider that his movie was making
caricatures of American Vietnam veterans, just as in old-time movies it was
understood clearly that blacks were lazybones and Italians with fedoras
gangsters. He said that was an interesting point.

On ''60 Minutes'' Morley Safer is interviewing Alicia Alonso, the great Cuban
ballerina. Alonso is 65, nearly blind, a heroine and beloved teacher in Cuba,
admired deeply by the world of ballet at home and in the United States, to which
she travels often.

Mr. Safer points out that although she had a privileged position under the
dictator Batista, during his regime she carried out her own protest against his
brutality. Dancers are not just horses, running in blinders, she says. So she
protested by refusing to dance for several years until, as Mr. Safer said, ''the
revolution succeeded.''

Now she is a national figure in Cuba, and lives a queenly life.

No, not one word. Not one word from her and not one question from Mr. Safer
about how she feels now about horses, or Mr. Castro's imprisonment of poets,
painters and writers. An unquestioning plug for Mr. Castro and a rewriting of
history by omission.

Mr. Safer is skilled enough, sophisticated enough, to know better. He does. He
told me that he did indeed ask the ballerina questions about Castro tyrannies.
But she was wordy and polemical so he thought he would cut that part. It made
for a better show, he said. A judgment call, he said.

Mr. Donner and Mr. Safer both sounded as if they might do it a little
differently if they had it to do over. Pleasant conversations with intelligent
men. That was at least something after a couple of upsetting hours spent
watching show business history.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 26, 1987, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEIGHBORS IN QUEENS DEPICT SUSPECT AS A 'LOVABLE' PATRIOT

BYLINE: By GEORGE JAMES

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


In the working-class project where he grew up in Woodside, Queens, Cpl. Arnold
Bracy of the Marine Corps was remembered yesterday as a lovable, patriotic
minister's son from a hard-working, upright family.

That the 21-year-old former guard at the United States Embassy in Moscow has
been arrested on suspicion of espionage for the Soviet Union was difficult for
many of his neighbors to believe, they said.

''Everybody here is upset - it doesn't make sense,'' said Martin Rigney, a
retired Air Force captain who is a neighbor in the six-story, red-brick building
at 31-46 51st Street where the Bracy family has lived since 1974.

The building is part of a 1,357-unit Federal housing project, Woodside Houses,
which was built in the mid-1950's and is managed by the New York City Housing
Authority. The Woodside section is still considered an Irish neighborhood,
despite an influx of other minorities, and many old-timers still recall with
pride that one of its sons won the Congressional Medal of Honor in the Vietnam
War.

'He Had to Be Framed'

''I don't believe the kid could be in any kind of trouble at all,'' Mr. Rigney
said of Corporal Bracy. ''He had to be framed. I've known him since he was a
kid. They're an upstanding family, a Christian family.''

The family was not at home yesterday and neighbors said they believed they were
visiting Corporal Bracy in Quantico, Va.

Mr. Bracy's father, Theodore, 48 years old, is a train operator who has worked
for the New York City Transit Authority since 1964, according to Jared Lebow, a
spokesman for the authority. His mother, Frieda, is a director of a center for
the elderly in Manhattan. Besides Arnold, the couple has two daughters, Annette,
27 and Theda, 19.

The elder Mr. Bracy is also a minister with a storefront church, according to
Mr. Rigney and Ravenia Monroe, another neighbor, but neither they nor other
residents knew the name of his church.

Ms. Monroe said the minister was active in the tenants' organization and had
provided a lunch program through his church for elderly people in the project.
He also arranged to have buses take them to and from services at his church.

''The family was always together, going to church together, helping you out if
you were in a jam,'' said Ms. Monroe.

Martin Rigney's wife, Alice, said: ''This doesn't sound like the person I know.
He is a very lovable person. He helped people here, watched out for the children
when they were outside the building. If he saw that people were in trouble he'd
go over and see what he could do to help them out.''

Ms. Monroe said she thought he joined the Marine Corps to better himself.

''He loved the Marine Corps to start with, was always talking about joining,''
Mr. Rigney said. Asked why the marines, he replied: ''Love of country. He was
very patriotic.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: FRIDAY, MARCH 27, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 986 words




INTERNATIONAL    A3-11

Sanctions against Japan, probably higher tariffs, are likely. President Reagan
is expected to announce the action today because of Tokyo's failure to comply
with a semiconductor agreement.    Page A1



The Vietnamese demand cleanup of widespread corruption. The Communist Party has
been criticizing, purging and punishing errant party workers, according to
unusually detailed reports in the nation's press.    A10



Shimon Peres was the radio host in the first telephone call-in news conference
ever held by an Israeli leader with an Arab world audience. The Foreign Minister
was conciliatory in answering all questions.    A1



The President said selling arms to Iran became ''a little like paying ransom to
a kidnapper.'' Mr. Reagan's comment, in Columbia, Mo., was his bluntest
admission of how badly his Iran policy had deteriorated.    A12

British Petroleum seeks Standard Oil in a deal that would equal the third
biggest takeover in American history. British Petroleum said it would offer $7.4
billion for the 45 percent of the concern it does not already own.    D1



Thatcher to visit Moscow

    A3



Angola rebels in offer on rail link

    A3



Hard choices on missiles

    A9



Syria warns group on captives

    A11



National    A12-20



Conrail was sold to private investors after a decade of Federal stewardship. The
sale of the Government's 85 percent stake in the now-healthy freight rail giant
brought in $1.65 billion.    A1



News analysis: The Supreme Court's broad endorsement of special preferences for
women and minority members in the workplace culminates a strong rejection of the
Administration's position.    A1



A rocket went out of control and was destroyed soon after liftoff. The failure
ended a streak of seven launching successes for the American space program that
followed staggering accidents early last year.    A15



AIDS victims could not enter the United States under a draft rule under
consideration. Dr. Laurence S. Farer said officials were pursuing the plan once
thought to have been dropped.    A14



A study of AIDS-infected prostitutes found 32 of 56 (57 percent) of the women in
Newark, Jersey City and Paterson, N.J., to be virus carriers on the basis of
blood tests for the AIDS virus antibody.    A14



Prosecutors seek the death penalty for a 43-year-old former psychiatric patient,
Gary Heidnik, charged in Philadelphia with kidnapping, raping and torturing four
young women and murdering at least one.    A12



Democrats advanced budget plans in the House and Senate calling for new taxes to
reduce the Federal deficit. As they worked on the budget, President Reagan
reiterated his opposition to tax increases.    A20



Michael K. Deaver pleaded not guilty to perjury before Congress and a grand jury
that was investigating alleged violations of conflict-of-interest laws involving
his multimillion-dollar lobbying activities.    A20



Canadian veterans of Vietnam meeting in Washington said they felt more rejected
than their American comrades say they have been. The Canadians are making a film
designed, they said, to bring their veterans ''out of hiding.''    A18



Washington Talk

B4



Politics of contra aid

Lots of names for F.B.I. chief

Regional    B1-3, B6, B24



An ex-Treasury chief pleaded guilty to illegally operating a Caribbean bank and
evading income taxes. The defendant is Robert B. Anderson, 77, the Treasury
Secretary in the Eisenhower Administration.    A1



A.T.&T. plans to relocate most of its headquarters staff from its four-year-old
building on Madison Avenue at 55th Street to an office complex it owns in
Basking Ridge, N.J. The move may affect as many as 1,000 employees.    A1



A model whose face was slashed with a razor blade was portrayed by a defense
lawyer as a woman who used men and she was reminded of a graphic sexual
vulgarity used to describe her before the attack.    B24



The beating death of an inmate at Rikers Island prompted the indictment of a
correction officer and another inmate and New York City to open an investigation
into violence in the city jails.    B1



A street vendor used cocaine and had been admitted to hospitals three times for
what the police termed extremely violent behavior. The vendor, Nicholas A.
Bartlett, was fatally shot by police officers after he was said to have attacked
one with a pipe.    B1

18 cellular mobile telephone owners were arrested by Federal agents in New York
City and charged with using illegally altered memory chips so they could make
calls and not be charged for them.    A1



Grief at a homeless man's death was expressed by employers and employees around
Madison Avenue and 40th Street. For 15 years, the man had slept over a heating
vent and been paid to sweep sidewalks.    B1



Overall accord on a state tax cut has been reached between the New York
Legislature and the Cuomo administration, the Governor said, adding that
specific rates or deductions still must be resolved.    B2



Most Yankee games will be barred from Bronx residents in the coming season. One
hundred of the games will be televised exclusively on SportsChannel, a cable
carrier not available to Bronx viewers.    A1



New York's nightclub of the moment is Nell's at 246 West 14th Street. It's one
of several new nightspots, all with different personalities, vying to keep the
estimated 10,000 New Yorkers who frequent them interested and intrigued.    C1



3 new public-payroll inquiries

    B3



Cuomo backs compromise on transit aid

    B3



Brownsville school transforms

    B3


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE REPORTS TELL OF ANTI-CORRUPTION DRIVE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 26


In provincial towns all over Vietnam, the Communist Party has been criticizing,
purging and punishing errant party workers, according to frank and unusually
detailed reports in the Vietnamese press.

Preparing for National Assembly elections on April 19, local organizations have
been reporting cases of corruption, abuse of power, embezzlement and expense
cheating.

The press accounts, bold even by the standards of non-Communist Southeast Asian
countries, confirm reports by Hanoi-based diplomats and visitors to Vietnam, who
say the Vietnamese, among the region's poorest and most strictly regulated
people, are demanding change at the grassroots.

Problems in the Military

At the same time, the Vietnamese Army newspaper has published accounts recently
indicating that the armed forces, involved for the last eight years in a war in
Cambodia, are facing serious problems in training, supply and morale.

Recent editorials in the army daily, Quan Doi Nhan Dan, criticized
''paternalistic'' officers who misinform and mistreat recruits. The editorials
followed articles late last year calling attention to the poor living conditions
of soldiers.

Writing about civilian corruption, the party newspaper, Nhan Dan, recently
published a long report on abuses uncovered in Hai Hung Province, a relatively
prosperous part of northern Vietnam between Hanoi and the port of Haiphong.
Foreign reporters taken to Hai Hung early in 1986 saw thriving markets and
private homes and threshing floors under construction. Food seemed abundant, and
local leaders were proud of the region's creativity and energy.

Since last fall, however, local party organizations in Hai Hung have been busy
investigating and exposing cases of ''negative phenomena,'' according to Nhan
Dan. Several party leaders have been taken to court. Early this month, the
newspaper reported these findings and official actions:

* ''A number of cadres were criticized for practicing corruption, enjoying
special privileges, oppressing the masses, illegally occupying land and
possessing houses beyond the prescribed criteria.''

* ''Those cadres and party members who were given special privileges or special
rights to buy motorcycles, radios with cassette players and refrigerators at
cheap prices have been asked to turn in these goods.''

* ''Truong Van Day, former director of the My Van district foreign trading
corporation, made under-the-table deals with bad elements to embezzle large
amounts of money and export goods.''

* ''Nguyen Van Tap, a cadre of Chi Linh district, forged documents to
misappropriate money belonging to fallen combatants and war invalids. These
cadres will soon be exposed before the law.''

* ''The provincial party committee has issued directives to sternly prohibit
excessive carousing, gift-giving and granting of awards contrary to policy.''

Debauchery and Drugs

In another report, Quan Doi Nhan Dan, the army paper, described two criminal
gangs that had been brought to justice. The first syndicate speculated in
commodities, bribing officials with gold. ''Squandering state property, they
bought fine houses and cars and engaged in debauchery,'' the newspaper said.

The members of the second gang were Hanoi truck drivers who made regular trips
into Laos. ''While on cross-border missions, they brought with them gold, silver
and large quantities of goods to Laos to trade for opium,'' the paper said,
adding that on an undisclosed date this year, they were caught ''red-handed''
with nearly 340 pounds of narcotics.

Most Western journalists have been barred from Vietnam since last spring, when a
long process of political reorganization and ''purification'' began. The changes
may not be completed until June, when a new Prime Minister is expected to be
named to replace Pham Van Dong, according to Vietnamese officials.

Hanoi's severe economic problems appear to have heightened the complaints and
criticisms about the army as it struggles to convert itself from a revolutionary
force into a conventional military organization, according to an Australian
expert.

The expert, Carlyle A. Thayer, a senior lecturer in politics at the Australian
Defense Force Academy and a specialist on Indochina, said the army is being
forced to become a constituency - ''a bargaining group competing for a piece of
the cake.'' Vietnam has one of the world's largest fighting forces, with 1.1
million regular troops backed by more than 3 million reservists and 1.5 million
paramilitary personnel, according to Mr. Thayer.

In a telephone interview from his office in Campbell, Australia, Mr. Thayer said
the priority on nonmilitary development had aroused fears among officers that
the army might be shortchanged. He said complaints took on a ''poignant'' edge
at garrison level.

Recruits Called Unprepared

Many of the recruits are rounded up in what was formerly South Vietnam and sent
unprepared into Cambodian battle areas, according to Vietnamese deserters now in
Thailand.

In an editorial read on Hanoi's domestic radio on March 11 and translated by the
BBC monitoring service, the army newspaper confirmed that recruits ''have failed
to adopt habits relevant to the requirements of building a modern, standardized
army.''

Several days earlier, the Hanoi radio quoted from an editorial in the same
newspaper that urged commanders to pay more attention to suggestions from the
ranks.

''We must keep the masses abreast of the situation,'' it said. ''What about the
strengths and weaknesses of the of the unit, the strong points and the
shortcomings of the leadership cadres and combatants? How tough are the ordeals
to be encountered by the unit ahead?''

Army newspaper articles have also mentioned corruption. It is generally agreed
by foreign experts that the dismissal of Gen. Van Tien Dung as Defense Minister
in February was related to the business activities of his wife, who had
reportedly built up a fortune from corruption and the black market.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CANADIAND ASK U.S. TO HONOR THEIR VIETNAM WAR VETERANS

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 446 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


While American veterans of the Vietnam War say they are gradually gaining
respect for their service, a small group of Canadian veterans of that war
assembled here today said they have continued to feel rejected.

Veterans of both nations met at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial this morning to
honor the 66 Canadians citizens known to have died in American uniforms in
Vietnam. Their names are inscribed with 58,064 others on the memorial's slabs of
black granite representing those who died in the war.

An estimated 30,000 Canadians enlisted in the American armed forces to fight in
Vietnam. Canadian forces took no formal part in Vietnam combat but sent troops
briefly to the international control commission assigned to police a short-lived
truce in 1973.

Canadians Plan a Film

The Canadians here are making a film they said was designed to ''bring Canada's
Vietnam veterans out of hiding.'' The group included producers, a film crew and
a brigadier general from the Canadian Embassy here.

Representative Lane Evans, an Illinois Democrat who is co-chairman of the
Vietnam Veterans' Caucus in Congress, declared at the brief ceremony that ''the
best way to honor the dead is to fight for the living.''

He noted the post-war readjustment difficulties of the Canadian veterans, whose
access to counseling and other benefits through the United States Veterans
Administration is limited by their residency in another country.

High on the agenda of newly organized groups of Canadian Vietnam veterans, he
said, is the negotiation of a United States-Canadian agreement extending to
Canadian veterans the benefits that have been available only to Americans who
fought in Vietnam, or to Canadian Vietnam veterans who moved to this country.

The Canadian film crew shot scenes at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial for an
hourlong television documentary, ''The Lost Brigade: Canada's Vietnam Veterans''
to be aired this fall. Norman S. Rumack, the film's Canadian producer, said he
hoped the documentary would ''encourage our Vietnam veterans to come out of the
closet.''

Ed Wilby of Toronto, a businessmen who was a member of the first large American
contingent sent to Vietnam in 1965, said, ''The Canadian veterans' attitude has
been, 'keep Vietnam out of your resume - don't tell anyone you served in Vietnam
because they'll think your head is screwed on wrong and they won't hire you.' I
am telling them you don't have to hide it any more.''

Brig. Gen. Yvon Sorel of the Canadian Air Force, the embassy air attache here,
and other Canadians at the gathering noted the irony of the wartime flight to
Canada of several thousand young Americans to evade the military draft.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GLITZ, FUNK AND VICTORIANA ENLIVEN NEW YORK'S DISCOS

BYLINE: By LISA W. FODERARO

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2468 words


IT is midnight on a recent Saturday. Outside the unmarked black entrance at 246
West 14th Street are about 100 people standing in silence, eyes fixed ahead on
the cadre of bouncers who hold their fate.

''Let's get out of here,'' one woman whispers to her friends. No one budges.

They are waiting, most of them in vain, for entree to Nell's, New York's
nightclub of the moment. It is everything the Palladium - the last club to steal
the city's imagination - is not. Nell's, of course, is new, while the Palladium,
which dates from May 1985, is practically ancient, at least according to the
accelerated lifecycle of a Manhattan club. Beyond its novelty, though, Nell's is
old-fashioned, intimate, aristocratic and seemingly carved out of another
century.

Savants on the nightclub circuit say that with changing patterns of social
behavior in recent years, the atmosphere at Nell's is not surprising. ''These
are conservative times; what's hip is what's established,'' said the director of
another popular new nightclub, the Tunnel, who goes only by the name Rudolf.

If Nell's ambiance is now unique, it may not stay that way for long. A dozen
so-called clones are expected to open in the fall. But even now, New York is far
from being a one-club town.

Several new nightspots, all with different personalities, vie to keep the
estimated 10,000 New Yorkers who frequent them up until 4 A.M., dancing,
drinking and admiring the decor. Scattered throughout the city, today's clubs
generally tailor themselves to the corporate ''uptown'' crowd or the more
artistic ''downtown'' crowd. Besides Nell's, clubs that have succeeded in
getting everybody talking about them include the Tunnel, Big Kahuna, the Baja,
Madam Rosa and China Club.

Every few seasons in New York, one club seems to take the spotlight, reflecting
the mood of the times with a modus vivendi that is fresh and original.

When it opened, for instance, the mammoth Palladium, at 126 East 14th Street,
presented a new order of world-class art and design, while exalting high
technology with the latest in sound, light and video. (It is still going strong,
Tuesdays through Sundays, and is now a popular spot for people from outside
Manhattan.) Before that, Area, a downtown club that closed two weeks ago,
appealed to the fickleness of New Yorkers by completely revamping its decor
every month.

In some respects, the modern-day nightclub began with Studio 54. In the late
70's, the disco introduced velvet-roped exclusivity, whereby staff members at
the door selected patrons based on style, attitude and overall aura - now a
common practice. In the view of Steve Rubell, who founded Studio 54, the club
brought together ''Princess Grace and the kid wrapped in plastic from Brooklyn''
in a post-Vietnam, post-Watergate hedonistic whir.

The club closed in early 1980 after it was raided by Federal agents who arrested
Mr. Rubell and his partner, Ian Schrager, for tax evasion. After their release
from prison, the two helped found the Palladium.

The disco culture embodied by Studio 54 and glorified in the movie ''Saturday
Night Fever'' actually represented a revival. New York's very first discotheque
and the rage of the mid-60's was a club named Arthur, a swank establishment with
a British bent on the Upper East Side. Its immediate predecessor, the Peppermint
Lounge, a seedy bar in the West 40's, may have been even more revolutionary. It
was there that ''the Twist'' was born and such luminaries as Greta Garbo and
Noel Coward engaged in the then-radical dance form.

What is perhaps most revolutionary about Nell's, paradoxically, is its
reactionary quality, a sense of its being a throwback to another era. Some of
the mania, of course, is generated by its reputation for being the most
difficult club in the city to get into. The exclusivity is based partly on
strategy, but partly on necessity. Unlike the Palladium, which can accommodate
3,500 people, Nell's has a capacity of 400. ''Because we are small, we can be
much more choosy,'' said Keith McNally, one of three owners and the founder of
the continually in-vogue restaurant Odeon.

Once inside Nell's, one discovers a classic Victorian setting with dark wood
paneling, overstuffed sofas, crystal chandeliers and diminutive engravings. The
patrons, somehow, become an extension of the decor. As if emerging from a Ralph
Lauren ad, many here seem to inhabit a world blending bored detachment and grand
theatricality. Black taffeta regularly appears next to faded denim, and English
accents - both real and fostered - abound.

A long mahogany bar leads to a dining area in the rear, where a small jazz trio
frequently performs, filling the room with a smoky, nostalgic sound. At other
times, Dvorak and Tchaikovsky alternate with David Byrne and Ray Charles on the
stereo, kept low so people can talk; downstairs, loud pop music packs the dance
floor. An artist from New Zealand, lounging on a sofa with a cigarette, mused as
to why he was admitted: ''They go for people who look like they don't care
whether they get in.''

Traditionally, nightclubs do not serve food. Nell's, however, offers a light
menu throughout the evening, with cheeseburgers going for $8.75 and Beluga
caviar for $50. The club, at 246 West 14th Street, is open every night from 10
P.M. to 4 A.M. The cover is $5, Sunday through Thursday, and $10 on weekends.
Information: 675-1567.

The Tunnel's 'Industrial Chic'

Several blocks north, and as far west as the Hudson River, stretches the Tunnel,
a dance club as cavernous as Nell's is cozy and one that attracts a diverse mass
of young people.

''Rule No. 1 of nightlife is that it has to be unpredictable,'' said the
director, Rudolf, who used to own the club Danceteria before it closed. The
notion of odd juxtapositions certainly fueled the $5 million transformation of
an abandoned 630-foot railroad tunnel into one of New York's hottest clubs.

The long, narrow 1891 structure -an industrial kaleidoscope of ducts and girders
- has been softened with red velvet couches and chandeliers. It has also been
updated with abstract paintings, spiraling lights and a mighty stereo system.
''It's industrial funky chic,'' summed up 23-year-old Jeff Heil, a patron
leaning against the oval-shaped aluminum bar in the club's center.

With an overall capacity of 2,500, there is plenty of room to dance to the
forceful disco beat, and three small rooms off the tunnel provide intimacy and
quiet for those who would rather communicate. Probably the most interesting
visual element comes at the end of the tunnel, where, beyond a guarded railing,
the original train tracks trail off into a sort of existential nothingness,
streaked with pink and blue spotlights.

The Basement, a dark room downstairs large enough for 350 people, has become the
Tunnel's club-within-a-club, providing another layer of social screening. (The
main entrance is already competitive.) Rudolf said the Basement helped draw what
he calls the ''Fabulous 500,'' that nebulous, charismatic group of artists and
celebrities who go to clubs at least three times a week. To further clarify the
breed, he said the next Andy Warhol would most likely emerge from their ranks.
''Their presence assures that this is the right place to be at the right
moment,'' he said.

The Tunnel, 220 12th Avenue, at the corner of 27th Street, is open every night
from 10 P.M. to 4 A.M., except Tuesday, when the door opens at 6 P.M. for an
evening of ''corporate networking.'' The cover charge varies nightly; tonight
and tomorrow it is $20. Information: 244-6444.

Big Kahuna: Wall Street's Station

If railroads and parlors are providing the latest inspiration for club settings,
a more timeworn theme -carefree island living - has resurfaced at Big Kahuna, a
new club on lower Broadway.

The Surf Club, a veteran preppie hangout on the Upper East Side, may adorn its
walls with stuffed dolphins, sailfish and sharks. Lucy's, an established ''beach
bar'' on the Upper West Side, aglow with the pearly hues of abalone, is famous
for its azure concoction, the Blue Whale. But Big Kahuna has surpassed both,
pushing the surfer motif clear to the horizon.

Sand carpets the floor. A 60-foot, sculpted turquoise wave lines one wall,
forever on the verge of breaking. Jutting through the foam are sharks' jaws,
clenching dismembered legs tethered to surfboards mounted on the ceiling.
Hamburgers and hot dogs are served on Frisbees. Bikini-clad women on a raised
platform bop to 50's and 60's music, while the walls are alive with video images
of surfers.

But Big Kahuna - whose name derives from ''witch doctor'' in Hawaiian - does not
count many beach bums among its clientele. ''Wall Street walks home and stops
here on the way,'' said Peter Bill, who helped design the club. ''We're not a
club for surfers. We're a club for want-to-be's.''

Indeed, on a recent Wednesday, Mr. Bill climbed up on a picnic table in the club
and shouted to the capacity crowd of 300 that he'd offer a free beer to anyone
in a T-shirt. There were only five takers. And in the small surf shop, right in
the club, the slowest-selling item by far has been the surfboard wax.

Even so, the customers ''really cut loose after they're here awhile,'' said Mr.
Bill, and the ''Frisbees start flying.''

Big Kahuna, 622 Broadway, between Bleecker and Houston Streets, is open Sunday
through Wednesday from 5 P.M. to 2 A.M. and Thursday through Saturday from 5 to
4. Barbecue-style fare is served through a snack-bar window. There is a $5 cover
charge after 9 P.M., Wednesdays and Thursdays and after 8 P.M. Fridays and
Saturdays. Admission at all other times is free. Information: 460-9633.

The Baja's Suburban Innocence

Another club with corporate flair is the Baja. Recently founded by 10 young
investment bankers, it is one of the few places where many patrons can boast of
knowing at least one of the owners.

But perhaps the biggest allure is its location. The club, on Columbus Avenue
near 72d Street, has become a lively hangout for young people who work in the
financial district, live on the Upper West Side and refuse to journey downtown
for a night out. ''Our crowd works very hard and plays very hard,'' said Robert
N. Schade, the 26-year-old manager and co-owner. ''They want something
accessible.''

The Baja has the comfortable, casual feel of a college-fraternity basement. Of
course, there are a few Manhattan influences, such as the cordoned-off entrance
outside and the speckled pastel walls inside.

But a wide television screen built into one wall is usually tuned to sports
events. The bar offers 14-ounce ''varsity-sized'' variations on the tropical
fruit-drink theme. And the dress code covers a lot of ground, but generally from
the same territory: button-downs, crew-neck sweaters, rugby shirts, ski jackets,
suits, silk dresses, angora sweaters and pearls.

There is a certain suburban innocence here. The people, mostly in their early
20's, engage in friendly, work-related conversation, and they also love to
dance, even to sway in a prom-night embrace. Most of the time, however, short
segments of pop music culled from the last three decades produce a quick, varied
pace on the sprawling dance floor.

The Baja, 246A Columbus Avenue, is open Tuesdays through Saturdays from 9:30
P.M. to 4 A.M. There is live music on Tuesdays, and a disk jockey on all other
nights. The cover charge is $5 Tuesdays and Wednesdays, and $10 Thursdays
through Saturdays. Information: 724-8890.

Madam Rosa: 'Urban Voodoo'

Of all the clubs considered to be ''downtown,'' Madam Rosa proudly occupies the
point farthest south -both in location and spirit.

A small, black basement fronting on an alley in TriBeCa, the club is so hard to
find that only people with prior knowledge of it (and a patient cab driver) seem
to end up here. And those patrons tend to be artists, musicians, film makers,
models and photographers, whose most visible common denominator is the color of
their wardrobe - black.

''The people who come here are serious about what they do,'' said Richard
Temerian, the manager. ''These are not the ones with trust funds who go around
to clubs pretending they're bored.'' Visitors in recent months have included
Matt Dillon, Jennifer Beals, Jodie Foster, Malcolm McLaren, Jean-Michel
Basquiat, Jim Jarmusch and John Lurie.

The club is divided into two rooms, one with a horseshoe-shaped bar, the other
with a dance floor and disk jockey. Aural stimulation is provided by musical
styles ranging from rap and swing to soul, blues and funk. The visual
entertainment comes from religious objects, paintings and random slide
projections. Mr. Temerian labeled the decor ''urban voodoo,'' which seems as
appropriate a description as any.

Madam Rosa, on St. John's Lane between Canal and Beach Streets, is open
Wednesdays through Saturdays from 11 P.M. to 4 A.M. Live bands perform
Wednesdays and Thursdays, beginning at midnight. The cover charge at all times
is $5. Information: 219-2207.

China Club: a Place to Play

Many clubs take off like Roman candles only to sputter in popularity with each
passing month. But China Club, a record-industry gathering place on the Upper
West Side, is more popular now than when it opened in June 1985.

The owners have David Bowie, Julian Lennon and Stevie Wonder to thank for that,
as well as the many other rock celebrities who have dropped in and unexpectedly
mounted the stage for impromptu jam sessions. ''Word got out in the music
industry that this was a living room where these guys could play if they wanted
or not play,'' said Danny Fried, an owner.

During the week, when bands struggling to establish themselves perform here,
almost half the audience is made up of record-company agents, artists, publicity
agents, executives and secretaries. Most of the time, renowned rock stars do not
wander toward the stage afterward, but sometimes they do, and that sometimes has
kept China Club in the vanguard. On weekends, a disk jockey spins Motown and Top
40 dance tunes, and the crowd is more difficult to pe a although usually
somewhat older than one finds at other clubs.

Situated in the basement of the Beacon Hotel, the club is dark and intimate,
with Oriental and Art Deco design influences. Brass plaques scattered throughout
the club pay tribute to regular patrons with nicknames and inside jokes. One in
a corner reads ''The Divine Area,'' named for Bob Divine, a customer who can
usually be found there.

China Club, 2130 Broadway, at 75th Street, is open every night from 10 P.M. to 4
A.M. There is usually live music three or four nights during the week, with
Friday and Saturday nights set aside for the disk jockey. The cover charge is
$10 Sundays through Thursdays and $15 Fridays and Saturdays. Information:
877-1166.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of disco owners and guests (NYT/Arlene Gottfried and Alan Zale)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'THE HANOI HILTON'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 538 words


''THE HANOI HILTON,'' written and directed by Lionel Chetwynd, is an earnest but
clumsy tribute to the heroism of the American servicemen - mostly officers - who
were captured and held prisoner by North Vietnam during the long, desperate
undeclared war we now refer to simply as Vietnam.

Mr. Chetwynd is aware that these men faced physical and psychological hardships
unlike those faced by any other group of P.O.W.'s in the nation's history. The
increasing unpopularity of the war at home obscured the prisoners' plight and
confused the country's sense of loyalties. In many of the home-front debates
over the war itself, the prisoners were, indeed, forgotten.

It's a big, tough, sorrowful subject, but Mr. Chetwynd finds no way to dramatize
its singularity.

The movie, set mostly in a Hanoi prison, looks and sounds like something out of
World War II, with American servicemen being cruelly abused by their small,
sadistic, yellow captors. One new wrinkle: the presence in the prison of a Cuban
interrogator - more vicious than even his North Vietnamese colleagues - who
talks in the street jargon of Spanish Harlem in the 1980's, though the film is
set in the 60's and early 70's. Without meaning to be, the movie comes across as
racist, if only by default.

                                     *  *  *

The drama itself, about how the individual prisoners react to their torture,
depends so much on the pain of these scenes that it ultimately has the effect of
exploiting the spectacle of torture. ''Aha,'' says the sadistic, Jesuit-schooled
Vietnamese captor, ''it's time for you to experience Room 18!''

Unlike ''Platoon,'' in which the enemy remains vague and unseen, ''The Hanoi
Hilton'' tries to characterize the Vietnamese, but only comes forth with
secondhand stereotypes. It must be admitted, however, that the movie does no
more justice to the characters of the prisoners than to those of the Vietnamese.
Along the way, the movie also finds time to send up American peaceniks as
represented by a bubble-headed actress wearing Jane Fonda's ''Klute'' haircut.

Though the film contains scarcely any action and though it's as sincere as a
pledge of allegiance to the flag, its point of view is no less narrow than that
of ''Rambo.''

Prominent in the cast, and doing as well as the simple-minded material allows,
are Michael Moriarty and Paul Le Mat as captured American officers, Aki Aleong
as the Vietnamese prison keeper and Gloria Carlin, who stands in for Miss Fonda.

''The Hanoi Hilton'' opens today at the Coronet theater.

Sorrowful Subject

THE HANOI HILTON, written and directed by Lionel Chetwynd; director of
photography, Mark Irwin; edited by Penelope Shaw; music by Jimmy Webb; produced
by Menahem Golan and Yoram Globus; released by Cannon Films Inc. At the Coronet,
59th Street at Third Avenue. Running time: 130 minutes. This film is rated R.
Lieutenant Commander Williamson...

Michael Moriarty; Captain Hubman...Paul Le Mat; Major Fisher...Jeffrey Jones;
Colonel Cathcart...Lawrence Pressman; Capt. Robert Miles...Stephen Davies; Major
Oldham...David Soul; Captain Turner...Rick Fitts; Maj. Ngo Doc...Aki Aleong;
Paula...Gloria Carlin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 27, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW PLAY'S CHARACTERS TRAVERSE TIME AND LINGO

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 980 words


In Eric Overmyer's fanciful comedy ''On the Verge or the Geography of
Yearning,'' three Victorian women set out with pith helmets, butterfly nets,
lemon drops, shepherd's pie and other quaint gear to explore unknown territory.

As their journey proceeds, strange, incomprehensible words, phrases and names
start popping out of their mouths in the middle of ordinary conversation.
Gradually it dawns on them that they have inadverently become time travelers,
and that the ''terra incognita'' through which they move forward so intrepidly
is the future. The cryptic incantatory terms, such as ''I Like Ike'' ''Cool
Whip'' and ''Burma Shave,'' that float to their lips, are part of the process of
''osmosing'' 20th-century iconography. Or as one of the travelers announces, ''I
have seen the future and it is slang.''

Eventually their journey lands them in front of a vintage Esso gas station. It
is 1955, and the meanings of Cool Whip and ''I Like Ike'' become revealed. While
Fanny (Patricia Hodges) and Alexandra (Laura Hicks) elect not to continue the
journey, Mary (Lisa Banes), the most adventuresome of the trio, has a vision of
wonders yet to come - of ''revolving credit,'' ''significant others'' and
''Rumanian cabernet sauvignon.''

''On the Verge'' is a delight to the ear because its language is a funny,
musically conceived torrent of Victorian language and modern slang, overflowing
with amusing puns and delicious alliteration. Delivering the dialogue in the
rich elocutionary cadences of proper Victorian speech, the three actresses play
it for all its poetic worth.

''I think of the play as a long poem,'' Mr. Overmyer said the other day in a
telephone interview from Minneapolis, where he is a teacher in residence at the
Playwrights' Center. ''I hope the play works in the way that a poem does by
resonating with meanings rather than by being explicit. I've been very
influenced by novelists with mandarin styles like Don DeLillo, John Barth and
Ishmael Reed. Beckett, Pinter and Chekhov, the playwrights who have influenced
me the most, all used poetic language and imagery.''

A Pacific Northwesterner

The 35-year-old playwright grew up in Seattle and attended Reed College in
Oregon and the Asolo Conservatory in Sarasota, Fla. After arriving in New York
in 1976, he did some teaching and in 1979 became literary manager of Playwrights
Horizons.

''On the Verge,'' which is running at the John Houseman Theater, is his first
full-length play to be produced in New York, having been nurtured at the Center
Stage in Baltimore, the same company that introduced two other Overmyer plays,
''In a Pig's Valise'' (written with Karl Lundenberg, a composer) and ''Native
Speech.'' A workshop production of a new play, ''In Perpetuity Throughout the
Universe,'' is about to be done by the Arizona Theater Company in Tucson.

In the past year, Mr. Overmyer has also enjoyed a lucrative sideline career as a
story editor and writer for the television series ''St. Elsewhere.''

''I first conceived of 'On the Verge' while reading 'A Long Desire,' Evan S.
Connell's book about travelers,'' Mr. Overmyer said. ''I was particularly taken
with a chapter about Victorian lady explorers, and I learned that the author had
gotten his information from another book, 'Victorian Lady Travellers,' by
Dorothy Middleton. One of the things that interested me in these women was the
way they would go out and have amazing, hair-raising adventures and then come
back to England or America and be as conservative as if they had never left
home. Many of them opposed women wearing trousers, smoking tobacco or even
having the vote.

''For the rhythms and vocabulary I did a lot of reading of Victorian novels, and
the play contains bits and pieces from actual journals and letters, though many
of the anecdotes are distorted and fictionalized. Another important inspiration
was 'The Land That Time Forgot,' Arthur Conan Doyle's melodramatic
science-fiction novel about Englishmen who become shipwrecked on an unknown
island. When they ascend its high plateau, they find that all time exists at
once there - that dinosaurs coexist with saber-toothed tigers.''

The play grew over a three-year period from a short one-act into a full-length
work that, following its Baltimore premiere in January 1985, has enjoyed some 20
regional productions around the country.

Rock-and-Roll Watershed

At the center of the mid-50's world in which the three women eventually land is
a glitzy rock-and-roll lounge presided over by Nicky Paradise (Tom Robbins), a
jive-talking Elvis Presley-styled hep cat. But why 1955?

''I see it as the beginning of the modern era,'' Mr. Overmyer said. ''Since I
was only 4 in 1955, the period seems mythological, a golden era between the
Korean and Vietnam Wars in which there was prosperity and beautiful cars, and
the birth of rock-and-roll. Looking back, President Eisenhower seems a
benevolent, avuncular figure. I've been told over and over by people with
immigrant parents that when their mothers and fathers first came to this
country, they saw things that we take as junk to be marvelous and wonderful.
These time travelers are like immigrants. Through them we can look at the
culture with fresh eyes.''

The language of the play is so charged and the characters so sympathetic and
brave, that ''On the Verge'' leaves audiences in a good mood. Does that mean
that Mr. Overmyer is an optimist?

''Not at all,'' he insisted. ''At one point, Alexandra says that you must
embrace the future, and I think that's true no matter how horrible it's going to
be. One has to embrace the future and find what's marvelous about it.''

The John Houseman Theater is at 450 West 42d Street. Shows are Tuesdays through
Fridays at 8 P.M., Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sundays at 3 and 7 P.M. Tickets
range from $15 to $24. Reservations and information: 967-9077.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Eric Overmyer (Jean Burbaker)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Lost Illusions

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 941 words



THAT NIGHT. By Alice McDermott. 184 pages. Farrar, Straus Giroux. $14.95.

The place is a Long Island suburb: one of those bedroom communities where the
men go off to work each day, the women occupy themselves with neighborhood
gossip and the kids pass the long summer evenings driving about in their cars
and falling in love. The time is the early 1960's -roughly the same space of
time chronicled, with such wit and affection, by the movie ''American
Graffiti.'' It is a time that predates the dark revelations of Vietnam and the
noisy rebellions of the late 60's - the last time, perhaps, when it could be
said that America was truly innocent.

''That Night,'' the elegiac new novel by the author of the highly acclaimed
''Bigamist's Daughter,'' is concerned not only with that larger loss of
innocence but also with the mundane disillusionments that go with adolescence
and the rites of growing up. Indeed, the night referred to in the novel's title
serves as a line of demarcation in the lives of Alice McDermott's characters. It
is the night when they suddenly realize that their dreams of family love and
safety are not inviolate, that violence and blood and loss play an equ r role n
n the equation.

Whaexexactly happened that fi summer evening? The facts themselves are fairly
simple: one of the neighborhood boys named Rick has been trying to reach his
girlfriend, Sheryl, for days. She has discovered that she is pregnant and her
mother has summarily bundled her off to relatives out of state - she is to
remain there, in seclusion, cut off from her former life. There is no
opportunity for Sheryl to explain what has happened to Rick; and in his
ignorance, he grows increasingly anxious and enraged. He and his friends begin
circling the neighborhood in their cars, and they end by driving onto the lawn
in front of Sheryl's house, where they threaten her mother with angry words and
gestures. Neighbors rush to the scene, blows are exchanged and Rick winds up in
jail.

The narrator of ''That Night'' witnesses this all as a child - she lives down
the street from Sheryl, whom she's always looked up to as a savvy elder, wise in
the ways of makeup and boys - and as she recalls the events from the vantage
point of the future, they take on a symbolic resonance. ''That night'' comes to
represent her own initiation into knowledge, into the mysteries of sex and the
failures of love; and it comes to stand as a point of no return - beyond which
lie only the disappointments and sobering realities of the grown-up world.

Until then, until ''that night,'' the narrator - indeed, all the neighborhood
kids and possibly their parents, too - have dwelled in a sort of pre-lapsarian
state of romanticism and hope. Sheryl, especially, believes in the redemptive
powers of love - her father has recently died and she sees her love for Rick as
possessing the power of salvation; by loving him, she will save him and save
herself. Nothing else matters, she tells him, not ''friends, family, getting
older, good luck or bad.'' The moment her mother succeeds in sending her away,
however, she realizes that all those other things do in fact matter very much,
that they have the capacity to undermine love, to erase it and slowly turn it
into a dim memory.

Sheryl and Rick will go on to lead separate and altogether conventional lives,
and their doomed affair will fade into a long list of disappointments and
losses. Indeed, ''That Night'' leaves the reader with an indelible sense of the
precariousness of daily life and the ephemerality of youth and passion. We see
parents lose their children to death and anger; we see children lose their
parents to madness and frustration, and we see lovers lose their idealism to the
simple passage of time.

By the end of the novel, the narrator has traced both Rick and Sheryl's movement
from rebellion into resignation, as well as her own passage into the melancholia
of middle age. When we meet her, she has returned to her parents' house after a
failed marriage. She and her husband, she observes, had reached the point
''where we seemed to have lost our capacity for nostalgia, where what we'd
shared, that part of our past together that had sustained us until now, had
finally worn thin, and only an imagined history, or future, held any promise.''

At times, Ms. McDermott's use of this narrator creates problems for the reader.
We're never sure how much of the story has been distorted by nostalgia and the
passage of time - perhaps we're not supposed to be. Nor do we understand how the
narrator is able to enter into the minds of Sheryl and Rick so readily and
describe their emotions and dreams. It's possible that Ms. McDermott wants us to
regard the entire book as a kind of imaginative projection on the part of the
narrator - in this sense, Rick and Sheryl's actions possess no meaning in
themselves; they serve, rather, as simple magnets for the narrator's own
yearnings. If this is the case, however, Ms. McDermott fails to make it clear -
and her novel consequently suffers from a certain narrative vagueness.

But while such matters may cause the reader to hesistate here or there, they in
no serious way damage the emotional impact of ''That Night.'' By mixing up
concrete details that anchor her story in a specific time and place (banlon
shirts; pale, chalky lipstick; turquoise Chevys and the hum of lawnmowers on a
summer evening) with a more lyrical sense of memory and desire, Ms. McDermott
has succeeded in writing a novel that is, at once, mythic and personal - a novel
that possesses the ability to make us remember our own youth and all that has
vanished since.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Alice McDermont (M. A. Armstrong)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               March 28, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TO '68 LEADER, COLUMBIA IS STILL LIVELY

BYLINE: By DAVID E. PITT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 940 words


It was, said Mark Rudd, a complete coincidence. He had not set foot on campus in
years. But here he was at Columbia University, a few hours early for a
longstanding speaking engagement, and the students were demonstrating.

Mr. Rudd, who won notoriety as the fiery leader of the 1968 student
demonstrations at Columbia, strolled to the edge of the crowd Thursday and
watched in largely anonymous wonderment. There were at least a thousand people
on College Walk protesting what witnesses said was a racially motivated brawl
last Sunday outside the Ferris Booth Hall student center.

It was a glorious spring afternoon, full of impassioned speeches and bullhorns
and anger. For the few people who recognized the 39-year-old former student
leader, it was hard to keep the deja vu at bay. Mr. Rudd, a dead-ringer for his
former self except for a gray-flecked beard, said, ''Compared to demonstrations
we had here at Columbia in the '68 era, I think it was better in many
respects.'' There was a greater racial mix than rallies he could recall, and
there seemed to be more female leaders.

After nearly two decades of avoiding publicity - seven and a half as a fugitive
in the Weather Underground -Mr. Rudd said he had decided to step up his visible
political activities, meaning more speaking engagements and an autobiography.
The reason, he said, was the war in Nicaragua, which he is convinced will be for
the 80's generation what the Vietnam War was for his.

''I'm angrier now than I was during Vietnam,'' he said, stroking his beard.
''Why? Because I've seen the same thing happening for 25 years. It's our country
trying to maintain control of these other countries.''

'Short-Term Goal Is Education'

The postrally forum at which Mr. Rudd had been invited to speak attracted 60
people. They listened raptly to his message, which has mellowed considerably
with the passage of two decades. The man who once stirred rallies with calls to
put the authorities ''up against the wall'' said:

''I don't think that power is a realistic short-term goal anymore. I think our
short-term goal is education.''

''My theory,'' he told the Columbia Students in Solidarity With Nicaragua. ''is
that the more you talk about Vietnam - the more you relate it to Central America
- the more the learning process will go on.''

Mr. Rudd picked an appropriate day to return to Morningside Heights. A handful
of students was trying unsuccessfully to impede a recruiter from the Central
Intelligence Agency. Other demonstrators handed out leaflets to protest what
they called illegal evictions of tenants by the university. And the late
afternoon rally to protest the brawl turned into a noisy march down Broadway.

'A Time of Hope'

Aniko Bodroghkozy, who studied film making and who was 8 years old when Mr. Rudd
was at the barricades, had invited Mr. Rudd to campus. She said she had begun
corresponding with him as part of a passionate personal interest in the history
of the 60's.

''I'm still hoping to someday meet Bernadine Dohrn,'' she said, referring to
another former student leader.

''The world we live in right now seems really hopeless for a lot of people,''
Miss Bodroghkozy said, trying to talk above chants of, ''Hey Columbia, have you
heard, this is not Johannesburg.'' ''But the 60's were a time of hope, when
young people thought they could change the world.''

Mr. Rudd acknowledged that many students he met seemed caught up in despair and
pointless nostalgia about a bygone time.

''The thing that people ask me the most,'' he said, ''is, 'Why do you sound
optimistic?' Everybody else is pessmistic. The generation is pessimistic. The
students nowadays are pessimistic.

''Well, I'm pessimistic in the short run. I think some terrible things may
happen in Nicaragua. But I think some of the lessons of intervention have been
learned. Look at the polls.''

Children's Soccer Games

Mr. Rudd, a divorced father of two, said pulling back from publicity 19 years
ago grew largely out of a wish ''to be a normal person in my community'' in
Albuquerque, N.M.

''I teach and I organize,'' he said, ''and I take my two kids to their soccer
games.

''After I turned myself in in 1977'' -he walked out of Manhattan Criminal Court
a free man after pleading guilty to a 1968 criminal-trespassing charge - Mr.
Rudd was a construction worker in Brooklyn for a year. He then moved to New
Mexico, where he earned a degree in secondary education and taught for six years
at a technical-vocational institute.

Mr. Rudd's visit to Columbia was an afternoon of Rip Van Winkle-like surprises.
''Hey,'' he said as the march passed a dormitory near Amsterdam Avenue, ''wasn't
there a senior citizens' home here?''

No one knew, any more than they could tell him what had happened to the Orange
Julius store or the Gold Rail, a popular bar of another era that has given way
to a Chinese restaurant.

Colleague From the Old Days

One person who recognized him was a former classmate who stopped Mr. Rudd on the
steps of Low Memorial Library.

''Mark?'' he said. ''You were my classmate. Irving Ruderman. I was in class with
you.'' Mr. Rudd looked blank.  ''Remember,'' Mr. Ruderman said, ''after one
rally, we took a cab back together - and you said, 'Hey you're next to me
alphabetically'?'' I used to hang around with the Weathermen for a while after
it went underground.''

''Because you were next to me alphabetically?'' Mr. Rudd said, laughing in
disbelief at Mr. Ruderman, a mild-mannered-looking man with gray curls and
wire-rim glasses who teaches at the university. And up the stairs they went,
reminiscing about the old days.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mark Rudd

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Ex-Rep. Tim L. Carter, Kentucky Republican

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 30, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 231 words

DATELINE: GLASGOW, Ky., March 28


Former Representative Tim Lee Carter, a Republican who called for the withdrawal
of United States troops from Vietnam in 1967, died of anemia Friday, his doctor
said. He was 76 years old.

Dr. Carter, a physician, represented the Fifth Congressional District from 1965
to 1980, when he retired from Congress and returned home to practice medicine.

In 1966 he gained national attention as the first Republican Congressman to seek
withdrawal of American troops from Vietnam. However, he never wavered in his
support of the troops fighting there. He voted against efforts to cut off funds
for the war and in 1972 backed the saturation bombing of North Vietnamese cities
as a way of saving American lives.

He was a staunch defender of President Nixon in the Congressional impeachment
hearings in 1974, rising to denounce what he saw as attacks by the ''liberal
limousine press'' on the President.

In Kentucky he was known for efforts to improve one of the nation's poorest
districts, which allied him with President Johnson's Great Society programs for
schools, water systems, libraries, airports, roads and recreation.

Dr. Carter, who was a major contributor to health and hospital legislation,
graduated from Western Kentucky University and earned a medical degreee three
years later from the University of Tennessee.

Survivors include his wife, Kathleen, a brother and a sister.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ART;
WAS 1967 WHEN ABSTRACTION MET REALITY?

BYLINE: By ROBERTA SMITH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1480 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA


FOR THE ART WORLD, THE 1960's 1960's was a time of both dazzle and tumult, of
artistic innovation and artistic fragmentation. Not surprisingly, the esthetic
trajectory of the intersects with the larger social one, which began with the
optimism of the Kennedy era and ended with the agonies of Vietnam and the
antiwar movement.

Artistically, the early and mid-1960's saw Pop and Minimal Art continue the
triumph of Abstract Expressionism while subverting many of its esthetic ideals.
But by the end of the decade, Pop and Minimalism themselves were giving way to
something else, a range of activities much less easily categorized and, at
times, much more anarchic. Younger artists, picking up on Pop's attention to
mass culture and Minimalism's embrace of non-art materials, as well as the
Minimalists' emphasis on the factual nature of the art object, were beginning to
make themselves heard. This significant shift is the subject of an exhibition,
''1967: At the Crossroads,'' currently on view at the Institute of Contemporary
Art in Philadelphia (through April 26).

The show attempts to demonstrate how the new realities of Pop and Minimalism
developed into an examination of the broader social and esthetic contexts that
existed beyond the art object and the contained space of the art gallery. These
endeavors - often under the rubric of post-Minimalism, or Conceptual or Process
art - coincided with the widespread questioning of institutions and conventions
of all kinds and the desire to be more ''relevant'' to real life.

Janet Kardon, director of the Institute of Contemporary Art, hit on the idea of
this exhibition four years ago, deciding that ''it was time to look back on the
60's.'' She found it difficult to choose between 1967, 1968 or 1969, but finally
settled on the first year, feeling that this was when the conversion from
Minimalism to post-Minimalism really began. Based on this conviction, she has
organized an exhibition that uses the work of 36 artists spanning three
generations, plus sundry artifacts, to survey a number of the esthetic shifts
and developments - some generational, others individual - of that year.

The exhibition that Mrs. Kardon has assembled is ambitious but flawed. It seems
that 1967 was not always the best year for some of the older artists (Andy
Warhol and Robert Rauschenberg, for example), nor are others necessarily
represented by genuinely characteristic efforts. Roy Lichtenstein, one of Pop
Art's big names, is represented not by a painting, but by a sculpture, a
bronze-and-glass Art Deco-flavored concoction that represents neither the artist
nor the art movement at full strength.

Consequently, this exhibition fares better when taken as a documentary overview
rather than as a series of isolated esthetic experiences. It may be strongest in
the catalogue, packed with good chronologies and historical data, which contains
essays by Mrs. Kardon, Lucy R. Lippard, Hal Foster, Irving Sandler and Barbara
Rose.

By 1967 such artists as Warhol, Mr. Lichtenstein, Frank Stella, Jules Olitski
and Claes Oldenburg were becoming part of the art Establishment. The work that
represents them here looks elegant and classic - even a little corporate - being
for the most part sleekly finished and often factory made.

In marked contrast is the work of the younger generation - rough, ready and rife
with subversive intent, at least as far as art was concerned. These artists took
art back to basics in ways that remain physically eccentric, downright funny or
maddeningly esoteric. Here we see Eva Hesse's painting made with little rubber
washers, Bruce Nauman's photographs that wryly act out such colloquialisms as
''waxing hot'' or ''feet of clay,'' and, finally, Joseph Kousuth's provocative
''art as idea as idea'' series - here represented by an enlarged white-on-black
photostat of the definition of the word ''meaning.''

The exhibition is at its best where it intimates broad changes of attitude in
sculpture, which was literally being dismantled in the late 60's. Process Art's
presentations of nearly raw materials completely overturned the older
generation's notion of finish and form. In 1967 Barry LeVa, whose work would
grace a cover of Artforum the following year, defined sculpture as diced brown
felt, ball bearings and aluminum rods scattered randomly across the floor.
Richard Serra's ''Chunk'' is a large and solid piece of vulcanized rubber
leaning casually against a wall.

But the exhibition also stresses some underlying continuities. For example, it
is illuminating to go from Donald Judd's wall sculpture of red galvanized iron,
with its alternating solids and voids determined by mathematical progression,
and Sol LeWitt's equally didactic presentation of open and closed white cubes,
to Dan Graham's Conceptual artwork-cum magazine article, ''Homes for America,''
in which he photographed the repeating profiles of tract houses so that they
mimic the serial forms of Minimalist sculpture. In 1967, the interest in larger,
extra-gallery contexts led Robert Smithson from making Minimalist-inspired white
sculptural spirals to proposing one of the first earthworks, an asphalt spiral
for the Dallas-Fort Worth Airport.

Not all the crossroads examined in this exhibition are so issue-oriented; some
are quite personal and go against the prevailing winds. One of the show's most
imposing inclusions is Alfred Leslie's painting ''Linda Cross,'' a nude portrait
painted exclusively in grays that is disturbing for its large-scale, unstinting
realism and subtle distortions. And a small (for him) canvas by Al Held shows
the artist moving away from the frontal forms and heavy surfaces of his 60's
paintings toward the intricate special geometries he has pursued since then.
These works, one embracing realism, the other illusionism, ignore the then
fashionable emphasis on abstraction and flatness in painting.

Also anomalous is the model for Alexander Calder's great stabile ''La Grande
Vitesse,'' rather out of place near the drawings of Mr. Smithson as well as the
models by Dennis Oppenheim and Michael Heizer. But this inclusion, like that of
the model for Barnett Newman's ''Broken Obelisk'' and Tony Smith's ''Smoke,''
show that the young were not the only artists with large-scale public sculpture
on their minds.

Ultimately, this exhibition does not quite convince the viewer that 1967 was the
optimum perspective from which to survey the changes in question. It still does
not show them in full bloom. When queried about the absence of such artists as
Brice Marden and Dorothea Rockburne, Mrs. Kardon said that 1967 was ''too
early'' for them. Her response suggests that delving into the year 1969, for
example, might have made for a more effective exhibition. A later date would
also have meant that Hans Haacke's political-oriented brand of Conceptualism
could have been included, making the intersection of art and politics clearer.

Nonetheless, if the exhibition's concept remains somewhat better than its
execution, it is a concept too seldom broached by other, larger museums.
Examining the 60's is unquestionably a fact of late-century American art as it
is of American life. The period can sustain several such exhibitions, for which
this one provides a stimulating precedent.

AN EARLY INNOVATOR

Back when the year 1967 was running strong, and galleries and museums were
caught in a tangle of trends, the Institute of Contemporary Art at the
University of Pennsylvania took critics aback by removing its art to the streets
of Philadelphia. Samuel Adams Green, I.C.A.'s second director, selected the work
of 17 sculptors, including Robert Grosvenor, Mark di Suvero, Tony Smith and
Alexander Liberman, and sited it all over town. As a result, ''Art for the
City'' both looked back to Philadelphia's rich tradition of public art and
forward to the emergence of national interest in art in public spaces.

This sort of innovative exhibition has been typical of I.C.A. since it opened in
1963 with the first museum retrospective of the work of Clyfford Still. In 1965,
Andy Warhol (in photo) received his first museum show at I.C.A. More recently,
Laurie Anderson (1983) and David Salle (1986) received their first full-scale
exhibitions at I.C.A., which has also commissioned important work from artists
such as Robert Morris, Red Grooms and Christo. Although Philadelphia is not
generally thought of as congenial to innovation in the arts, I.C.A. has thrived
over the years and is now preparing to move into larger quarters near the
university campus in September 1989.

''Our role is to be a barometer of what's happening of significance,'' notes
Janet Kardon, director of I.C.A. since 1979. ''When we open our new space, we
are planning to do a 25-year summary of American art which will also touch, in a
sense, on what our history is.''    - Stephan Salisbury

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of art on display at Institute of Contemporary Art (Eugene
Mopsik); Photo of Andy Warhol (page 35)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUR WOMAN OF LETTERS

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI; Michiko Kakutani is a book critic for The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 60, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4317 words


IT IS EASY TO PICTURE MARY MCCARTHY AT home in France - that ''unsentimental
country,'' as she once wrote, ''where icy reason had its temples.'' The
classicism and chilly intellectualism of Paris complement her own rational turn
of mind, just as the city's magisterial architecture, its fine restaurants and
couture clothing seem to have been designed with her highbrow estheticism in
mind.

Last September, six people were killed and another 60 wounded in Paris when a
bomb exploded across the street from McCarthy's building on the Rue de Rennes,
but while the writer still has nightmares about terrorists, her apartment seems
a perfect refuge of civility and order. With its stiffly upholstered furniture,
the living room is not exactly comfortable, but it's lovely to look at, all the
same. Pale pink tulips and a pot of Japanese azaleas echo the pink in the
William Morris wallpaper. And everywhere, small, pretty objets - butterflies
frozen in glass, a tiny brass umbrella, a persimmon carved from ivory - catch
the sunlight.

From her perch on a pink chaise longue, McCarthy serves tea and spice cake, and
presides over the afternoon. The gaminlike beauty she possessed in her youth has
given way to a more stately mien, but her conversation remains animated by the
same mixture of girlish charm and intellectual brio shared by all her heroines.

Over the years, in fact, McCarthy has written tirelessly about her own life,
busily mythologizing herself in the process of inventing a gallery of alter
egos. As she readily points out, she is Meg in ''The Company She Keeps'' - the
clever Vassar girl, ''a princess among the trolls.'' She is also Martha, the
truth-telling ''bohemian lady'' in ''A Charmed Life.'' She is Kay, iconoclast
and scoffer in ''The Group.'' And she is Rosamund, the ardent and willfully
noble esthete in ''Birds of America.''

A more factual portrait of the author was provided by ''Memories of a Catholic
Girlhood'' in 1957, and with the publication next month of ''How I Grew'' - the
first volume of her autobiography - the self-portrait of the young Mary McCarthy
will be complete. At least two more volumes are planned, and when completed the
autobiography will minutely document McCarthy's own life and more than five
decades of intellectual life in America.

At 74, McCarthy has written 19 books, achieving recognition as a novelist and
critic, as well as a journalist and cultural historian. Taken together, her
books attest to a classical, all-round literary career. In a narrow sense, the
books chronicle the follies and preoccupations of McCarthy's own liberal
intellectual set, but they also open out onto broader issues: sexual freedom in
the 1930's; radicalism in the 40's and 50's; Vietnam and the social upheavals of
the 60's; Watergate and terrorism in the 70's. Whatever the subject, the voice
has always been consistent. The point of view is always moral (at times,
moralistic); the angle of vision, feminine; the tone, logical and cool.

Unlike the work of Philip Rahv or Edmund Wilson, McCarthy's criticism does not
demonstrate a consistent set of radical attitudes toward politics or books.
Instead, it comprises an anthology of reactions to various phenomena: literary,
social and personal. At worst, there is a tendency to go for shrill one-liners
at the expense of larger truths (of ''The Iceman Cometh,'' she wrote, O'Neill
''is probably the only man in the world who is still laughing at the iceman
joke''). But at their best, McCarthy's essays -and her superb cultural history
''The Stones of Florence'' - display a keen intelligence and freshness of
perception, coupled with common sense and an old-fashioned belief in social
responsibility.

''I see her in the Voltarian enlightenment tradition,'' says Karl Miller, the
editor of The London Review of Books. ''Her distinctiveness in America relates
to her being some sort of European intellectual, but at the same time she's
rather thoroughly American - someone who is bright and optimistic and
practical.''

Although McCarthy has by no means confined her gadfly activities to the printed
page (she even tried to get a Vietnam protest, based on a refusal to pay taxes,
off the ground), her social utopianism has been blunted in recent years.
''Through the Vietnam period one had certain hopes,'' she says. ''Not that I
personally counted on being so instrumental, but that certain beliefs I cared
about and groups I cared about had a chance at least of bringing about a better,
more interesting course of history.'' She now feels, however, that she has not
had ''the slightest effect on public behavior.''

AS A YOUNG GIRL growing up in the Pacific Northwest, Mary McCarthy had an image
of herself ''starring, shining somehow.'' In the years since, she has
constructed one of the most annotated of literary lives. Robert Lowell addressed
her as ''our Diana, rash to awkwardness,'' blurting ''ice-clear'' sentences
above the ''mundane gossip / and still more mundane virtue'' of her colleagues.
In ''Pictures From an Institution,'' Randall Jarrell reputedly drew a wicked
fictional portrait of her as a ferocious lady novelist who ''had not yet arrived
even at that elementary forbearance upon which human society is based.'' And
Norman Mailer simply dubbed her ''our First Lady of Letters'': ''our saint, our
umpire, our lit arbiter, our broadsword, our Barrymore (Ethel), our Dame
(dowager), our mistress (Head), our Joan of Arc.''

Memoirs about the New York intellectuals who came of age during the 1930's are
flecked with references to McCarthy, and central to all of them is an image of
combativeness and radical dissent. William Barrett, a Partisan Review editor,
saw her as ''a Valkyrie maiden, riding her steed into the circle, amid thunder
and lightning, and out again, bearing the body of some dead hero across her
saddle.'' And Alfred Kazin portrayed her as the owner of ''a wholly destructive
critical mind.'' She had, he wrote, an ''unerring ability to spot the hidden
weakness or inconsistency in any literary effort and every person. To this
weakness she instinctively leaped with cries of pleasure - surprised that her
victim, as he lay torn and bleeding, did not applaud her perspicacity.''

What was it about McCarthy that inspired such attention? In large part, of
course, it was her fiercely adversarial literary and political stands: her
vitriolic theater columns in Partisan Review; the public skirmishes with Philip
Rahv, Diana Trilling and Lillian Hellman; her impassioned pronouncements on
Watergate and Vietnam. She defended Hannah Arendt and William Burroughs when it
was easy to assail them, and attacked J. D. Salinger, Kenneth Tynan and Arthur
Miller when others were celebrating their oeuvres.

To this day, McCarthy appears astonished that everyone does not share her own
lofty standards, knowledge or even expertise at spelling. She tends to address
almost any subject with directness and precision. She talks in detail about her
three recent operations for hydrocephalus (otherwise known as ''water on the
brain''). She casually names various real-life models for characters in her
fiction (the bright young woman journalist in ''Cannibals and Missionaries'' was
based on Renata Adler; the Senator in that same novel, on Eugene McCarthy). And
she is equally candid about her confrontation with the late Lillian Hellman - a
confrontation that has roots in the split over Stalinism within the intellectual
left during the 1930's. Hellman had responded to McCarthy's calling her a
''dishonest writer'' on a 1980 Dick Cavett show with a $2.25 million lawsuit,
and McCarthy now says, ''I still feel disgusted by the amount of lying that
didn't stop after my remarks on that show.'' ''I wanted it to go to trial,'' she
adds, ''so I was disappointed when she died.''

The thing about McCarthy's pronouncements is that they are delivered with a
distinctive style and flash; and as Elizabeth Hardwick has noted, this
''romantic singularity'' has helped her to ''step free of the mundane, the
governessy, the threat of earnestness and dryness.'' Indeed, when McCarthy first
appeared on the literary scene, she must have seemed like some sort of Shavian
heroine: this would-be actress who used her theatrical instincts to call
attention to herself and who, as William Barrett recalled, intended ''to hold
her own with men -both intellectually and sexually.''

Her short story ''The Man in the Brooks Brothers Shirt,'' which chronicled a
casual one-night stand on a train, created an uproar when it appeared in 1941.
''The Group,'' which included an almost clinical chapter on diaphragms, became a
much talked-about best seller in 1963.

Thanks to such outspokenness, Mary McCarthy has been held up as an early
exemplar of feminist ideals, but she has little patience with the women's
movement, which she sees as a by-product of women's ''loss of function in the
domestic sphere.'' ''I don't care for the whole self-pity business,'' she adds.
''I'm not such a fool to think that relations between any two persons who live
together can be divided up in absolute equality - somebody has to give more.''

McCarthy's independent-minded women all share an anomalous dependence on men
(''the mind was powerless to save her,'' thinks one heroine. ''Only a man . .
.'') and the author freely acknowledges the large role that men - as mentors,
husbands and friends - have played in her career. It was Philip Rahv, then an
editor of Partisan Review and her live-in boyfriend, who helped her get her
first literary job: writing theater reviews for the magazine (the other editors
figured she must know something about drama, since she'd been married to an
actor, Harold Johnsrud). And it was her second husband, Edmund Wilson, who got
her started writing fiction. He put her in a room, she recalls, and admonished
her to stay there until she had finished a story.

At home, certainly, McCarthy seems less the acid-tongued sibyl portrayed by her
colleagues and more the pleasant, convent-educated homemaker, cheerfully
nattering on in her low, Julia Child voice. She has always demonstrated in her
writings an ability to combine the personal and the didactic, the cerebral and
the feminine; and in conversation, too, she moves fluently from discussions of
Kantian ethics to analyses of Fanny Farmer.

McCarthy's sentences tend to be as symmetrical and as Latinate as those in her
books. But she also speaks with girlish enthusiasm, exclaiming excitedly over
bits of found knowledge and news. The correct pronunciation of Kierkegaard; the
exact date of a meeting, the alternate name for a chaise longue -all are pieces
of information to be pinned down, then happily filed away, until they may be
properly displayed for the edification of others. Once noted, nothing is
forgotten. To this day, McCarthy remembers everything from the sort of breakfast
buns her young son once liked to eat at a certain coffee shop to the dirty
verses Edmund Wilson composed about other writers (''the next one on the list is
Malcolm Cowley / Who edited The New Republic so foully . . .'').

FRIENDS NOTE THAT McCarthy has mellowed over the years - largely, they say, as a
result of her 25-year marriage to James West, a former director of information
for the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a Paris-based
group that promotes worldwide economic growth. In Paris and at their summer
house in Maine, the Wests maintain a hectic social schedule; and in McCarthy's
capable hands, picnics, birthdays and holidays tend to become special occasions.
In such respects, notes her brother Kevin McCarthy, the actor, she has succeeded
in ''reconstituting'' the life they once had with their parents.

As Mary McCarthy has recalled, their parents possessed a romantic singularity.
The former Tess Preston was reputed to have been ''the most beautiful woman in
Seattle,'' and her husband, Roy McCarthy, radiated a wild, extravagant charm.
Life with them seemed, in retrospect at least, a sweet idyll with May baskets
and valentines, picnics in the spring and fancy snowmen in the winter. Then it
abruptly ended. Both Roy and Tess McCarthy died during the flu epidemic of 1918.
Mary and her three brothers ended up living with relatives in Minneapolis.

It was a harsh and incomprehensible exile, for if the children's previous life
had been Edenic, this new one was Dickensian. They were made to stand outside in
the snow, for three hours at a time, and they were routinely beaten with a razor
strop.

Although McCarthy's grandfather would later take her away to live with him in
Seattle, the years in Minneapolis had lasting consequences. They made her aware
of the possibility of starting over, of inventing a self, as an orphan, out of
the raw materials of will and imagination. And they also made her aware of ''the
idea of justice'' - an idea, she says, that informs nearly everything she has
ever written.

''It wasn't only the sort of divine justice that took our parents away from us
and set us down among these awful people,'' she says, ''but also the difference
between our lives with our parents, which was so spoiled and delicious, and the
life in that dreadful house in Minneapolis. And then the fact that I made my
escape, while my brothers were left behind. There was certainly a great deal of
injustice there - that I was the lucky one.''

As her brother Kevin sees it, their experience as children also had the effect
of turning them into critics. ''I always thought,'' he says, ''that Mary was
busy criticizing the great mistakes that were made back then. It's trying to
make things nice again, seeking to regain paradise. And in doing so, you have to
show how things went awry.

''I would think a kind of detachment happens,'' he continues. ''Something goes
so wrong it silences you. But at the same time, there's a tremendous amount of
anger. And I think Mary's stifled anger and my stifled anger have a lot to do
with who we are and how we've conducted our lives. We had to suppress these
things, and it manifested itself by finding fault with things. I think Mary,
through her talent, has released a lot of that - using the tools of language.''

His sister is less given to looking at their lives in such psychological terms,
for she feels that Freudian theory leads to a kind of emotional determinism, in
which will and intellect are diminished. When it is pointed out that all her
novels involve groups of one sort or another - closed communities of bohemian
artists, academics and so on -she acknowledges that some underlying longing for
family definition might, just might, have something to do with it. But she would
prefer to think of the phenomenon as a manifestation of her ''political
utopianism.'' ''I don't like these biographical explanations,'' she says. ''I
like to think things come out of the mind.''

MCCARTHY HAD last taught at Bard College in the 1940's, and when the school
offered her a teaching chair two years ago, she eagerly accepted. She is now
dismayed, however, to find that her students seem ''almost totally ignorant of
the whole period spanned by my life, to say nothing of what happened before.''

Given her hectic writing and lecturing schedule, her recent illness and the
strain of juggling several households, one wonders why McCarthy even took on the
additional responsibility of teaching. Like many things in her life, it seems
largely a matter of will and drive - a sense of duty to her own credo of
self-reliance.

''I remember Lizzie [Hardwick] and me saying to each other - this was perhaps 25
years ago - that we never woke up in the morning without a feeling of intense
repentance and a resolve to be better. I don't do that anymore - or almost
never. But I do have this idea of improvement, if not in one's powers, at least
in one's vision, in one's understanding. I couldn't live without feeling I know
more than I did yesterday.''

Certainly these imperatives to better oneself lend a certain puritanical quality
to McCarthy's life. Though she and her husband covet such niceties as an antique
Mercedes convertible, though they insist on buying the best bottled water, the
best meat and fish, these luxuries seem less frivolous indulgences than
eccentric manifestations of her obsessive insistence on high standards. In other
respects, their Paris apartment is modest, even spartan. There are no fancy
appliances in the kitchen and no television. When McCarthy is writing, she takes
only 10 or 15 minutes for lunch, and spends her free time studying German.

In a sense, there have always been two sides to McCarthy. In both ''How I Grew''
and ''Memories of a Catholic Girlhood,'' there is a die-hard, impetuous
romantic, who worships Byron and writes outlandish stories about suicide and
prostitution. And there is the self-conscious, persevering puritan, who wants to
win a pink ribbon at school for good conduct. The first wants to become a famous
actress; the second pictures herself as a Carmelite nun.

Failing to win sufficient attention by being a good student, the young Mary will
determine ''to do it by badness.'' She will pretend to lose her faith (and in so
doing, actually misplace it). She will lose her virginity at 14, renounce her
family's bourgeois roots, and become a ''wayward modern girl.'' In becoming a
writer, however, she will also develop her rational, objective side; and like
Flaubert and so many other reformed romantics, she will attempt to submit her
wilder impulses to her perfectionist drive.

''I've often thought,'' she says, ''that I have very little will in terms of
abstentions, restraining, though that's been very much developed in me in later
years. But when I was young, assertion of the will was a force almost to throw
off self-control.

''Of course, one's tastes also change a bit,'' she goes on. ''One is no longer
tempted by certain things that were temptations in the past. For example, I was
terribly tempted by detective stories when I was young, and I'd swear off them
as though I were swearing off drink. Now, I don't think I've read one in 25
years and I have no inclination to read one. Nor do I have an inclination toward
light reading. I enjoy things that are harder more.''

Curiously enough, the same impulse informs McCarthy's writing career, which
includes eight novels. On the whole, her essays and journalism possess an
organic assurance - a style, a voice, an originality - that is missing in her
fiction, and McCarthy herself says she finds ''that writing anything from a book
review to a book about Watergate is easier than writing one chapter of
fiction.''

''That may mean that I have no natural talent for fiction,'' she says. ''It must
mean that, or that it isn't at least as accessible to me as the other. But I
prefer, in the end, writing fiction because you're creating something that
wasn't there before. That's where you're really contributing something to the
world's treasure.''

Indeed, McCarthy's fiction has the distinct feel of being a willed creation.
With the exception of her first novel ''The Company She Keeps'' (which melded
autobiography and a highly personal voice to produce a wonderfully immediate
series of interconnected stories), the novels each began with an idea. ''Birds
of America,'' a sentimental study of an idealistic boy's coming of age, was
meant to ''be a novel about the idea of equality and its relation to nature.''
''The Groves of Academe,'' a brittle portrait of a Machiavellian academic, was
supposed to raise the question: ''Where is the justice for an impossible
person?'' And even ''The Group,'' that gossipy chronicle of eight Vassar women,
was conceived as ''a history of the loss of faith in progress.''

Their execution tended to be equally didactic: after a chapter or so, says
McCarthy, she would ask herself a series of questions and then proceed on the
basis of the answers. The problem with this approach, of course, is that the
narratives tend to become mannered; the voice, more and more detached. In his
review of ''The Group,'' Norman Mailer concluded that McCarthy was really ''an
engineer manque in literature.'' And Hilton Kramer, reviewing ''Birds of
America,'' was even harsher: ''the truth is - dare one say it? - that Mary
McCarthy cannot write a novel. She lacks the essential fictional gift. She
cannot imagine others.''

McCarthy herself acknowledges the limitations inherent in her mode of comic
detachment. ''Laughter is the great antidote for self-pity,'' she writes in
''How I Grew.'' ''Maybe a specific for the malady, yet probably it does tend to
dry one's feelings out a little, as if exposing them to a vigorous wind.''
''There is no dampness in my emotions,'' she adds, ''and some moisture, I think,
is needed, to produce the deeper, the tragic, notes.''

ALTHOUGH MCCARTHY says she hopes her fiction has moved in a ''direction of
greater objectivity'' over the years, she points out that she ''can't get away
from autobiography.'' Indeed, read together, the novels form a sort of ongoing
narrative of her life. ''The Group'' was based heavily on her own schoolmates at
Vassar, and ''The Company She Keeps'' serves as a virtual chronicle of the
author's own adventures in New York during the 1930's.

Like the heroine of that book, McCarthy says she was an essentially
''nonpolitical person'' who fell, quite by accident, into the middle of one of
that period's great ideological debates. She was at a party in 1936, she
recalls, when she was casually asked two questions: Did she think Trotsky had a
right to asylum and did she think he had a right to a hearing? Without thinking
much about it, she answered yes to both questions. The next day, she says, ''I
got a letter from something calling itself the Committee for the Defense of Leon
Trotsky, and there was my name on the letterhead. I was furious.

''I was just about to call the committee to tell them to take my name off that
list when I began to hear that a number of people - including Freda Kirchwey,
the editor of The Nation, and God knows who else - had dropped off the list. And
as soon as I heard that, naturally I turned completely around and felt very glad
I hadn't asked them to take my name off because I would have had to be in the
company of people like that.''

Even though she began reading more and more Marxist literature, she recalls that
the ''P.R. boys'' (Philip Rahv and the rest of the Partisan Review crowd) ''were
always afraid I'd commit some awful bourgeois error.'' Similarly, she says, when
Edmund Wilson - who was regarded by Partisan Review editors as an eminent elder
statesman - asked McCarthy out to dinner, ''the boys'' worried that she would
embarrass them all ''by having the wrong literary opinions.''

They needn't have worried. Wilson, who was then 42, soon asked the 25-year-old
writer to marry him. McCarthy, who was then living with Philip Rahv, demurred.
''I told Wilson I'd live with him,'' she says, ''but I did not want to get
married. But I guess I felt guilty. I felt, somehow, since I'd gone to bed with
Wilson that I should marry him. It was wrong, of course. I wasn't in love with
him, and I was kind of in love with Rahv.'' She and Rahv, however, were
''fighting all the time'' (''class and race warfare,'' as she recalls), and
McCarthy found herself increasingly drawn to Wilson's promises of quiet
domesticity. ''The next thing I knew,'' she says, ''I was sitting next to this
stranger on a train to get married.''

The marriage lasted seven years. Some years after that, in her novel ''A Charmed
Life,'' McCarthy portrayed a loud, unattractive intellectual named Miles Murphy,
who ''wanted to be another Goethe and had ended up as a rolling stone'' - a
character widely believed to be based on Wilson. Wilson ignored the book -
unlike Rahv, who reacted to McCarthy's teasing portrait of him in ''The Oasis''
with a lawsuit (later dropped).

YOU COULD NOT treat your life-history as though it were an inferior novel and
dismiss it with a snubbing phrase,'' says Meg in ''The Company She Keeps.'' ''It
had after all been like that. Her peculiar tragedy (if she had one) was that her
temperament was unable to assimilate her experience; the raw melodrama of those
early years was a kind of daily affront to her skeptical, prosaic
intelligence.''

It is an outlook common to many of McCarthy's heroines, and one suspects that
their creator, too, shares this unwillingness to trust in fate - this desire to
make sense of life through rules and definitions, this instinct to control
disorder through intelligence and logic.

Her own life, after all, seems to have had more than its share of accidents and
chance occurrences. Had her parents lived, she once observed, they would have
been ''a united Catholic family, rather middle class and wholesome,'' and she
might very well have ended up ''married to an Irish lawyer and playing golf and
bridge, making occasional retreats and subscribing to a Catholic Book Club.''

In ''The Company She Keeps,'' Meg dreams of having a ''brilliant career,'' of
becoming ''a great writer, an actress, an ambassador's gifted wife.'' As her
autobiography makes clear, McCarthy not only cherished similar dreams herself,
but she also succeeded in using her will and intellect to become that imagined
person. After years of feeling like an outsider - the orphan in a strange
household, the young woman from the Far West at Vassar, the ''bourgeois''
theater critic at Partisan Review - she now seems, in Meg's (and Chaucer's)
words, ''my own woman well at ease.''

Though she contemplates no further novels, McCarthy says she hopes one day to
write a study of Gothic architecture. In the meantime, there are at least two
more volumes of the autobiography to complete.

What sort of self-assessment is she making? ''Not too favorable,'' she says
slowly. ''But then it'd be awful if one formed a favorable assessment of
oneself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mary McCarthy (Julio Donoso/Sygma)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS TALKS HAVE IMPACT ON MUCH MORE THAN WEAPONRY

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE Soviet-American relationship is tethered to arms control. The range of
compromise and cooperation in trade, human rights, cultural and scientific
exchange, third world conflicts and other areas is defined by the negotiations
to contain the nuclear arms race. The prospect of an arms accord increases the
possible range. Failure or impasse restricts conciliation and affects the entire
circle of issues between the superpowers.

This is the geometry of the situation as Secretary of State George P. Shultz
prepares to take a large team of Administration officials to Moscow April 13-15.
And as became clear last week from public statements, important obstacles remain
on the arms issue, but there is also a chance of success on arms and other
issues.

''The Soviet leadership is preoccupied with their domestic situation,'' Arthur
A. Hartman, who just returned from more than five years as United States
Ambassador to Moscow, said last week in a reference to Mikhail S. Gorbachev's
efforts to modernize the economy. ''Our relationship is colored highly by the
Soviet reactions to what they really have to do internally. And I think
basically what they would like to have now is a period of calm. And therefore,
there could well be opportunities for serious negotiations in a variety of
fields.''

The key question in Mr. Shultz's Moscow trip is expected to be the nuclear arms
talks, specifically the attempt to conclude a treaty eliminating
intermediate-range missiles from Europe. After linking such an agreement to a
broader strategic arms accord, Moscow de-linked it a month ago, opening the way
for a separate treaty. Problems remain in working out means of verification,
including on-site inspection, and in regulating deployment of short-range
missiles, leading the chief Soviet negotiator, Viktor Karpov, to accuse the
United States last week of not wanting an agreement, of making a proposal that
was ''a bluff from the very start.''

The Warm-Up

Such posturing may be just a warm-up for the serious bargaining yet to come.
Probably, progress in those talks will shape Moscow's readiness to deal on other
matters. Weapons technology advances so much faster than diplomacy, and
controlling nuclear weapons is so complex, that the difficulty of arms
negotiations ought not to inhibit progress in other areas. And while the Soviet
Union has traditionally made arms control the centerpiece of Soviet-American
relations, the two powers are rarely very close to success. Furthermore, the
United States has a broader view of the relationship, placing considerably more
emphasis than Moscow on managing Soviet-American competition in other parts of
the world, such as Central America, especially Nicaragua, the Middle East and
Africa. This grows partly out of the painful American experience in Vietnam and
the resulting desire to avoid the kind of superpower competition that magnifies
regional conflicts. But the two views do not mesh; Washington gets dragged into
the narrower Soviet definition and finds only frustration.

The Reagan Administration has pressed for dialogue with the Russians on regional
issues in recent years, but with little concrete effect except a richer
understanding of each other's positions and evaluations of the regional
situations. Two weeks ago, Michael H. Armacost, Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs, conducted such talks in Moscow, reportedly focusing on
Afghanistan as well as other issues. Although Mr. Gorbachev has spoken
repeatedly of wanting to withdraw from Afghanistan, Washington doubts that the
Russians have resigned themselves to seeing the collapse of the pro-Soviet
Government in Kabul. ''Until you get serious about removing the Communist Party
from power,'' a senior Administration official observed, ''there's not going to
be any national reconciliation or political settlement.'' A rapid Soviet
withdrawal would allow the Afghan rebels to settle the situation ''by the gun
and the knife,'' he added.

'Talk to the Cubans'

Ambassador Hartman sees the regional talks as more useful now than initially,
when Soviet officials simply recited well-known policies. ''The later meetings
got a little looser,'' he said. On the Angola question, for example, ''The
Soviets say, 'You ought to talk a little more to the Cubans,''' a comment that
suggests that Cuban actions there are not tightly controlled from Moscow. Soviet
authorities have also expressed impatience about paying huge sums for the
Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, Mr. Hartman said, providing some insight into
Moscow's frustrations with its clients.

''It does develop personal contacts,'' said another American official,
''contacts which can be used if a crisis develops. Eventually, you may come
across things out of these talks that the two sides can do together - joint or
parallel action. That hasn't happened yet.'' Some diplomats are convinced that
such dialogue can reduce tension. ''The Soviets think we have a secret game plan
to put military forces close to their southern border,'' the official observed.
''They look at our Rapid Deployment Force, the marines in Beirut, now the patrol
in the Persian Gulf. It is useful to tell them that that is not our purpose,
that our concern is with freedom of navigation. They may not believe us, but it
helps.'' On human rights, Mr. Gorbachev's release of more than 100 political
prisoners and an increase in emigration of Soviet Jews this month have given
Administration officials some hope that more improvements may come. But there
were reminders in Washington last week of how severe the issue can be. Leon
Charny stood near the Soviet Embassy in a vigil for his brother, Benjamin, a
cancer patient in Moscow who has been denied permission to emigrate. And
Alexander Slepak began a hunger strike on the Capitol's steps for his parents,
Vladimir and Mariya Slepak. He plans to fast for 17 days, one day for every year
that they have been denied exit visas.

FOUR ISSUES HIGH ON AGENDA

ARMS CONTROL
Talks on banning American and Soviet medium-range nuclear weapons from Europe
have encountered difficulties over short-range missile strengths.

CENTRAL AMERICA
The United States trains and supplies the Nicaraguan contras in their campaign
to overthrow the Sandinista Government, which is supported and supplied by the
Soviet Union.

EMIGRATION
The United States wants Moscow to permit more Jews, and others, to emigrate.
There has been movement: some 400 Soviet Jews got permission to leave in March,
the highest monthly rate since 1981.

AFGHANISTAN
The 115,000 Soviet troops in Afghanistan sustain a pro-Soviet Government in
Kabul. Anti-Government guerrillas are supplied by the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS: MARCH 29, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1380 words


$
          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List FICTION

1       2     2
                 FINE THINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $18.95.)
                The vicissitudes of a son of the 60's on his way to the
                80's.
2       1     8
                 WINDMILLS OF THE GODS, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow,
                $18.95.) The nightmarish experiences that befall a
                woman and her family after her appointment as
                Ambassador to Rumania.
3       3     9
                 THE EYES OF THE DRAGON, by Stephen King. (Viking,
                $18.95.) A fairy tale, complete with an aged king, two
                princes, an evil wizard and a mouse.
4       4     3
                 BOLT, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $17.95.) The
                jockey-hero of ''Break In'' has to contend with a
                romantic crisis, a family feud and an international
                arms-selling intrigue.
5       5    35
                 RED STORM RISING, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $19.95.) The
                West tries to stave off the Russians in World War III.
6             1
                 DESTINY, by Sally Beauman. (Bantam, $19.95.) The
                30-year romance of a couple with diverse backgrounds
                and ambitions.
7       6    11
                 NIGHT OF THE FOX, by Jack Higgins. (Simon & Schuster,
                $17.95.) A mission to keep D-Day plans from being
                discovered by the Germans.
8       7    29
                 IT, by Stephen King. (Viking, $22.95.) Childhood
                horrors haunt six men and a woman who grew up in a
                small Maine town.
9 *     9    10
                 THE PANIC OF '89, by Paul Erdman. (Doubleday, $17.95.)
                A financial wizard undertakes to defuse the crisis
                besetting Wall Street and the American economy.
10     10     6
                 OUTBREAK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $17.95.) Tracking
                down a mysterious disease that strikes certain
                physicians and their patients.
11 *   11    26
                 THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Houghton Mifflin,
                $19.95.) Complex family relationships in South
                Carolina's low country and New York City.
12 *          2
                 ANYWHERE BUT HERE, by Mona Simpson. (Knopf, $18.95.)
                Love, hate, fear, need and loyalty lock mother and
                daughter in 20 years of combat.
13      8    22
                 FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER, by Stephen Coonts. (Naval
                Institute, $15.95.) Navy aviators at war over Vietnam.
14     13     2
                 THE RED WHITE AND BLUE, by John Gregory Dunne. (Simon
                & Schuster, $18.95.) America during the past 25 years,
                seen through the lives of a rich and powerful
                California family.
15     12    21
                 WHIRLWIND, by James Clavell. (Morrow, $22.95.) Iran
                during the month following the Shah's departure.

          Weeks
This Last    on
Week Week  List Nonfiction

1       1    13
                 A SEASON ON THE BRINK, by John Feinstein. (Macmillan,
                $16.95.) A chronicle of one season spent with the coach
                Bob Knight and his Indiana University basketball team.
2       2     5
                 COMMUNION, by Whitley Strieber. (Beech Tree/ Morrow,
                $17.95.) A professional writer tells of the visits of
                ''intelligent nonhumans'' to his family's place in
                upstate New York.
3       3     6
                 THE FITZGERALDS AND THE KENNEDYS, by Doris Kearns
                Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) From the Boston
                slums of Irish immigrants to the White House: three
                generations of a family.
4       4    47
                 FATHERHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Dolphin/ Doubleday,
                $14.95.) Anecdotes and ruminations from the television
                star and father of five.
5       6     7
                 THE FATAL SHORE, by Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $24.95.)
                Australia from penal colony to its gradual emergence as
                a flourishing nation.
6 *     5     7
                 ECHOES IN THE DARKNESS, by Joseph Wambaugh.
                (Perigord/Morrow, $18.95.) A case involving the murder
                of a Pennsylvania high school teacher and the
                disappearance of her two children.
7       9    17
                 A DAY IN THE LIFE OF AMERICA. (Collins Publishers,
                $39.95.) The nation on May 2, 1986, as recorded in
                pictures by 200 photojournalists.
8       8     4
                 INTIMATE PARTNERS, by Maggie Scarf. (Random House,
                $18.95.) Changing patterns in love and marriage.
9       7     2
                 BETTY: A Glad Awakening, by Betty Ford with Chris
                Chase. (Doubleday, $16.95.) A former First Lady tells
                about her recovery from alcoholism and drug abuse.
10     10    55
                 YOU'RE ONLY OLD ONCE! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House,
                $9.95.) A checkup at the Golden Years Clinic in
                pictures and rhyme.
11     14     2
                 BOONE, by T. Boone Pickens Jr. (Houghton Mifflin,
                $18.95.) The autobiography of an oilman who has made it
                big as a corporation-takeover entrepreneur.
12     13     4
                 LIFE WISH, by Jill Ireland. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                The author tells of her battle against cancer.
13     11    11
                 THE SEARCH FOR SIGNS OF INTELLIGENT LIFE IN THE
                UNIVERSE, by Jane Wagner. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) Acerb
                observations on life today; script of the show starring
                Lily Tomlin.
14     15     8
                 REAGAN'S AMERICA, by Garry Wills. (Doubleday, $19.95.)
                The President as the product and embodiment of an
                American mythology.
15     12    25
                 THE RECKONING, by David Halberstam. (Morrow, $19.95.)
                The crisis in the American automobile industry and
                Japan's role in it.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1       1    25
                 MEN WHO HATE WOMEN & THE WOMEN WHO LOVE THEM, by Susan
                Forward and Joan Torres. (Bantam, $16.95.) How to cope
                with overbearing men.
2       2    22
                 THE FRUGAL GOURMET COOKS WITH WINE, by Jeff Smith.
                (Morrow, $16.95.) Recipes to be prepared at moderate
                cost.
3       3    41
                 THE ROTATION DIET, By Martin Katahn. (Norton, $15.95.)
                A regimen based on the Vanderbilt University Weight
                Management Program.
4       4    81
                 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.
                (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard reference work in
                a 1983 revision.
5             1
                 HOW TO BE YOUR OWN NUTRITIONIST, by Stuart M. Berger.
                (Morrow, $16.95.) Ways to create a diet regimen for
                health and energy.


 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

And Bear in Mind
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE MESSIAH OF STOCKHOLM, by Cynthia Ozick. (Knopf, $15.95.) The plot of this
short, brilliant novel concerns the destruction of a (possibly nonexistent) book
by a great dead writer; its meditative workings concern much more, including the
nature of storytelling, idolatry and Jewishness.

THE OLD DEVILS, by Kingsley Amis. (Summit, $16.95.) Several Welsh married
couples in their 60's inhabit what is Mr. Amis's most inclusive novel so far,
which faces right up to the impossible subject of death and the other
awfulnesses that accompany life.

THE OBJECT OF MY AFFECTION, by Stephen McCauley. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.)
Some extremely attractive young people reach the verge of adulthood without
leaving their charm behind in this very funny, exceptionally vivid first novel.

THE AMERICAN CONNECTION: U.S. Guns, Money, and Influence in Northern Ireland, by
Jack Holland. (Viking, $19.95.) Many Americans - conservatives and liberals
alike - take leave of their better judgment when Northern Ireland is involved,
according to Mr. Holland's analysis of American words and deeds.

A TIME TO KEEP: And Other Stories, by George Mackay Brown. (Vanguard, $19.50.)
Permanence and renewal, human quirks and longings in an ancient landscape are
the matter of the tales in this collection by a distinguished Scottish poet and
fiction writer.

OUT IN THE MIDDAY SUN: My Kenya, by Elspeth Huxley. (Viking, $18.95.) Deft
portraits of the working people, celebrities, rogues and adventurers who lived
in Kenya between the world wars - a society that now seems almost unimaginably
strange.

SISTERS BY A RIVER and THE SKIN CHAIRS, by Barbara Comyns. (Virago/Penguin,
Paper, $6.95 and $5.95 respectively.) Childlike fascination with cold, prosaic
horror marks these strange little novels of English middle-class family life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: MARCH 29, 1987

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 824 words


$
     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

1        4
            THE BOURNE SUPREMACY, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $4.95.) A
           plot to seize Hong Kong and bring China into conflict with
           the West.
2        9
            I'LL TAKE MANHATTAN, by Judith Krantz. (Bantam, $4.95.) A
           rich, beautiful young woman conquers the world of magazine
           publishing.
3        4
            PRIVATE AFFAIRS, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $4.95.) A
           couple's marriage is seriously strained when they strike it
           rich in journalism.
4        4
            JOANNA'S HUSBAND AND DAVID'S WIFE, by Elizabeth Forsythe
           Hailey. (Dell, $4.50.) Two sides of a marriage revealed in
           diary entries.
5       10
            THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood. (Fawcett, $4.95.)
           In the Republic of Gilead, men and women perform the
           services assigned them.
6        1
            BREAK IN, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $4.95.) Mystery,
           melodrama and bitter family rivalry in the world of British
           steeplechase racing.
7       54
            THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.)
           A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the
           United States.
8        4
            TO TASTE THE WINE, by Fern Michaels. (Ballantine, $4.50.)
           An English beauty's passionate affair with a handsome
           Australian.
9       17
            LIE DOWN WITH LIONS, by Ken Follett. (Signet/ NAL, $4.95.)
           An Englishwoman in Afghanistan, caught between the C.I.A.
           and the K.G.B.
10 *     3
            WORD OF HONOR, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $4.50.) A
           former officer is falsely held responsible for an atrocity
           committed by his men in Vietnam.
11       4
            THE LEBARON SECRET, by Stephen Birmingham. (Berkley,
           $4.50.) Love and conflict among a wealthy family of
           California vintners.
12       9
            THE IMMIGRANT'S DAUGHTER, by Howard Fast. (Dell, $4.50.)
           The last volume of the Lavette saga tells of a woman
           involved in today's politics.
13       3
            THE GAMBLE, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $3.95.) The stormy
           romance of a saloonkeeper and a temperance crusader in a
           small Kansas town.
14       2
            DEEP LIE, by Stuart Woods. (Avon, $4.50.) A thriller with
           spies, sex and Soviet submarines.
15       9
            SEASONS OF THE HEART, by Cynthia Freeman. (Berkley,
           $4.50.) A businesswoman is torn between devotion to her
           husband and her mentor.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction: General

1        2
            THE TOWER COMMISSION REPORT. (Times Books/Bantam, $5.50.)
           The full text of the President's Special Review Board.
2        5
            NECESSARY LOSSES, by Judith Viorst. (Fawcett, $4.95.) Life
           is a series of losses, the author says, and we must
           confront them to grow.
3      179
            THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $9.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a
           psychiatrist.
4       12
            THE MAN WHO MISTOOK HIS WIFE FOR A HAT, by Oliver Sacks.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $7.95.) Strange neurological
           disabilities.
5 *     52
            OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $4.50.) Her
           midlife ''journey to find her true self.''
6       21
            WEST WITH THE NIGHT, by Beryl Markham. (North Point,
           $12.50.) A woman's experiences flying in Africa and across
           the Atlantic in the 30's.
7        7
            WISEGUY, by Nicholas Pileggi. (Pocket, $4.50.) Life in a
           Mafia family.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction: Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1       43
            WOMEN WHO LOVE TOO MUCH, by Robin Norwood. (Pocket,
           $4.50.) How to avoid or end addictive, unhealthy
           relationships with men.
2        9
            FIT FOR LIFE, by Harvey Diamond and Marilyn Diamond.
           (Warner, $4.95.) A diet for weight loss and physical
           fitness.
3       43
            ADULT CHILDREN OF ALCOHOLICS, by Janet Geringer Woititz.
           (Health Communications, $6.95.) Advice about a family
           problem.
4        3
            GARFIELD: FOOD FOR THOUGHT, by Jim Davis. (Ballantine,
           $5.95.) Comic strips.
5        8
            THE FRUGAL GOURMET, by Jeff Smith. (Ballantine, $4.95.) A
           television chef's dishes.
6        2
            WHAT COLOR IS YOUR PARACHUTE? by Richard Nelson Bolles.
           (Ten Speed, $8.95.) Job and career advice; 1987 edition.
7       25
            DIANETICS, by L. Ron Hubbard. (Bridge Publications,
           $4.95.) Latest edition of a handbook by the founder of
           Scientology.
8       20
            RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.
           (Rand McNally, $5.95.) For 1987.


The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY: TUESDAY, MARCH 31, 1987


SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words




INTERNATIONAL    A3-14



An increase in Jewish emigration, direct flights through Rumania to Israel and
an improvement in the ability of Soviet Jews to study Hebrew and observe their
religious traditions will soon be permitted by Moscow, two Western Jewish
spokesmen said they had been told by top Soviet officials.    A1



A Soviet woman who lured a marine into a spying scheme left some indelible
memories at the United States Embassy, a striking ''presence'' who appeared at
embassy social functions in fashionable attire.    A1



Mikhail S. Gorbachev accused the Western allies of introducing ''additional
conditions and demands'' to block an agreement between the United States and the
Soviet Union to remove their medium-range missiles from Europe.    A1



Older marines should be stationed in Moscow, Arthur Hartman, the most recent
American ambassador to the Soviet Union, has urged. He said the contingent of
young, single Marine guards in Moscow should be replaced.     A12



A Van Gogh brought $39.9 million, a record for a single painting, in a telephone
bid to a London auction by an unidentified buyer for one of the ''Sunflowers.''
The previous auction record was $12.1 million paid for Mantegna's ''Adoration of
the Magi'' in 1985.    A1



The expulsion of a Soviet diplomat is reportedly being considered by the French
Government after newspaper reports that six people arrested for spying were
supervised by a member of the Soviet Embassy in Paris.

A12



Haitians look to election

    A4



Church is critical of increases

    A6



Hungarian is outcast at home

    A7



Libyan jets bomb Chadian units

    A8



News analysis: U.S.-Israeli relationship is still edgy

    A10



NATIONAL    A16-28, B8



Reaction to the dollar's decline was violent in the stock and bond markets,
where prices plunged in near-panic selling. Pressure on both markets was intense
right from the start of trading.    A1



News analysis: The chain reaction in the financial markets touched off by
President Reagan's trade sanctions against Japan suggests a grim reading by the
world's traders of a largely symbolic act.    D5



TV ministers overemphasize money, three-fourths of the people who watch them
say, a New York Times/ CBS News Poll shows. About the same proportion expects
more accusations against evangelists.    A1



Public approval of the President remains near the low point of his six years in
office, although it has recovered slightly since the Tower Commission released
its report, the New York Times/CBS News Poll found.    B8



Rupert Murdoch will acquire Harper & Row Publishers for about $300 million, or
$65 a share. The bid, which was unanimously recommended by Harper & Row's board,
surprised book industry executives and analysts.    A1

Education officials falsified papers to create the impression they were meeting
court-imposed deadlines for handling civil rights complaints, a top Education
Department official said.     A16



An appeal by Hustler Magazine will be heard by the Supreme Court. The case
involves a $200,000 award to the Rev. Jerry Falwell for his ''emotional
distress'' after a Hustler parody depicted him as an incestuous drunk.

    A22



The President sounded optimistic about the remainder of his term as he told
several thousand senior Administration officials that ''we're going to have the
greatest fourth quarter in Presidential history.''    B8



A road for Altoona, Pa., is threatened because of Mr. Reagan's veto of an $87.5
billion highway and mass transit bill. That bill contained funding for a road
that would connect Altoona to Interstate 80.     A16



Louisiana's Governor is on the stump again, campaigning to hold his seat as the
state economy suffers from oil industry problems and its unemployment rate at
14.7 percent, highest in the nation.    A16

Washington and Oregon are defying the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which
wants to test civil defense workers' ability to deliver services following a
nuclear attack and to monitor public attitudes during an international crisis.
    A21



The 59th annual Academy Awards were presented last night. ''Platoon,'' a movie
about the Vietnam war, was named best film and received a total of four Oscars.
Top acting awards went to Paul Newman and a newcomer, Marlee Matlin.    C14



Accord near on AIDS test patent

    A16



Air Force assailed on program

    A25



Children swell ranks of homeless

    A28



Hart gains Texans' endorsement

    B8



WASHINGTON TALK    B6



New Yorkers and capital art

Gephardt, Hart and issues

REGIONAL    B1-5



In New York City, blacks lack power that they have achieved other American
cities, despite this city's reputation for political pluralism and openness. In
New York, no black has been elected to a citywide office.    B1

A counterspy described his life as a double agent who helped capture a Soviet
spy last August. Rejecting comparisons to James Bond, he said his Federal
controllers had reneged on promises of money, a job and other rewards.    B1



A contractor was sentenced to four years in prison and fined $500,000 for
evading income taxes on work that he did for the city. The man, Carl A. Capasso,
is a major construction contractor for New York City.    B3



A decision in the Baby M case is to be announced today. When it is, legal
scholars across the country will be watching for answers to fundamental
questions raised by the custody dispute.    B2



A federal racketeering trial began in Newark in which 21 men are accused as the
hierarchy of the New Jersey faction of the Lucchese organized crime family. The
trial is expected to last for almost a year.    B3



A judge's dismissal of drug cases recently has been criticized by the Brooklyn
District Attorney. The judge contends that undercover police officers were not
qualified to determine whether the substances sold to them were drugs.    B3



Cuomo seeks emergency bill

    B2



12th Atlantic City casino opens

    B3



Stickers used as parking deterrents

    B3



Newspaper contracts expire

    D35


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

''PLATOON'' WINS OSCAR AS THE BEST MOVIE OF 1986

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 30


''Platoon,'' a movie that was turned down by every major studio, was named best
picture of the year tonight.

An infantrymen's view of the frustration and pain of the Vietnam War,
''Platoon'' was the biggest winner at the 59th annual Academy Awards
presentations in the Los Angeles Music Center.

The awards were more evenly distributed than they have been in recent years.
''Platoon'' won four, while ''Hannah and Her Sisters'' and ''A Room With a
View'' were runners-up with three Oscars each.

Oliver Stone, who wrote the script for ''Platoon'' more than a decade ago but
could find no studio willing to buy the harrowing tale of combat, took home his
own golden statue for best director. ''Platoon'' also won for film editing and
sound.

Calling his award a ''Cinderella ending,'' Mr. Stone said he felt his Oscar was
''really acknowledging the Vietnam veteran'' and the fact that such a war
''should never ever in our lifetimes happen again. If it does, then those
American boys died over there for nothing.''

Newman Is Best Actor

In the evening's most sentimental moment, the Academy finally gave Paul Newman
his Oscar. Nominated six times previously for best actor without winning the
award, Mr. Newman was honored for his performance as Fast Eddie Felson, a
retired pool shark, in ''The Color of Money.'' In 1961, 25 Academy ballots ago,
Mr. Newman won his second nomination as the young Fast Eddie in ''The Hustler.''

When he was given an honorary award by the Academy last year, the kind of award
that usually goes to elderly or seriously ill performers, Mr. Newman quipped,
''I'm especially grateful that this did not come wrapped as a gift certificate
to Forest Lawn.''

Mr. Newman was not at the Music Center tonight. He told friends that since he
had been in the audience six times and lost, he thought he would see what
happened if he stayed away.

For her performance as a deaf woman who refuses to use speech in ''Children of a
Lesser God,'' Marlee Matlin became the fourth actress to win an Oscar for her
first screen appearance. Miss Matlin, who is deaf, signed her thank-you speech.
She seemed genuinely surprised by her victory.

Caine and Wiest Are Winners

Both supporting-performance Oscars went to players in Woody Allen's ''Hannah and
Her Sisters.'' Michael Caine won best supporting actor for his performance as a
man in love with his sister-in-law in ''Hannah.''

Dianne Wiest won the supporting-actress award for her role as the most
outrageous of the sisters.

Miss Wiest, who had already pocketed all the critics' honors for her performance
in Woody Allen's bittersweet family comedy, was grinning widely as she walked
onto the stage.

''Gee, this is not what I imagined it would be, in the bathtub.'' she said. Now
making her fourth movie with Mr. Allen, she thanked the cast and crew of
''Hannah,'' her parents, and ''my dearest friend,'' her agent, Sam Cohn.

Mr. Caine was not present at the ceremony.

Mr. Allen, who never attends the Oscar ceremonies because he doesn't believe in
competition for prizes, won, despite himself, an Oscar for his original
screenplay for ''Hannah.''

Dutch Film Gets Award

The foreign-language award was won by Fons Rademakers's film ''The Assault,'' a
Dutch movie in which a son learns why his family was murdered by the Nazis.

''Platoon,'' which was produced by Hemdale and distributed by Orion, was not the
only independently produced and financed film to win honors tonight.

''A Room With a View,'' which had tied with ''Platoon'' for the most
nominations, with eight, won for art direction, costumes, and Ruth Prawer
Jhabvala's screenplay based on material from another medium. Adapted from E. M.
Forster's novel about romance in Edwardian England, the $3 million ''Room With a
View'' is an opulent-looking comedy of manners about the perils of falling in
love. Financing was obtained from half a dozen sources by the film's producer,
Ismail Merchant.

Orion, which produced ''Hannah and Her Sisters,'' is a mini-major or second-tier
studio, while Cinecom, which distributed ''A Room With a View,'' is a small New
York distributor. Orion was the big winner among studios, with seven awards.

The weakening hold of the major studios was symbolized last year by the
victories of William Hurt as best actor in ''Kiss of the Spider Woman'' and
Geraldine Page as best actress in ''The Trip to Bountiful.''

Little for Major Studios

Tonight, the major studios were limited mostly to technical awards. 20th
Century-Fox took three awards for its two horror films, ''The Fly'' and
''Aliens.'' Jeff Goldblum's transformation into a monster in ''The Fly'' won for
makeup, while ''Aliens'' took sound-effects editing and visual effects.

Warner Bros took two awards. Herbie Hancock won for his original score for
''Round Midnight'' and Chris Menges won for cinematography for ''The Mission.''
Two years ago, Mr. Menges won for ''The Killing Fields.''

Paramount got one major award, for Miss Matlin's performance, and for best song
for ''Take My Breath Away,'' from ''Top Gun.'' M-G-M, Universal, and Columbia
did not win anything.

There was a tie for documentary feature between ''Down and Out in America,''
about the homeless, and ''Artie Shaw: Time Is All You Got,'' a biography of the
musician. ''Women - For America, For the World,'' an anti-nuclear-arms film, won
in the short documentary category.

The award for an animated short film went to ''A Greek Tragedy,'' the story of
three statues who get tired of holding up a temple. ''Precious Images,'' a
collage of hundreds of clips from movies, won the Oscar for live-action short
film.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Oscar winners and presenters (AP)

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 403 words




War Stories

To its credit, the eight-year-old Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater produced, in
cooperation with Joseph Papp's New York Shakespeare Festival, the acclaimed
Vietnam drama ''Tracers.''

This month, Vetco, as the company refers to itself, has presented a series of
staged readings on Monday evenings, the New Works Reading Series. Yesterday's
final reading in the series was postponed to today because the 19 cast members
felt no one would pass up the Academy Awards program to attend the reading.
Translation: They probably wanted to watch the televised ceremonies themselves.

Coincidentally, a televised ceremony is what tonight's reading is about. The
play is ''The Grunt Childe,'' by Lawrence O'Sullivan. It is an impression of the
Vietnam war seen through the court-martial of Private Childe, which is televised
from Saigon for an American audience. In the play, set in a television studio,
the news media, the military and the politicians are pitted against one another.

Thomas Bird, Vetco's founder and artistic director, directed this reading. It
will begin at 7 P.M. After the reading the audience, the cast, the director and
the playwright will discuss the work. Wine and cheese will be served. Admission,
free. The reading will take place at the American Theater for Actors on the
second floor of the Chernuchin Theater, 314 West 54th Street. Information:
664-0023.

Father and Son Night

Boris Brott is a Canadian conductor who has crossed the border specifically to
make his Carnegie Hall debut tonight at the Oratorio Society concert. And for
Mr. Brott the specialness of the occasion is spiced by the fact that he will
conduct the Oratorio Society's New York premiere of a composition, ''Songs of
Contemplation,'' by his father, Alexander Brott.

The evening's second premiere is Srul Irving Glick's choral symphony, ''The Hour
has Come.'' In observance of the 255th anniversary of Haydn's birth, Mr. Brott
will also conduct the society's performance of Haydn's Lord Nelson Mass. The
program will include the singing in Hebrew of ''Chichester Psalms,'' by Leonard
Bernstein, under whom Mr. Brott was assistant conductor at the New York
Philharmonic from 1969 to 1971.

The Oratorio Society, now 114 years old, was presided over for 30 years by
Andrew Carnegie. In 1891, Mr. Carnegie built the hall that bears his name to
provide the society with an auditorium of its own.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Move to Delay 'Platoon' Video

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 113 words

DATELINE: STAMFORD, Conn., March 30


Vestron Inc., a leading video concern, said today that it was seeking a court
order to restrain the Hemdale Film Corporation from distributing or releasing
two hit movies, ''Platoon'' and ''Hoosiers,'' in such markets as home video and
cable television.

In a complaint filed in a California court, Vestron said Hemdale was to deliver
each film to Vestron within 30 days of its theatrical release. Vestron would
then wait six months before distributing a video cassette. To date, Vestron
said, Hemdale has refused to make delivery.

''Platoon,'' a graphic portrait of an infantry unit in Vietnam, was released
last December and has already grossed more than $100 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 295 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1987, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DESIGNS SOUGHT FOR NEW WOMEN'S PARK

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD D. MAY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 35, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 602 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 30


One hundred thirty-nine years ago, in a small village in upstate New York, a
convention was held to demand equality for women. Today, on that site, known as
the ''birthplace of the women's rights movement,'' a coin laundry stands.

But not for much longer. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and National Park
Service officials this afternoon announced the opening of a design competition
for the Women's Rights National Historical Park in Seneca Falls, N.Y.

''We're talking about a new idea,'' said Mr. Moynihan, the New York Democrat.
''Making a park where something happened.''

The land and most of the buildings that make up the park have already been
purchased and dedicated under a bill sponsored by Mr. Moynihan and passed in
late 1980.

'More Like a Historical District'

''It's not the usual kind of park,'' Mr. Moynihan said at a news conference by
the Suffragette Monument in the Capitol. ''You might think of it more like a
historical district'' along the Seneca River in downtown Seneca Falls, in New
York's Finger Lakes region.

Only two side walls and three-fourths of the roof remain of the original
Wesleyan Chapel, a Methodist church where on July 19 and 20, 1848, more than 300
women and men assembled for the first formal ''Convention to discuss the social,
civil and religious condition and rights of woman.''

A few days later, the women met again at the home of Mary Ann McClintock, where
they drafted a Declaration of Sentiments asserting that ''all men and women are
created equal'' and demanding 18 specific rights.

Sixty-eight women and 32 men signed that document. Many others, however, felt
that in calling for women to vote, the Declaration had gone too far.

A 72-Year Wait

In fact, it would be another 72 years before American women could cast ballots
in an election. But the Declaration of Sentiments has been credited with
creating the agenda for the women's rights movement.

The McClintock House was acquired by the park two years ago and is also
scheduled for restoration.

The design competition is being sponsored by the National Endowment for the
Arts. The idea, according to Adele Chatfield-Taylor, director of the Endowment's
Design Arts Program, is to ''create a physical place which preserves the remains
of the Wesleyan Chapel and celebrates the events of 1848.'' The design must
include open space, a visitors' center and parking.

The contest is open to all United States citizens and permanent residents and
carries a first-place prize of $15,000, a second-place prize of $10,000 and up
to 10 $1,000 honorable mention awards. Entries must be submitted by July 1.

Ms. Chatfield-Taylor noted that the design for other significant American
structures, including the Capitol, the White House and the Vietnam War Memorial,
were chosen in similar competitions.

In the years since the 1848 Convention, the Wesleyan Chapel has served as a
meeting hall, an opera house, a skating rink, an automobile dealership and,
finally, a laundry.

The park's superintendent, Judy Hart, said that completion of the women's park
would cost ''a minimum of $4 million to $5 million'' and that the Wesleyan
Chapel would be opened within three years.

A controversy over the chapel design appears to be already brewing. Mr. Moynihan
challenged the Park Service's contention that no one could know what it
originally looked like and that the restored building design should therefore be
an ''interpretation'' of its significance.

''I don't want to see a symbolic representation of the spirit of 1848,'' the
Senator said. ''I want to see that Methodist church restored.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
