
                               1 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 898 words


AROUND THE NATION;
Supreme Court Affirms Stay for Georgia Killer

JACKSON, Ga., June 30 (AP) - The United States Supreme Court, with Justice
William J. Brennan Jr. absent, today voted 8 to 0 to confirm a lower court's
stay of the execution of Jack Potts.

Mr. Potts, who had been locked for two days in a ''death watch'' cell only 20
feet from Georgia's electric chair, was promptly moved back to a regular death
row cellblock. He was to have been executed tomorrow.

Word of the decision was relayed to the 35-year-old inmate at 1:45 P.M. by his
brother, John William Potts of Marietta, Ga. Within the hour, Mr. Potts was back
at the prison 50 miles south of Atlanta.

The High Court blocked the petition of the State of Georgia to overturn the stay
and cleared the way for the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Fifth
District to hear arguments for the first time on a habeas corpus petition. No
date has been set for that hearing.

Federal Judge William O'Kelley of Atlanta rejected that habeas petition Friday,
ruling that Mr. Potts had waived his right to further Federal court review when
he withdrew an appeal initiated June 4. It could be weeks before Mr. Potts,
sentenced to die for the 1975 kidnapping and murder of a Roswell, Ga., mechanic,
Michael Priest, has his day in the appeals court. Robert Stubbs, a spokesman for
the state Attorney General's office, said there were no plans to ask the Supreme
Court to reconsider.

Copper Workers Prepare For Strike in 8 States

PHOENIX, June 30 (AP) - An estimated 39,000 copper workers prepared to go on
strike today after negotiations between 26 unions and seven companies broke down
in a cost-of-living dispute. Union leaders unanimously rejected all current
industry contract offers as inadequate.

The only bargaining session expected was scheduled by Anaconda-Arco for July 9
in Spokane and then only if some other company put a new offer on the table,
said Cass Alvin, spokesman for the United Steelworkers of America.

The steelworkers union is the bargaining leader for the union coalition that has
been conducting talks here, in Tucson, and in Albuquerque, N.M. Three-year
contracts expired last midnight with Kennecott, Phelps Dodge, Anaconda-Arco,
Asarco, Inspiration Consolidated and Miami Copper, and a contract with the Magma
Copper Company was to expire at midnight tomorrow.

The contracts covered workers in Montana, New Jersey, Arizona, Washington, Utah,
Nevada, New Mexico, Texas and Maryland.  Disagreement on cost-of-living
adjustments was said to be the major item blocking agreement. The unions have
demanded pay and benefit increases of about 95 cents an hour over three years
for workers who now average $10.23 hourly. The companies offered increases of
about 70 cents.

More Skin Surgery Is Due For Pryor in California

SHERMAN OAKS, Calif., June 30 (AP) - Richard Pryor, recuperating from near-fatal
burns, will undergo more skin graft surgery Wednesday after doctors determine
that about three-fourths of last week's grafts have taken, a hospital spokesman
said today.

But even if Wednesday's surgery is successful the 39-year-old comedian, who was
taken off the critical list last week, will face ''at least a few more'' skin
graft operations and spend two or three more months in the hospital, said Gary
Swaye, assistant executive director of Sherman Oaks Community Hospital.

Even then, he said, Mr. Pryor may still have to undergo plastic surgery for the
burns he suffered in an accident June 9 at his Northridge home. He said that Mr.
Pryor's face was healing well and that he apparently would not need facial
grafts.

Shrimpers in Boatlift Sign to Get Vessels Back

MIAMI, June 30 (AP) - A dozen Georgia shrimpers whose boats were seized in the
Cuba-to-Key West boatlift signed release agreements with the Customs Office in
Miami today and headed for Key West to pick up their vessels.

Thirty-four of the 61 Georgia boats seized are from Thunderbolt, according to
Mayor Michael J. Cesaroni of the fishing town. Mr.  Cesaroni, four of whose own
boats were seized, said the impoundment had severely hurt the town's economy.

The customs service agreed to release the boats Friday on condition that the
shrimpers leave the red seizure stickers on the boats, which are still liable to
legal action.

Garwood Plea That War Was Undeclared Is Rejected

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., June 30 (AP) - A military judge today rejected defense
arguments that Pfc. Robert Garwood of the Marine Corps cannot be prosecuted for
deserting in time of war because the United States never declared war against
North Vietnam.

The argument came as the defense filed pretrial motions before the 34-year-old
Indianan faces a court-martial on charges of desertion and collaboration with
the enemy in Vietnam.

Vaughan Taylor, a Garwood attorney, argued today that since Vietnam was not a
Congressionally declared war, penalties for actions during the conflict could
not come under wartime statutes.

Desertion in time of war is a capital offense, but the death penalty has been
ruled out in the Garwood case and he could receive a maximum sentence of life in
prison. ''The Vietnam conflict was not a time of war, as Congress intended that
phrase,'' Mr. Taylor told Col. R.E. Switzer, the military judge, who rejected
that argument.

National news appears on pages A12-17; political news on page B6.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION A FIGHT FOR ACADEMIC FREEDOM

BYLINE: By GENE I. MAEROFF

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 776 words


NICHOLS COLLEGE in Massachusetts did not permit a faculty member to complete the
academic year after he complained to the student newspaper and to the
institution's trustees about being denied tenure.

Philander Smith College in Arkansas dismissed two faculty members, each with at
least six years of service, after they appeared before the trustees to present
the grievances of students who had boycotted classes in protest of the condition
of campus facilities.

Olivet College in Michigan dismissed a faculty member without a hearing in the
middle of a semester for allegedly failing to conduct one of his three courses
satisfactorily.

These are apparently only a few of many recent violations of academic freedom on
the campuses of the nation's institutions of higher education, according to the
American Association of University Professors. In these situations, however, the
cases were investigated by the association, which voted last week at its annual
meeting to censure the three colleges.

Despite much progress in shoring up the concept of academic freedom, the right
to due process of faculty members at some colleges and universities still seems
to depend on the whims of administrators and trustees. The professors'
association has led the fight to convince institutions that they should follow
prescribed rules in their treatment of faculty members.

The association has no official power to compel an institution to change its
policies, but a vote of censure is meant to inform the public that an
institution is not observing generally recognized principles affecting academic
employment. A school must show that it has remedied the abuses in order to be
removed from the censure list.

''Getting trustees and legislatures to accept the judgment of one's peers on
competence to teach is a very important achievement of the association,'' said
Jordan E. Kurland, associate general secretary of the association and head of
its academic freedom investigation staff.

Some academicians think that moves to protect faculty members are especially
important now for two reasons: the growing pressure on colleges and universities
to hold down costs, and what some perceive as a shift to the right in national
attitudes.

Faculty members at more than 75 percent of the nation's institutions of higher
education are not covered by union contracts and have only good faith to protect
their right to due process.

While members of the professoriate do not have to worry as much as they did in
former years about losing jobs because of their political beliefs, the
association's case files show that this concern is not very far in the past.

All three of the institutions removed from the censure list at this year's
annual meeting - Marshall University in West Virginia, Ohio State University and
the University of California -were censured in the early 1970's for their
treatment of faculty members with controversial political positions.

At Marshall, the problem revolved around a geology professor who had missed
classes to participate in a protest against the Vietnam War, and at Ohio State
the dispute centered on a history professor who had burned his draft card in
front of one of his classes. Both institutions finally agreed to revise faculty
regulations in a way that the association says will better protect nontenured
teachers.

The third case was one of the most publicized of the last decade, and the fact
that the file was closed with so little fanfare may be a sign of the times.

Angela Y. Davis, a philosophy teacher at the University of California at Los
Angeles, lost her job in 1970 when the Board of Regents intervened to block her
reappointment. Miss Davis, an avowed Communist, had attracted wide attention by
her fiery speeches at offcampus rallies in behalf of militant causes.

After a detailed investigation, the professors' association concluded that
''substantial efforts must be made to reestablish at the University of
California the unquestioned freedom that is essential to a great university.''

Now, after eight years on the association's censure list, the University of
California is being removed because its governing rules have been revised to
preclude the Regents from interfering with appointments and promotions made
locally by the chancellors at the system's nine campuses. The association said
that it also has assurances from the university that, if Miss Davis wants to
reapply for a job, ''her qualifications for a position would be the only proper
standard without regard for incidents of 10 years ago.'' Miss Davis is now the
Communist Party's candidate for Vice President of the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 1, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GRUELING TOUR KEEPS BOB HOPE IN MOTION

BYLINE: By JENNIFER DUNNING

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1588 words

DATELINE: DEVON, Pa.


''LADIES and Gentlemen, Mr. Bob Hope!'' Men, women and children rise to their
feet in one surging tide of summer polyester and lazy anticipation. A moment
later, the man who has kept America laughing for about a half

century strolls down the ramp to the stage of the Valley Forge Music Fair,
pausing to shake hands as he goes. Once on stage, he mumbles something about
pickpockets, and the audience chortles softly. He peers into the crowd for a few
moments, and then explains why he was hired:

''They figure this is an election year, and you'd like to see a comedian who
isn't running for anything.''

The audience roars.  The engagement was the first stop in an eight-week summer
tour that has brought Mr. Hope and Suzanne Somers to the Westbury (L.I.) Music
Fair this week, through Sunday.

It is an exhausting itinerary, but that is not all the comedian has planned for
the summer. ''I've got to show you my schedule, darlin', you'll love it,'' he
said to a visitor the other day, tilting into his hotel bedroom to retrieve a
sheaf of neatly typed pages listing benefit golf tournaments, television taping
dates for a September show, college homecomings and personal appearances that
have him zigzagging across the United States, with London and Moscow thrown in
for good measure. ''Just keeps jamming up.''

The phone rings constantly. A hotel desk clerk appears with a gift made by an
inmate of the Philadelphia Home for the Incurably Ill, which Mr. Hope had
visited earlier in the week. The comedian tears off the wrapping and examines
the glass-studded brandy snifter with intense interest, barely reading the
institution's accompanying note. A radio station calls for an interview, and he
throws himself onto his bed, settling in as happily as a kid with a new comic
book. The boy who startd out as a vaudeville monologuist at banquets and fairs
in Cleveland in the 1920's and went on to fame in the theater, radio, movies and
television, is still going strong at the age of 77.

''I'm sorry Ford isn't running. I know he's thinking about it. I was over at his
new house in Palm Springs. Every room is oval.''

The jokes are comfortably familiar. ''I talk about golf, and flying, and my
health and other people's health. And politics. People buy sex all the way, but
I try to stay away from a lot of it. I don't think my humor has changed much. It
might be a little more sophisticated because you can do things today. You never
thought you'd see a headline with 'The Best Little Whorehouse.' That gives you
an idea of the sophistication that has attacked our country.''

''Valley Forge is a sentimental place with me. One of the toughest Christmas
shows I ever played. I remember Washington kneeling down in prayer. He'd just
gotten off the Schuylkill Expressway. On the Schuylkill, you can get from South
Philadelphia to Valley Forge in 20 minutes. Whether you want to or not.''

Mr. Hope likes to work in topical jokes. ''Anything local like that, they know
you've thought about them, about their scene.'' There was the time a couple of
summers ago in Fargo, N.D., when he found he was riding in a hearse, the only
limousine in town. ''I told the audience there, and it was one of biggest laughs
you ever heard.  I hope I can remember it tonight, because I want to tell that.
They love that, when the story's on you.''

Women hug themselves and rock back and forth with laughter, nodding at friends
and giggling behind their hands at some of the earthier one-liners. The men
chortle, then howl as the joke builds, shaking their heads in admiration. The
children gaze at the comedian, joining in this adult ritual with slightly
bemused smiles.

Mr. Hope is the patient near-innocent acted on by the bewildering forces of
modern life. The traffic policeman who pulls up beside him on the Los Angeles
Freeway is riding sidesaddle and threatens to write a ''tickey-poo.'' The golf
caddie smokes his divots. Jews, Irishmen and a black, an Arab and even a Pole
prance intrepidly through his repertory.

But the comedian does not have to say a word to make people laugh.  He strolls
back and forth across the stage deep in thought, the microphone wire trailing
behind. At a backward lean several degrees short of verticality, his shoehorn
chin tucked into his collar, Mr.  Hope is a master of provocative calm. Those
black, laser-point eyes secretly sweep the audience, drinking in the variety of
reactions to a casual finger pop or two. A wave of the hand to Jeffrey Clark,
his imperturbable conductor, then he changes his mind a few bars into a
hip-swishing version of ''Buttons and Bows'' and starts into a description of
playing golf with presidents, breaking up the band in the process.

''If you just sit and brood, I'll work in the nude. I do a lot of charity shows.
What the hell. I play all the time anyway. These shows get me up. A little love,
a little laugh every day, and you're way ahead of the world.''

He is his work. The offhanded national monument and the man who hurls tennis
balls down a hotel hallway for his dog, Toby, are one smooth-running whole. He
pores over a scrapbook sent him by a fan in Jenkintown. ''This is incredible.
Isn't this something? Look, Bob Hope's commercials for Pepsodent. These are the
openings I used to use on my radio show: 'This is Bob (Evergreen) Hope telling
you that if you use Pepsodent, your teeth will always be evergrins.' Sorry.
Here's Paulette Goddard. She caddied for me one day. There's my grandfather.
Lived to be a month short of 100 in England.''

In ruddy good health himself, Mr. Hope has no plans to retire.  ''That would be
dumb and dull. Some doctors at the Baylor School of Medicine, which has a big
heart school, invited me down to say a few things. Laughter opens up the
arteries, you know. I tell people to keep that in mind the rest of the show. And
I get a lot of therapy out of it myself. There's nothing like doing your work
well, and you like to practice your art with an audience.''

He has his favorite comics, among them Shecky Greene, Jackie Gleason, Johnny
Carson and Steve Martin. Every day, he calls his gag writer in Los Angeles to
talk about what's ''hot.'' ''I guess the New York transit strike is a little
bygone?'' he asks a visiting New Yorker, a little wistfully, looking ahead to
Westbury.

There are daily golf games. ''My beauty secret.'' He'd like to do a show for the
American hostages in Teheran, but his private negotiations here broke off when
Iranian diplomatic officials were sent home. ''If I only had the time, there's a
film about Walter Winchell that I want to do badly. I mean goodly.''

Is he the millionaire tightwad, the entertainer who drew boos from captive
audiences in Vietnam and the absentee father portrayed in a recent interview?
''Those soldiers were not commanded to go to my shows,'' he says angrily.
''That's the biggest lie of all time.  Booed! Can you imagine those marvelous
kids booing me in Vietnam? My God, they'd give you religious medals, they were
so grateful. We traced the source of these things, and they said it was a big
lie.  Funny, because this guy that wrote it was such a nice guy.''

Does he, as the interview suggested, find it extremely difficult to talk about
personal things? ''Certain things you don't want to talk about.''

Once heckled by young people who disagreed with his stand on Vietnam, Mr. Hope
is now championed by the young, whose hero, Woody Allen, is an acknowledged fan.
''I had nothing to do with the Vietnam War. I just did my regular thing. And the
things they were 'anti' for, I was, too. I saw the kids in the hospital. I've
always had young audiences. Last year, the year before, I was selected as No. 1
guy in Seventeen magazine. I was shocked. What have I got that Travolta hasn't?
Their parents must nudge 'em or something.''

''I watched 'Paleface' on television the other night. Sometimes I get a funny
feeling I've a son I never met. I just finished 30 solid years on television,
and before that I was on radio for 12. Both NBC. I got everything I need, and
all because I saw the president of NBC coming out of that motel.''

Why has the appeal lasted? ''I've been coming at 'em for a long time.'' Mike
Sullivan, an otherwise blase taxi driver, remembers the day Mr. Hope came to Chu
Lai, Vietnam. ''Him and eight girls. We watched him in the pouring rain. It was
like another world. Here was the United States in front of you for an hour.''

For Cheryl Griffin, a telephone-switchboard operator, the comedian and his wife
of 48 years, Dolores, who also appears in the show, are family. ''I was an art
major in college, and I'm making a card for him. It'll say, 'What do Superman,
Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny, the Good Fairy and Good King Wencelaus all have
in common?' Then you turn the page, and it says, 'They're all married to Dolores
Hope.' ''

A small boy, waiting in the parking lot for the Hope entourage, whistles the
comedian's theme song, ''Thanks for the Memory,'' into the night. Why does
everyone like Mr. Hope so much? Spiro Anthony, 11, deliberates for a moment.
''He knows how to tell a joke.'' More deliberation. ''I know some.'' Every joke
had an ethnic punch line.

Gail Hoke, an employee at General Electric, recalled: ''Ten years ago, they
built a children's clinic near here, and I read in the paper that Bob Hope had
been there to dedicate it. What did he get out of it? There was no advance
publicity. Years ago, people just went to be entertained. Now I think they're
thanking him. Very few people have given as much as he has, and if someone has
that need to be up there, then you want to give something back.'' There was a
standing ovation the night Mr. Hoke attended the performance here.  ''Who do you
stand for, if not Bob Hope?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bob Hope

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAELI PEACE MOVEMENT LONGS FOR ARAB COUNTERPART

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1326 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, July 1


The peace movement in Israel, which for more than two years has been calling for
an end to the occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, is finding that it
faces obstacles not only in the Israeli Government's hard-line policies but also
in the lack of a similar movement of moderation on the Palestinian side.

On March 7, 1978, 350 army officers in the combat reserves signed an open letter
calling on Prime Minister Menachem Begin to halt Jewish settlement in Arab
territory and seek to end military rule over more than a million Arabs. Since
then the movement has grown to the point where 22 percent of Israelis polled
recently expressed support for its aims. Demonstrations draw thousands,
including some of the most distinguished intellectuals in the country.

But among the leaders of the movement, called Peace Now, there is deep
frustration at the failure of any Palestinians of note to stand up in opposition
to terrorism and in favor of Israel's right to exist.

''If only there were a Peace Now movement on the other side,'' said Michael
Bruno, an economist at Hebrew University, ''if there were a group of moderates
who would be willing to come out. When you talk to them in private they say, 'We
agree, we should, but we can't do it, it's dangerous,' and so on.

'Hard to Face the Criticism'

''The fact that there's no such group on the other side,'' he said, ''makes our
life very difficult because it's very hard to face the criticism: 'You're
moderates, you say all these things, but where are your counterparts on the
other side?' This has really been a major problem of the liberals in Israel ever
since '67.''

The difficulty has been compounded by a resolution passed on June 1 in Damascus,
the Syrian capital, at a congress of Al Fatah, the main guerrilla group in the
Palestine Liberation Organization, vowing ''to liquidate the Zionist entity
politically, economically, militarily, culturally and ideologically.'' It
undermined the conciliatory message of the Israeli liberals and gave an arguing
point to the Israeli rightists.

''They say, 'You're a naive academic and you're bringing destruction to this
country,'' explained Janet Aviad, a sociologist at Hebrew University. ''They
say, 'You're a bunch of people floating in the air. The empirical realities are
that the Arabs hate us, they'll always hate us and the only way to talk to them
is force.'

''Then you plead with them on rational grounds,'' she continued, that the
occupation ''is wrecking our country, it's wrecking us internally. Secondly,
according to Begin's plan, ironically enough, you have a binational state here.
You actually have a million and a half Arabs - so where's the Jewish state? It's
not a Jewish state anymore.

'You Bunch of Foolish Kids'

''Then they throw the Middle East at you,'' she went on, ''and they say, 'Look
at it: There's Iran and there's Iraq and there's the Arabs, they hate each other
and all they understand is force, so what are you telling us, you bunch of
foolish kids? You're really up the creek.' I don't know of any other country
where people have less faith in their own survival. Vietnam is peanuts compared
to this.''

Nevertheless, Peace Now has continued to attract a range of support from
moderate to left-wing Jews, mostly those of European and American backgrounds
with higher education, rarely from the poorer segments of the population. Ten
days ago, after a week of demonstrations demanding that the Government step down
and call new elections, a rally in Tel Aviv drew a crowd of 40,000, according to
estimates in the Israeli press.

But if the Government is unresponsive, and if the Palestinians display no
moderation, why continue the protest?  ''People are doing it to be able to sleep
at night,'' explained Deddi Zucker, an educational researcher at the Van Leer
Institute in Jerusalem. ''I don't want to be asked in a few years, 'Where were
you when this bunch of people were doing all these things?' ''

'Corrupting, Immoral' Occupation

Miss Aviad, who came from New York eight years ago, said: ''As an immigrant, I
would have a very hard time staying here if there weren't a Peace Now movement.
You come here with the idea of building a better society in some way, and I
don't think the conditions are available to work on any of the things I came
here to work on. You can't really worry about cultural development and Jewish
values and religious changes and all of those things if you're in the middle of
an occupation that objectively speaking is just corrupting, and in my opinion
immoral.''

Peace Now's position has been carefully drafted as a common denominator of
moderate thinking to attract the broadest possible support among Israelis; the
stress is on patriotism, Zionism and Israeli security, just as the 1978
officers' letter made an impact because of its signers' credentials as
combatants on Israel's behalf.

In opposing Jewish settlements in occupied lands, for example, the movement
couches its arguments in terms of the interests of Israelis, not Palestinians,
contending that settlements impose preconditions on negotiations, provoke
increased radicalism by the Arabs, harm the peace process with Egypt, deepen the
hostility of West Bank and Gaza residents, cost huge sums that could help
bolster a flagging economy and ''lead to the debasement of Israel's moral
character, create arrogance and lead to unethical actions.''

Israel's Security Is Main Concern

''A state with an unstable economy cannot maintain a modern army,'' the position
paper declares, ''and a state with an embittered society will eventually be
witness to the erosion of the army as well. Peace Now has never demanded a
return to the borders of '67 nor the creation of a Palestinian state. The
movement's main concern is the security of the state of Israel.''

Consequently, it has few parallels with the American antiwar movement of the
1960's and '70's. Although it contains extreme leftists whose differences with
the moderates create constant tension, Peace Now as a whole has shunned radical
positions such as support for the P.L.O. or for conscientious objection to
military service.

In the spring of 1979, for example, when the military government temporarily
closed Bir Zeit University on the West Bank following a series of pro-P.L.O.
demonstrations, leading figures in Peace Now declined to sign a public statement
opposing the closure because they felt it would identify them with P.L.O.
interests.

Hoping for moderation from the Palestinian side, the movement has encouraged
moderation on the Israeli side, pitting itself against the more influential
religious zeal that regards the West Bank as Godgiven land, belonging to the
Jewish people since the days of Abraham.

'They Turn Land Into an Idol'

The settlers, Miss Aviad contended, ''would have us translate Zionism into how
many settlements and how many pieces of land. They turn land into an idol,
either for secular chauvinist reasons or messianic reasons. We're saying that
there is another translation of Zionism in 1980. In the 1930's and 1940's it
might have been to put up towers and fences. In this time it might be to try to
make peace and build internally.''

Peace Now has called for negotiations with any group on the Palestinian side,
including the P.L.O., that accepts Israel's existence. But none do, and it is
this lack of response from the other side that keeps cropping up in
conversations with the movement's leaders, who recall past Arab rejections - of
the 1937 Peel Commission's proposal for partition of Palestine, for example, and
the United Nations' partition plan of 1947, after which, in 1948, Arab armies
attacked Israel only hours after it gained independence and lost much of what
they would have been awarded.

''The Palestinians are the same as Begin,'' remarked Omri Padan, an originator
of the officers' letter and spokesman for Peace Now.  ''They say, 'Never, never,
never.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of protestors

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

7 THAI FISHERMAN JAILED FOR RAPING VIETNAM REFUGEES

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 1


Seven Thai fishermen have been sentenced to prison terms for boarding a boat
carrying Vietnamese refugees, raping three of them and robbing more than 80.

Murder charges have also been filed in connection with the beheading of several
men among the refugees, but witnesses in the case obtained temporary asylum in
Malaysia and were not available to the court in Songkhla, in southern Thailand,
where the trial took place. The fishermen were sentenced to prison terms ranging
from 8 to 24 years.

The verdict and sentences reportedly mark the first punishment meted out in the
continuing wave of piracy, murder, rape and robbery of which refugees heading
for southern Thailand and northern Malaysia are victims.

Thailand, Malaysia and the three other members of the Association of Southeast
Asian nations - Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines - are preparing for a
possible meeting soon to discuss joint measures against what a senior Asian
diplomat described in a recent conversation as ''these obscenities that stain
our reputation.''

Abuses Cited by Red Cross

Last month, the International Committee of the Red Cross, in an appeal on behalf
of the ''boat people,'' estimated that ''one out of two Vietnamese refugees
falls a victim to pirates once or even several times while at sea and that 40
percent do not reach port alive.''

''It is highly necessary,'' the statement said, ''that states should realize
where their responsibilities lie and protect the unfortunate boat people from
pirates. Only governments, by coordinated action, can put an end to these
heinous crimes.''

A group of refugees in the large Songkhla camp who methodically question all
arrivals reported that 26 of the 27 boats that arrived there in the first half
of June had been assaulted by pirates.

The total number of assaults amounted to 138, since most of the boats had been
attacked repeatedly. Of the 340 women among the 976 passengers, 43 said that
they had been raped, many of them repeatedly.

During May, 41 boats reached the Songkhla camp, situated on the Gulf of Siam, of
which 36 had been attacked. Of 384 women, 126 said they had been raped.

In addition to the registration of incidents of piracy, the refugee group has
also prepared a series of reports in the form of open letters replete with
details of attacks and their victims as well as identification of pirate boats
and other evidence that could lead to the arrest of pirates. But, the group
complains, little official interest has been shown in the documents.

The accounts of the attacks, uncorroborated except by fellow victims, abound in
descriptions of savagery and sexual violence, kidnappings and murder.

Despite the prevalence of piracy, officials of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees reported that only four cases, including the one
concluded last week, were before the courts. The case just concluded is the only
one that has gone to trial.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words


AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood Calls a Refugee Hanoi Secret Police Chief

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., July 1 (AP) - A masked Vietnamese refugee who testified
before a Congressional subcommittee last week is the former head of North
Vietnam's secret police and ordered torture and execution of prisoners during
the Vietnam War, lawyers for Pfc.  Robert R. Garwood of the Marines charged
today.

In a surprise request, Private Garwood's lawyers asked a military judge to order
the refugee held in this country until Private Garwood could confront him and
make a positive identification.

If the refugee is the man Private Garwood says he is, ''he will exonerate Pfc.
Garwood on desertion charges and other charges coming out of this case and give
credence to things Pfc. Garwood has been saying all along,'' a civilian
attorney, John C. Lowe, said.

The presiding judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, said he would not issue a subpoena for
the refugee. But he ordered the Defense Intelligence Agency to try to determine
the identity of the witness and to ''enable Pfc. Garwood to view and further
identify him, either through a lineup or a personal confrontation.''

The refugee, who was identified only as a Vietnamese undertaker, testified last
Friday in Washington before a Congressional subcommittee looking into the
possibility that Americans, dead or alive, may still be in Vietnam. He said he
knew of the remains of some 400 Americans and of two or three sightings of live
Americans in Vietnam in recent years.

Andrus Backs Agreement On Maine-Indian Dispute

WASHINGTON, July 1 (AP) - The Carter Administration today endorsed an $81
million settlement of a dispute between the state of Maine and Indian tribes
there over who owns some 12.5 million acres of the state.

Interior Secretary Cecil D. Andrus told the Senate Select Committee on Indian
Affairs that more work needed to be done on the settlement legislation to
resolve technical problems in the bill. However, he said the problems did not
appear severe enough to kill the measure.

''The Administration stands ready to work with all parties to obtain a mutually
satisfactory bill,'' Mr. Andrus said.  The bill before Congress was introduced
by Senators William S.  Cohen, Republican of Maine, and George Mitchell,
Democrat of Maine.  It is intended to resolve a land dispute that dates back to
treaties made in 1794 that now threaten the legal title to up to 60 percent of
Maine's land area.

In his testimony, Mr. Andrus said the Administration was concerned that language
in the bill could require financial commitments from the Federal Government
beyond the $81 million. But he said the Administration did not object to that
amount.

Woman Says She'll Marry Georgian on Death Row

ATLANTA, July 1 (UPI) - Diane Nicholson, who dated Jack Potts, the condemned
killer, a dozen years ago, announced today that she would divorce her husband
and marry Mr. Potts, who had been scheduled to die today in Georgia's electric
chair.

State prison officials said, however, that the marriage could not be permitted
under current prison regulations.  Mr. Potts, whose planned execution was put
off indefinitely by an appeal in the Federal courts, was removed from the
''death watch'' cell and put back on Death Row with 45 other condemned men at
the Georgia Diagnostic and Classification Center at Jackson.

Sara Englade, spokesman for the Offender Rehabilitation Department, said that a
convict was permitted to marry only if the intended bride was pregnant before he
was incarcerated.

Crack at Mount St. Helens Much Longer Than Believed

VANCOUVER, Wash., July 1 (AP) - A glowing red crack within the lava dome in
Mount St. Helens's crater is about 400 feet long, not 75 feet as previously
estimated, a Government geologist said today.

The crack is in a 600-foot wide dome of crusted lava that has bulged about 220
feet into the air within the crater of the volcano.  The crack has been observed
glowing ''cherry red'' with the incandescence of heated rocks the last four
mornings, said Tim Hait, geologist with the United States Geological Survey.

The discrepancy in the length of the crack was a miscalculation by an aerial
observer, Mr. Hait said. The crack covers about two-thirds of the width of the
lava dome. But the crack is not unusual and the dome is not growing, Mr. Hait
said.

Radiation Levels Rising, But Release Is Called Safe

MIDDLETOWN, Pa., July 1 - Federal officials monitoring the venting of krypton
from the Three Mile Island power plant today reported increased amounts of
radiation detected in the surrounding areas, but at levels still considered safe
for public health.

Officials of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission, the Public Health Service and Pennsylvania State University said
that small amounts of radioactive krypton had been picked up in populated areas,
such as Middletown, for the first time.

But the officials continued to stress that the amounts of radiation so far found
were almost tiny, that is far less than 1 percent of a maximum permissible dose
for an individual.

Officials of Metropolitan Edison, the utility that owns the crippled plant,
reported that venting was proceeding at rates as high as 500 cubic feet per
minute. More than 6,000 curies of the 53,000 curies of radioactive gas had been
vented by this afternoon. The purging is expected to take several more weeks.

Arrests Begun in Tampa In U.S. 'Sting' Operation

TAMPA, Fla., July 1 (AP) - The police began arresting 164 people today, ending a
16-month ''sting'' operation that recovered nearly $2.7 million worth of stolen
property, officials said.

The federally financed undercover operation was dubbed Gulfstream II, with
''Gulf'' an acronym for ''government uncovers local fences.''

Hillsborough County sheriff's deputies and Tampa police officers said they had
recovered 150 automobiles, 43 pickup trucks, 29 tractors, heavy grading
equipment, an airplane, a boat, a refrigerated meat truck, appliances, jewelry
and even state vehicle inspection stickers.

National news appears on pages 10 and 12-18; political news on page 10.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CARTER HAILS VETERANS OF VIETNAM IN SIGNING BILL FOR A WAR MEMORIAL

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 714 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 1


President Carter paid quiet tribute to Vietnam veterans today, saying that the
''painful'' divisions wrought by the war were ending.

''A nation healing is a good sight to behold from the Presidency,'' said Mr.
Carter, standing in the sun-drenched Rose Garden at a bill-signing ceremony
providing for the construction of a memorial to the 2.7 million Americans who
served in the Vietnam War.

Appearing before an audience of about 150 Congressmen, representatives of
veterans' organizations and men who served in Vietnam, several of whom were in
wheelchairs, Mr. Carter said softy:

''A long and painful process has brought us to this moment today.  Our nation
was divided by this war. For too long we tried to put that division behind us by
forgetting the Vietnam War and, in the process, we ignored those who bravely
answered their nation's call.

''Over the last two and a half years I have encouraged and I have been heartened
to witness an enormous change in the attitude of Americans towards those who
served in Vietnam. We are ready at last to acknowledge more deeply and also more
publicly the debt which we can never fully pay to those who served.''

'A Drop in the Bucket'

Mr. Carter's remarks were greeted by some in the audience with coolness. Robert
Muller, a crippled veteran who is executive director of Vietnam Veterans of
America, said after the ceremony that Mr.  Carter's comments were ''merely
words'' and that the Administration's programs involving Vietnam veterans were
''a drop in the bucket.''

''There has been a failure to meet the needs of Vietnam veterans,'' said Mr.
Muller, asserting that funds sought for job programs, education and counseling
were minimal.

In recent years Mr. Carter has been relatively silent on the issue of Vietnam
veterans' needs.  The design and construction of the two-acre memorial, which is
to be situated in Constitution Gardens, near the Lincoln Memorial, will cost
about $2.5 million, which is being raised entirely through donations. The
Federal Government was asked only to provide the land.

Although the memorial fund committee will shortly announce a competition for
designers and artists, the design concept for the memorial calls for a
landscaped setting with sculpture that will symbolize the experience of American
troops in Vietnam. The memorial will include the names of all 57,661 Americans
who died in the war.

''We do not seek to make any statement about the correctness of the war,'' said
Jan C. Scruggs, a former Vietnam infantryman who heads the memorial fund and
drive. ''Rather, by honoring those who sacrificed, we hope to provide a symbol
of national unity and reconciliation.''

Theme of 'Reconciliation'

''Reconciliation'' was the dominant theme at the ceremony at which several
speakers noted that the Senate had approved the memorial in a rare display of
total unanimity.

''The President's signature and the vote of the Senate are an outward and
visible sign of the reconciliation in this country, a sign that we now have
perspective about Vietnam, which makes it possible for us to resolve the
differences that divided us during the war,'' said Senator Charles McC. Mathias
Jr., Republican of Maryland who was the initial sponsor of the bill providing
land for the memorial.

Another speaker, Max Cleland, a Vietnam veteran and triple amputee who heads the
Veterans Administration, said: ''We do honor to those who have honored us. This
will say to all Vietnam veterans this nation cares and we remember.''

In his remarks, Mr. Carter raised the issue of the Vietnamese Government's
holding the bodies of 400 American servicemen. Pentagon officials recently told
a Congressional hearing that a former North Vietnamese mortician, who was
expelled last year because he was an ethnic Chinese, had seen the bodies as late
as 1977.

''We'll exert the fullest possible effort to account for all those lost and
still missing,'' said Mr. Carter.  Hours before the White House ceremony, the
Veterans Administration released a survey, conducted at a cost of $485,000 paid
to Louis Harris Associates, that found most Vietnam-era veterans feel they were
poorly treated upon returning home from the war, and that seven out of 10
Americans favor preferential hiring of veterans for Federal jobs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Young Should Register - Twice

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 603 words


Americans over the age of 20 can only hope that the four million younger men who
are about to be directed by President Carter to register this month for a
nonexistent military draft will do so, and without asking why. If a significant
number refuse to register, that would raise new doubts about the American
people's dedication to public service and to the defense of vital interests
abroad. And if they ask why they must make this demonstration of fealty, they
would expose a hollow, even cynical political exercise.

Do we need this registration of l9- and 20-year-old men? Only if we also need a
draft to fill the ranks of the armed forces. And do we now need a draft? Only if
America needs a standing force of more than 2 million and balks at paying the
$11 billion needed over five years to recruit and retain enough volunteers of
the desired quality.

The President, Congress and the military chiefs have not in fact faced up to
defining the right size of the armed forces except in relation to
''traditional'' numbers and what the budget traffic will bear. Even in those
terms, they have not fully and fairly assessed the all-volunteer force. They
have avoided debating the explosive issue of whether to revive a draft. And they
have never bothered to ask what kind of draft would be fair and therefore
acceptable to young Americans.

The four million postcards to be collected this month will not stimulate
recruitment or prepare the nation for emergency. No one could be called to duty
without a further act of Congress. And if the call ever came, the four million
would have to be located again, examined, classified and summoned in some
logical and equitable way.  Since neither Congress nor the armed forces are
ready for a draft, the postcards add nothing substantial to preparedness. At
best, this might have been a symbolic exercise - a symbol of American resolve to
wash away the stains of disillusionment with Vietnam. If all citizens between
the ages of, say, 18 and 30, male and female, were trooping to post offices this
month to signify a readiness to serve, the world might have concluded that
Americans were ready again to support a diplomacy that risks military action far
from home.

But Mr. Carter and Congress plainly feared to ask for such a demonstration.
Indeed, they rushed to diminish the potential symbolism by exempting, first, all
women, and then all men over 21.  Such obvious calculation, in an election year,
proved the very opposite of the resolve the President vowed to show after the
Soviet Union marched into Afghanistan last winter. Washington is stuck now with
a registration that has neither practical nor symbolic value.  Even if dutifully
obeyed, it is futile.
So what can one tell an inquiring 20-year-old? First, that law, even bad and
unfair law, should not be violated lightly. There is no more plausible moral
ground for refusing to register than there is for refusing to pay a tax. There
is also no practical reason to demur.  Registration will have no real
consequence; refusing to register risks punishment for no clear cause.

But there is a second step to be urged on registration-age youth.  The armed
forces do have serious problems in recruiting and retaining the quality of
people they need. Young Americans belong in the discussion of how these problems
are to be resolved. After registering at the post office, they ought to register
again, at the Board of Elections.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
WEDNESDAY, JULY 2, 1980

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


International
Possible East-West talks on missiles were indicated by Chancellor Helmut Schmidt
of West Germany. He hinted that his two days of talks with Soviet leaders in
Moscow might open the way to negotiations to limit medium-range missiles in
Europe. But Mr. Schmidt said that the Kremlin had refused to halt Soviet missile
deployment in Eastern Europe to get such talks started. (Page A1, Column 6.)
Moderation by Israel was urged by 56 prominent American Jews, including present
and former heads of organizations that have raised funds and lobbied for Israel.
The leaders endorsed a statement advocating territorial compromise and
criticizing extremists in the Israeli Government. The statement was initiated by
250 prominent Israelis. (A1:5.)
Major bars to Israel's peace movement involve both the Government's hard-line
policies and the lack of a similar movement for moderation by Palestinians. For
more than two years, the peace advocates in Israel have urged in vain an end to
the occupation of the West Bank and Gaza. (A2:3-6.)
C.P. Snow died at his London home at the age of 74. The leading novelist,
playwright and scientist was made a life peer in 1964.  (A1:5-6.)
Canada tried to bolster its unity at a ceremony in Ottawa proclaiming a
100-year-old song, ''O Canada,'' the official national anthem. The song, for
years an unofficial anthem, has generated a dispute over its words. Those sung
at the ceremony are tentative because the political parties have not yet agreed
on them and will try to resolve the phrasing next fall. (A1:2-4.)
Acts of piracy against ''boat people'' fleeing Vietnam have been punished for
what is believed to be the first time. A Thai court has sentenced seven Thai
fishermen to prison terms ranging from 8 to 24 years for the rape of five
Vietnamese women and the robbery of more than 80 refugees. (A3:4-6.)
A world record for the one-mile run of 3 minutes 48.8 seconds was set by Steve
Ovett of Britain. His countryman, Sebastian Coe, the previous mile
record-holder, set a world mark of 2:13.40 in the 1,000-meter run. (A23:5-6.)
National
A major new step toward a tax cut was taken by the Democratic Congressional
leadership. Officials said that the House Ways and Means Committee would hold
hearings on proposals for reductions soon after Congress returned July 21 from a
recess. Senate Democrats, under Republican pressure, have already said they
would have a taxcut plan ready for action by the full Senate in September.
(A1:3-4.)
A cutback in trucking regulation took effect under legislation signed by
President Carter. He said that the new law would ''eliminate the red tape and
senseless overregulation that has hampered'' the $41 billion interstate industry
and could save consumers up to $8 billion a year. (A1:1.)
Speedy action against the recession was urged by Senator Edward M.  Kennedy. He
said that if the Administration took such steps he ''could'' support President
Carter in the November election, but that if the Administration failed to act
the Democratic Presidential nomination should be worth little to either of them.
(A1:1.)
An asserted slight against blacks led an aide of Ronald Reagan to redefine the
Presidential aspirant's trip to Mexico. He is to go there today on what is now
called a working ''retreat'' rather than a vacation. Mr. Reagan's decision to
make the trip rather than address the convention of the N.A.A.C.P. prompted
Benjamin Hooks, president of the civil rights organization, to say that Mr.
Reagan ''has written off the black vote.'' (A17:1.)
Wheat is dying in the worst drought in the Northwest in more than 40 years,
causing millions of dollars in losses. Officials said that at least half the
crop would be lost in eastern Montana. A major heat wave took more lives in the
Southwest. (A12:1-2.)
Metropolitan
City and union negotiators returned to the bargaining table in an effort to
avert a strike tomorrow by 42,000 police and correction officers, firefighters
and sanitation workers. Both sides expressed a willingness to heed an appeal by
Mayor Koch for around-the-clock negotiations. After a half hour, the unions held
a caucus and joint meetings were expected to continue later. (A1:2.)
The funerals of two firemen who were killed last Friday in a Harlem fire were
attended in Manhattan and on Long Island by thousands of firemen and Mayor Koch.
The turnout of firefighters was the largest since 1966 when services were held
for 12 firemen who died when a roof collapsed in a Union Square fire. (B2:4-6.)
A major ruling involving judges was handed down by the New York State Court of
Appeals. It held that a special judicial commission had the authority to
investigate alleged election campaign irregularities by Manhattan Surrogate
Marie M. Lambert. The state's highest tribunal also said that most court records
of challenges brought by judges to bar inquiries by the State Commission on
Judicial Conduct must be made public. (B1:4-6.)
An indicted Councilman is to resign. Eugene F. Mastropieri, a Democratic
Councilman from Queens who was censured for misconduct by the New York City
Council last year, said he would resign on July 18. Three months ago, a Federal
grand jury indicted him on charges that included tax fraud. He has pleaded not
guilty. (B3:4-6.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 606 words


Begin will require at least a month to recover from heart attack A2
Seven Thai fishermen jailed for raping Vietnamese refugees A3
World News Briefs A4
Carter orders airlift of arms to Thailand A5
Prince Edward Island: laboratory for solving Canada's problems A6
Iranian doctors and water workers strike, defying Government A8
Shah, in satisfactory condition, leaves intensive care unit A8
Iran religious leaders to prohibit sales of 'vulgar music' A9

Government/Politics
Computer breakdown snarls tax-cut proposals A10
Carter hails Vietnam veterans in ceremony on memorial A14
Campaign Report A16
Republicans in Congress back retention of equal rights plank A16
Anderson begins formal phase of candidacy for President A16
Group spending funds for Reagan sued by Common Cause A17
Jersey is faced with rising unemployment benefit claims B3
Koch welcomes funds for summer youth jobs but wants more B6

General
Around the Nation A12
Mexican worker outlines torture allegations in Arizona court A12
Coalition of civil rights groups to monitor broadcast hiring A15

Industry/Labor
One-third of Detroit's city workers go on strike A12
McGuire is in middle as police plan a strike B2
LaChance resigns post in newspaper deliverers union B3
Union Carbide to pay to filter L.I.  water containing its pesticide B4

The Living Section
Food Cooking in the great outdoors: The American barbecue C1

Solar cooker needs patience and a place in the sun C1

Foreign beer taps a new thirst for more flavor C1

New cook book plumbs the North Atlantic C3

60-Minute Gourmet C3

Washington food notes C4

A rating of sauces for the barbecue C6

Mastering marinades is simple C6

Best Buys C6

Tasting a 1935 cabernet sauvignon from California C13

Tasting the imports: A vote for flavor C14

Carcinogen fear allayed C14
Living Collecting insurance after a car is stolen C1

Pierre Franey's Kitchen Equip- ment C2

Metropolitan Diary C2

As a pain reliever, hypnosis is free of side effects C9

Where to inquire about car claims C10

Champagne concern to build U.S. plant C12

New Yorkers, etc.  C15

Discoveries C15

Tassell's clean, quiet designs C15

Religion
Thousands acclaim Pope in 2 more Brazilian cities A3

Health/Science
Risks reportedly downgraded in revised radiation study A14

Obituaries
The Rev. Dr. Herman Sidener, Episcopal rector in Brooklyn A20

Arts/Entertainment
''Blues Is a Woman'' program looks at other side of the blues C16
''Manhattan Showboat'' opens at the Music Hall C16
Roger Mudd leaving CBS to join NBC News C16
''Airplane!'' a satire on disaster movies, on local screens C17
''Summer Showers,'' Brazilian film at the Cinema Studio C20
Gisele Freund's study ''Photography & Society'' is reviewed C25

Sports
Amy, jockey, seeks to shift hearing from Racing Board A22
Beckenbauer to leave Cosmos and go to West Germany A22
Phils beat Expos, 5-4, in 11th A22
Dave Anderson on Tom Seaver's ailing arm A23
Yankees, behind Figueroa and Davis, down Red Sox, 3-2 A23
Cub halt Mets, 4-3 A24

Features/Notes
Man in the News: Reagan's new political fire horse A17
Notes on People A19
Going out Guide C17

News Analysis
Michael Kaufman views Sanjay Gandhi's legacy A7

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A26

Youth should register-twice What the F.B.I. has to prove Bolivia's perpetual
election Topics: suitabilities Letters A26
Russell Baker: one gravest problem at a time, please A27
Steven Brill: the high cost of going to court A27
Sandy Close: explosive youth around the globe A27
Carl Flemister: keeping the middle class in town A27

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 3, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT SIGNS ORDER REQUIRING 4 MILLION TO REGISTER FOR THE DRAFT

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 2


President Carter signed a proclamation today that will require four million
young men to register later this month for possible military conscription.

Last January, after the Soviet Union's intervention in Afghanistan, the
President proposed the revival of draft registration, suspended in 1975. He said
then that it would demonstrate a national resolve to resist aggression.

Today, 160 days later, Mr. Carter told dignitaries assembled in the White House
that ''we are deeply concerned about the unwarranted and vicious invasion of
Afghanistan by the Soviet Union, and occupation by them of this innocent and
defenseless country.''

Many See It Differently

The President also said: ''I would like to emphasize that the registration act
is not a draft. I am not in favor of a peacetime draft.''

But a large and growing number of people, both proponents and opponents of the
draft, see it differently. ''It is impossible to divorce a discussion of
registration from discussion of the draft itself,'' Senator Gary Hart, Democrat
of Colorado, said in a debate over registration last month. ''You do not compel
young people to register for a draft unless you can foresee drafting them.''

Already, the nation has begun a wide-ranging debate over whether to return to
peacetime conscription, which ended in 1973 after the United States had
withdrawn its troops from Vietnam.

Debate Cuts Both Ways

The new debate may intensify in the coming Presidential campaign, although it
cuts both ways for the leading candidates. And it seems to be headed for a sharp
struggle when a new session of Congress convenes next January.

For the moment, a measure of the national temperature on the issue could become
evident if antidraft protests develop and in the degree of apathy among those
required to register.

The armed service committees in both houses of Congress are regarded by many as
favoring resumption of the draft, although the call is often muted or disguised.
Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, and Representative Robin L. Beard Jr.,
Republican of Tennessee, are considered to be among the pro-draft leaders.

They drew fresh support from Adm. Thomas B. Hayward, the Chief of Naval
Operations, who recently became the first of the service chiefs to come out
publicly in favor of the draft. The others, including Gen. David C. Jones,
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, are holding open their options to
recommend a draft later. Congress, which passed legislation authorizing draft
registration last Friday, would have to approve a draft in new legislation.

Focus on Military Posture

Privately, some officials in the Defense Department favor a return to the draft,
but less to solve manpower problems than to focus national attention on the
nation's military posture and to send a message of national determination to
both adversaries and allies.

Those officials contend that the recent trend toward greater military spending
is not enough to signal such determination, and maintain that the real test will
come when the nation's parents are asked to risk the lives of their sons, and
possibly their daughters, in the military services for national security.

While everyone who advocates a resumption of the draft has his own reasons and
presents his own emphasis, through all of their arguments are certain themes
centering on one allegation: that the attempt to build a volunteer military
force is not working.

The pro-draft advocates contend that the military services are not attracting
enough young people even if the recruiting numbers are increasing at the moment.
They maintain that enlistments will begin to fall once the current recession has
run its course. Moreover, the long-term trends in the national birthrate show
that fewer draft-age youths will be coming into the labor market in the rest of
the decade.

Racial Issue Is Hidden

Underlying all of this is a racial issue that is usually expressed only in
euphemisms. The pro-draft advocates maintain that the Army is unrepresentative
of American society because about 30 percent of its recruits are black. They
want the draft to bring more white, middleclass youths into the Army.

The Carter Administration is against the draft. So is Ronald Reagan, the
probable Republican nominee, and Representative John B.  Anderson of Illinois, a
Republican running for the Presidency as an independent.

Some Republicans have suggested that Mr. Reagan make registration and the draft
a campaign issue in an effort to appeal to moderates.  But other advisers have
said that would risk offending conservatives.

Also opposed to the draft are most liberals in Congress, the remnants of the
anti-Vietnam organizations, civil rights groups and some military officers who
argue that a conscripted peacetime army would be worse than a volunteer force.

Reopening Wounds of Vietnam

Again, central themes run though the anti-draft arguments. Foremost is that
resuming the draft would reopen the political wounds of Vietnam.

Opponents of the draft also contend that there is no fair way to have a draft
unless everybody serves. Even an impartial lottery is inherently unfair and
violates the civil rights of those who are chosen at random, they maintain.

Moreover, those opposed to the draft argue that it would not solve the most
critical manpower shortage in the services today, which is the hemorrhage of
talented noncommissioned officers and specialists who are leaving the armed
forces because they can live better in civilian life. The draft would give the
services young, inexperienced privates but not hardened top sergeants.

Finally, no one has answered the question of whether a massed land army raised
by a draft would ever been needed to fight. Many military thinkers suggest that
the day of armies confronting each other in prolonged conflict has passed. Once
such a war has started and one side begins to win, they say, the other side will
go to nuclear weapons.

This would quickly escalate to a strategic nuclear exchange, that view holds,
and the war would be over while the new draftees were still in basic training.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 3, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


WORLD NEWS BRIEFS;
Pol Pot Rebels Report Killing 20 Vietnamese

ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, July 2 (AP) - Guerrillas loyal to the ousted Prime
Minister of Cambodia, Pol Pot, asserted today that they had killed at least 20
Vietnamese soldiers in a counterattack last night near the Thai-Cambodian
border.

Thai authorities said the attack occurred in a mountainous area of Cambodia that
was recently captured by Vietnamese soldiers and Cambodian forces loyal to the
Vietnamese-backed Heng Samrin Government in Phnom Penh.

Meanwhile, a spokesman for the United States Embassy in Thailand said today that
an American cargo plane with 30,000 pounds of military equipment would arrive in
Bangkok on Saturday. President Carter has ordered an immediate airlift of 1,000
rifles, some artillery and antitank guns to the Thai Army. The equipment had
already been promised to the Thais.

----

BANGKOK, Thailand, July 2 (Reuters) - Thailand protested to Moscow today that
Soviet arms and ammunition were used by Vietnamese forces in their two-day
military incursion into Thai territory, Deputy Foreign Minister Aroon Phanuphong
said today.

----

SINGAPORE, July 2 (Reuters) - A group of 293 Vietnamese refugees, picked up from
the South China Sea by two ships, landed here today after the United States
guaranteed to give them permanent homes, a United Nations refugee official here
said.

India Rejects Soviet Offer For a Nuclear Power Plant

NEW DELHI, July 2 (UPI) - India has rejected a Soviet offer to set up a large
nuclear power station in the country, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi said today.

She informed Parliament that the Soviet offer had been made some time ago, but
it was turned down because ''due to local conditions and considering the
development of the technology in the country, it would not be feasible at this
state to import large atomic power plants.''

India currently has two atomic power plants in operation - the United
States-aided Tarapur facility near Bombay and a natural uranimum-fueled station
at Kota in the western state of Rajasthan.

The Tarapur station is operating below capacity because approval for the sale of
39 tons of enriched uranium supplies from the United States is being held up by
Congress. Two other atomic power stations are under construction, at Narora in
the northern state of Uttar Pradesh and near Madras, in the south.

Yugoslav Dissident Fears A Post-Tito Crackdown

BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, July 2 (UPI) - Milovan Djilas, the dissident writer, said
today that he feared an attack on him in Belgrade's leading newspaper might
signal a crackdown on dissent by Yugoslavia's post-Tito rulers.

Mr. Djilas, 69 years old, was Vice President under Marshal Tito. He was stripped
of power in 1954 and jailed for nine years because he advocated a Western-likee
pluralistic democracy for Yugoslavia.

The long attack in Belgrade's Politika newspaper today accused Mr. Djilas of
being employed by ''forces outside the country'' in efforts to undermine the
system. ''There is no anti-Yugoslav campaign in which Djilas was not involved,''
the article said.

Mr. Djilas said it was possible the attack had resulted from recent interviews
he gave to West Germany's Der Spiegel magazine, Newsweek magazine and CBS News.

Three More in Jamaica Are Charged With Treason

KINGSTON, Jamaica, July 2 - Two more members of the Jamaica Defense Force and a
second civilian were charged today with treason in an alleged conspiracy to
overthrow the Government, bringing the total of people charged to five.

An additional 29 members of the Jamaica Defense Force, including three officers,
face court-martial on charges ranging disorderly conduct to incitement to
mutiny.

The alleged plot to take over an armory, seize the Prime Minister and Army chief
of staff, and demand the resignation of the Government was revealed June 22. It
came in the midst of a hard-fought election campaign and a tide of violence in
which shootings and beatings were daily occurrences.

Last week, prison warders stopped accepting prisoners because of overcrowding
and a lack of food at prisons around the island.  Yesterday soldiers were called
to operate the general penitentiary after a backed-up sewage system flooded the
prison and guards refused to work.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 3, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


AROUND THE NATION;
Judge Assures Garwood Of Seeing Possible Witness

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., July 2 (AP) - A military judge assured Pfc.  Robert R.
Garwood of the Marines today that he would have a chance to confront a
Vietnamese refugee who Private Garwood's attorneys say could clear him of
military charges of desertion and collaboration with the enemy.

But prosecutors questioned whether Private Garwood was certain of the identity
of the man, who he maintains was a North Vietnamese official who ordered
executions and torture of prisoners.The refugee, unnamed and wearing a mask,
testified before a Congressional subcommittee last week that the bodies of
nearly 400 Americans were still in Vietnam.

In a move that surprised prosecutors and the judge, defense lawyers said
yesterday that Private Garwood could identify the man and called on the judge to
subpoena him. Private Garwood's pretrial hearing is under way now.

The judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, refused to subpoena the man but ordered Department
of Defense officials to keep him in the country until Private Garwood and his
lawyers could talk with him.

John C. Lowe, one of Private Garwood's attorneys, said in today's hearing that
one purpose of a meeting would be for his client to make sure that his
identification of the refugee was correct.

Pryor Undergoes Operation For More Skin Grafts

SHERMAN OAKS, Calif., July 2 (AP) - Richard Pryor successfully underwent a
second skin graft today, and doctors said it might be the last operation that
the 39-year-old comedian will need in recovering from the near-fatal burns he
suffered three weeks ago.

''They accomplished exactly what they were planning and they were very happy,''
said Gary Swaye, assistant executive director of the Sherman Oaks Community
Hospital. He said Mr. Pryor remained in serious but stable condition.

''We will have to wait until the end of the week to see if the surgery takes,''
he added. ''He might not need any more operations.'' Mr. Swaye said that doctors
took skin from Mr. Pryor's calves and thighs and stretched it over burned areas
of his shoulders, chest, back, arms and ears.

Air Traffic Control System Back in Service at O'Hare

CHICAGO, July 2 (AP) - The air traffic control system at the O'Hare
International Airport was returned to normal service today after 13 days without
its primary guidance computer, the Federal authorities said.

The computer ''froze'' for about 15 seconds on June 20 while tracking flights.
Its job is to pick up aircraft about 40 miles away and project to radar screen
information on flight numbers, speed, altitude, type of plane and collision
avoidance and low-altitude warnings.

While it was out of service, controllers guided air traffic by radar, radio
communication and by manual identification, said Marjorie Kriz, a spokesman for
the Federal Aviation Administration.

Last week officials discovered the source of the problem, a programming error,
and for the last four days a corrected program has undergone testing.

Interim Appeal Ruled Out In Newspaper Trial

SANTA FE, N.M., July 2 (AP) - Federal District Judge Santiago Campos has said he
will not allow attorneys for Gannett Company Inc.  to seek an interim appeal of
his order to return The Santa Fe New Mexican to its former owner.

In a reversal, Judge Campos told attorneys in a letter dated yesterday that the
publicity that would result from the appeals process could prejudice jurors who
are to hear a second phase of the trial. which will determine how the return
will be accomplished.

A six-member jury ruled Friday that Gannett had breached a contract with the
former owner, Robert McKinney but did not find that the company had intended to
defraud him.

Judge Campos told attorneys Monday that he would ''cooperate'' in preparing his
order so that the decision could be appealed immediately to the United States
Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit.

But the judge said in his letter that, on further thought, he did not believe
that the case could be submitted to the appellate court until he had completed
formal findings. He said that the publicity resulting from those findings could
influence the jury.

John McCrory, attorney for Gannett, had no comment. Attorneys for Mr. McKinney
were not immediately available for comment.

Mississippi College's Actions Against Iranians Overruled

NEW ORLEANS, July 2 (AP) - A Federal appeals court today overruled attempts by
Jackson State University to punish 32 Iranian students who demonstrated on
campus in support of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit said the Mississippi
university's rules governing campus demonstrations were unconstitutionally
vague.

The ruling came in a suit filed as a class action on behalf of all Iranian
students subjected to disciplinary proceedings for taking part in the protest
last November.

Jackson State suspended two students for a school year and 18 for one semester
and placed 11 on disciplinary probation for the rest of their time in school.

National news appears on pages A12 and D14-17;political news on pages A14-15.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: ENVOI OF A CAREER DIPLOMAT

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 908 words


AN important addition to the literature of modern diplomacy will be published at
the end of September by W.W. Norton & Company: Charles W. Yost's "History
Memory." Mr. Yost, who held ambassadorial posts in Asia, Europe and Africa, said
with characteristic cheerfulness the other day, that the world could still
survive if the two words in the title of the of his book were taken seriously by
the superpowers.

The diplomat talked about his own ride on the roller coaster of history. He
started out as a Princeton graduate trying to write an obligatory F. Scott
Fitzerald-style novel after a European tour in the 1920's, worked as a young
diplomat in Cairo and Warsaw in the 1930's, served the New Deal in Washington
during the Depression and went on to posts in Laos, Syria and Morocco.

Now retired, Mr. Yost still gives counsel as an elder statesman to organizations
involved in the peacemaking process. He is remembered around the United Nations
as deputyto Adlai E. Stevenson and Arthur J. Goldberg and as permanent
representative himself.

"To my astonishment," he said the other day, with diplomatic sang-froid, "I
wascalled out of retirement by President Nixon to serve at the U.N. even though
I had been working for the election of Hubert H. Humphrey. I was replaced after
the Cambodian invasion, which I though a mistake. It disillusioned me totally
about Mr.  Nixon."

Mr. Yost said that avoiding war remains the No. 1 priority in the world because
the United States and Soviet Union both have nuclear weapons. He thinks it
"extremely unlikely" that the Russians would start a war or a drive to the
English Channel, and he is opposed to all the saber rattling and first
strike-second strike thinking. "The real danger, he said, "is that some incident
might blow up in the third world - and that is why I put my plug for the U.N. in
the book."

He believes that the United Nations can still be effective, that it has a record
of achievement and that the great powers ought to avail themselves of its
facilities in the early stages of conflict. Or, in Winston Churchill's phrase,
"it's better to jaw-jaw than war-war."

Mr. Yost keeps writing steadily by turning out a column every other Friday for
The Christian Science Monitor and says that, if the world behaves itself for a
while, he may still try his hand out at fiction.

While Norman Mailer was researching "The Executioner's Song" (his Pulitzer Prize
novel, published by Little Brown) about the convicted murderer Gary Gilmore, he
says that he heard from a man named Jack Henry Abbott, who is serving time for
bank robbery at the Federal penitentiary in Marion, ILL., and was deeply
impressed with Mr.  Abbott's writing - "as good as any convict's prose I had
read since Eldridge Cleaver."

Examples of Mr. Abbott's work appeared in the June 28 issue of The New York
Review of Books, with an introduction by Mr. Maller. The author showed Mr.
Abbott's letters to his literary agent, Scott Meredith, who then called them to
the attention of The New York Review. Jason Epstein, editor in chief at Random
House, and Erroll McDonald, another Random House editor, asked to see more.

The result is that a book by Mr. Abbott is scheduled to be published by Random
House next spring. Mr. Mailer and his assistant, Judith McNally, have been in
touch with the prison authorities, keeping Mr. Abbotts chances for eventual
parole alive; the author has offered to provide Mr. Abbott with a job upon his
release.

A book titled simply "X," a modern fable about an experimental child who is
raised without sexual conditioning, has had an interesting publishing life. It
was written by Lois Gould, the novelist, and first appeared in Ms. magazine as
"a story for free children"in 1972. Since then, it has been used as a teaching
tool, adapted as a musical comedy on behalf of Unicef and reprinted in
educational and scientific journals. A small company, Daughters Publishing,
published it in a hard-cover edition in 1978. Now "X," illustrated by Jacqueline
Chwast, has just come out in a trade paperback edition from Stonesong Press.

The author described the fable's genesis: "I was always dimly aware as a child
of people asking, "Do you like dolls - or baseball?" That sent the story of "X"
spinning in her mind. Her next novel, "La Presidenta," uses the legend of Eva,
Jean and Isabel Peron against the background of "an imaginary Latin country." It
will be published by Linden Press in the winter.

Remember the Beat Generation of the 1950's? "Beat," some said, was short for
beatific. The term theoretically described a postwar underground culture that
lasted until the Vietnam War created an involved, protesting generation.

Although Jack Kerouac's "On the Road" is recalled today, "Go" by John Clellon
Holmes proceded it and remains a work of culture history. Now "Go" appears in a
new edition as a Plume paperback from New American Library, with an introduction
by the author and a foreword by James Atlas. Whatever happened to Mr. Holmes?
He's teaching at the University of Arkansas, has written the novels "The Horn"
and "Get Home Free" and a brightly titled memoir "Nothing More to Declare."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

New Emphasis On Productivity

BYLINE: Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 939 words


THE familiar trappings of the Fourth of July are military, and its oratory still
celebrates the virtues of independence. But the primary challenges to the nation
today are economic, and its biggest problem is how to handle its interdependence
with other countries in a time of rapid economic, social and technological
change.

The continuing energy crisis, Iran's revolution and its defiance of America, the
determined resistance of poorly armed Afghan nationalists to the Soviet Union -
all these and other events around the world reinforce the lesson of Vietnam:
that there are severe constraints on the ability of a superpower to prevail over
lesser powers by the use of its enormous military power or its sheer industrial
weight.

The contraints on the superpowers are not physical but political and social. The
bipolar coalitions of the cold war have been weakened. The Soviet world has been
split with the defection of China. Nations, determined to avoid the total
devastation of nuclear war, now pursue their national interests by economic
means, including trade with their ideological adversaries.

And economic issues - the effort to raise living standards, the fight against
inflation, the struggle for shares of world markets, the preservation of jobs
and the shift of wealth from country to country and from bloc to bloc - have
risen to the top of the diplomatic agenda.

But individual nation-states are no longer able to control the outcome of those
struggles. Transnational institutions - most importantly the great multinational
corporations with access to vast, scientific, technological, managerial and
financial resources - are creating their own global networks. Multinational
corporate goals may either support or conflict with national objectives and
policies, and how to reconcile corporate and national objectives has become a
critical and unsolved issue of national policy. The issue is unsolved partly
because of the political power of the corporations within a nation.

National power has come to depend increasingly on promises of economic exchange,
investment, technological transfers, access to human or material resources - or
threats that markets, new technology or access to vital resources will be
denied.

The strength and stability of a nation's domestic economy has become the
dominant element in the vigor of its foreign policy.  Thus, while the old
military-threat system remains and may prove decisive if issues over aggression
and national survival develop, economics has largely replaced military force in
the pursuit of national interest. There is growing concern that the United
States is losing out in this international economic competition.

Such worries focus on flagging productivity, which many American businessmen and
some economists foresee as the principal source of trouble. The businessmen
think of productivity in a broader way than do most economists, who regard it as
a technical relation between inputs of labor and capital and outputs of goods.

American businessmen, as Frank Schiff of the Committee for Economic Development
has noted, think of productivity in far-ranging dynamic terms, affecting the
overall momentum and structure of the economy.  They believe that innovation and
investments in key industries will help to make them more competitive
internationally. In expanding markets, rising productivity will also result in
bigger output, with resulting economies of scale. This will, in turn, have
beneficial effects on America's balance of payments, thereby strengthening the
dollar and helping to curb domestic inflation.

A major shift of thought is going on in the United States, as well as in other
Western industrial countries, toward the importance of improving industrial
productivity as the key to the answer to the West's economic woes, not just
managing demand or deciding whether to stop inflation or stimulate growth.

Yesterday, as the Federal Reserve announced plans to end the rest of the credit
restraints imposed in March, it was clear that the Carter Administration was
moving toward stimulation. A recommendation by the President for a tax cut next
year may not be far behind. But the problem of making the recovery
noninflationary remains.

In Paris last month the chief economic representatives of the United States and
the other members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
agreed that, in planning their way out of the present slump, which has resulted
from fiscal and monetary measures to check inflation, they should not engineer a
recovery that, by reawakening inflation, would be short-lived. Instead, they
agreed, they should lay the groundwork for faster economic growth over the
coming decade by adopting measures that ''encourage investment, improve
productivity and lower costs.''

Innovation and competitiveness were once the hallmarks of American economic
philosophy. As that most perceptive tourist, Alexis de Tocqueville, wrote a
century and a half ago, ''I accost an American sailor and inquire why the ships
of his country are built so as to last for only a short time; he answers without
hesitation that the art of navigation is every day making such rapid progress
that the finest vessel would become almost useless if it lasted beyond a few
years.''

Here, coming from an ''uninstructed man,'' said de Tocqueville, was ''the
general and systematic idea upon which a great people direct all their
concerns.''

This might be a good Fourth of July on which to fly a Franklin kite instead of
exploding another firecracker or to remember Jefferson the inventor instead of
Jefferson the rhetorician.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: CartoonEconomic Scene

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THAILAND USES VIETNAMESE RAID TO BOLSTER ALLIANCES

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 392 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 3


President Carter's announcment on Tuesday that the United States would
immediately begin an airlift of weapons to Thailand has confirmed Thai policy
makers in a belief that they have made the best of a bad thing.

Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila, for example, was able at meetings in Kuala
Lumpur to exploit last week's Vietnamese raid across the Cambodian border into
three Thai villages to tighten the alliance with Thailand's friends.

One result of the meeting in Kuala Lumpur was redrafting by the ministers of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia
and Singapore, in addition to Thailand - of their special statement on
Indochina. ''It was our draft that was issued,'' a Thai diplomat said.

The original declaration, according to diplomats who participated in the
drafting, was worded so as to conciliate the two schools of thought in the
group. Thailand and Singapore are convinced that of the two Asian Communist
centers, Vietnam is now a greater threat than China. Malaysia and Indonesia
believe that whatever the present menace from Vietnam and its close alliance
with the Soviet Union, the ultimate threat is China. The Philippines distrusts
all Communist powers.

Vietnam Is Condemned

The draft, to which Thailand had assented before the Vietnamese attack, had not
condemned Vietnam by name over its continuing occupation of Cambodia and had
avoided such strong words as ''aggression.'' What was issued was a statement
accusing Hanoi of ''a premeditated and coordinated'' attack.

In the foreign ministers of Japan, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, as well as
Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie, Air Chief Marshal Siddhi found sympathetic
listeners. The United States was the only country from which he requested arms
aid.

The Foreign Minister received immediate assurances of accelerated shipments and
easier credit terms and found a willingness by Washington to consider Thai
requests for additional sales of arms under easy terms. The rapid announcement
of an airlift was viewed in Bangkok as a gesture of great symbolic value.

While some Thai officials expressed apprehension that Vietnam might consider the
gesture a provocation, the general view was that the airlift puts Vietnam on
notice of American support for Thailand's defense needs and will have a
deterrent value.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 4, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MANY JAPANESE FAVOR MORE FOR DEFENSE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 580 words


By HENRY SCOTT STOKES TOKYO, July 3 - ''Any country should at least make some
effort to defend itself, so I am in favor of a rise in defense spending,'' said
Yoshio Kogoma.

The neatly dressed coffee-shop manager leaned against a counter in a dinner
jacket and black tie. ''The Ministry of Finance should loosen the purse strings
a bit - and soon,'' he said.

Like many younger Japanese, Mr. Kogoma has a tough attitude on military
spending, a major issue in the recent general elections in which the
long-incumbent Liberal Democratic Party won a firm parliamentary majority. He
belongs to a growing, vocal minority who believe that Japan's military spending
is too low at $10.08 billion in this year's budget.

Junko Onogi, a 25-year-old proprietor at a record store, said: ''The Liberal
Democrats won the last elections, didn't they? That was a vote for a bigger
effort in defense, to take care of the Russians and deal with that danger.'' She
added:

''Now that Ohira has died, someone has to take care of this country.''

Status Quo Backed in Polls

Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira died of a heart attack June 12, 10 days before
the elections, and his successor has not yet been selected.

Miss Onogi's views may not be typical, according to recent opinion polls. A
majority of Japan's 117 million citizens favor the status quo, according to
these polls.

But the mood of the country seems to be gradually changing. Polls taken after
the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan showed a marked increase since last year
in the proportion of those who favor strengthening the 239,000-man self-defense
forces, as the Japan's armed forces are known. This is in euphemistic deference
to the 1947 Constitution, which was drafted under American supervision during
the postwar United States occupation. Article 9 of that document denies Japan
the right to maintain military forces.

Some 25 percent of Japanese favor strengthening the armed forces here, according
to a poll taken by the newspaper Asahi in March, compared with only 18 percent
last December. Some 34 percent of the Liberal Democrats' supporters want a
bigger Japanese military effort, the latest survey showed.

The change shown by another poll - involving the views of students - is
striking. Some 44 percent of 2,711 students at Waseda University, a large
private university in Tokyo, said in a poll last year that the Constitution
should be revised -meaning that the antimilitary restrictions in Article 9
should be eased.

Student Views Surprise Pollster

Keiichi Hatakeyama, a 24-year-old who conducted the poll, said that he was
surprised at the attitude toward the Constitution displayed by many Waseda
students. He said they had answered questions on the subject with little
hesitation and without criticism of the pollsters.

Fifteen years ago, Waseda University was the point of origin of a series of
anti-Government demonstrations by leftist students. That unrest later spilled
over into rioting sparked by the the presence of American military bases in the
late 1960's. Many Waseda students were also leaders of anti-Vietnam War
demonstrations in the early 1970's.

However, the majority of Japanese do not appear to want increases in military
spending. In the recent Asahi poll, 58 percent of those questioned said they
favored continuing the same proportional level of military spending, as did 58
percent of Liberal Democratic Party supporters. This majority reflects the views
of older Japanese.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Japanese soldiers on parade

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 5, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ON ITS 205TH FOURTH, THE NATION VIEWS ITS FLAG WITH FRESH PRIDE

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 986 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 4


An early-morning haze enveloped the Capitol dome today as young people, carrying
beach blankets, plastic picnic coolers, knapsacks and radios, trooped along the
Mall, past the turrets of the Smithsonian Institution's castle-like structure to
stake out positions for concerts and for fireworks.

In their long hair and short shorts, they looked very much like the
anti-establishment crowds that had gathered on the Mall in the past to denounce
big business and protest the Vietnam War.

But the spirit was different here on this 205th Independence Day.  It was more
patriotic. Perhaps not since the Bicentennial celebration four years ago has
there been such a display of unashamed patriotism in the nation's capital, and
pride in the nation's flag.

Iran Is a Recurring Theme

Concern for the American hostages in Iran and their families was a theme that
recurred in Fourth of July observances all around the country, including some in
which relatives of the captives participated. But the holiday had its lighter
moments, too, not the least of which was an exhibition in Lake Bluff, Ill., by
the Precision Lawn Mower Drill Team. (Page 6.)

In New York the day began with a boom and meandered through parades, visits to
ships in the harbor, a hot-dog eating contest and a fireworks display. (Page
21.)

The subject of Iran was not far from the minds of those who thronged the
Washington Monument grounds under a bright sun for a concert by the Beach Boys.
''You got to feel for the guys in Iran,'' said Hank Kerfoot, a high school
senior from McLean, the affluent Virginia suburb of Washington. ''They've been
hostages for eight months now. That problem really bothers me.''

U.S. 'Stomped Around the World'

It bothered Wallace Creek of Detroit, a 41-year-old accountant who was visiting
Washington with his wife and their four children. ''The United States seems to
be getting stomped on around the world,'' he said. ''That has caused the
American people to become somewhat more patriotic.''

''Students are more conservative, even jingoistic,'' said Ronald Iannotti, a
psychology instructor from Marietta College in Ohio.  The concern of liberal
officeholders, who are running scared this election year, voting to increase
spending for military hardware and military pay, was echoed on the Mall.

A Strong Defense Is 'No. 1'

Don Anderson, 27, a medical student at Howard University here, volunteered the
view that ''we should have a strong defense, militarily, that's No. 1.''
Technology, he said, should continue ''at an ever-faster rate,'' and ''we should
develop all of the weapons necessary, because if we don't, somebody else will.''

Sheila Lavsa, a high school English teacher in a Maryland suburb who was sharing
a picnic lunch of fried chicken and red wine on the Washington Monument grounds,
said that while ''flag-wavers were considered right-wing'' in her classroom five
years ago, ''now people are not ashamed to show their patriotism.''

Robert Vaughan, a social studies teacher at the same school, agreed, saying,
''We have bottomed out on our depression and our inferiority complex.''

But this groundswell of pride in America has not been translated into any zeal
for military service. ''I don't want to go for Texaco,'' said Don Drakulich, a
19-year-old student from Virginia Commonwealth University at Richmond. ''The oil
companies may try to get us into a war, and there may be a return to
old-fashioned imperialism, which I am not in favor of.''

Suntan Oil and Marijuana

Apparently a number of young people celebrating Independence Day felt that their
rights should include the freedom to smoke marijuana. The sweet piercing smell
of the drug, mixed with the fragrance of suntan oil, was in the air wherever
young people gathered. In Lafayette Park, across Pennsylvania Avenue from the
White House, rock musicians played from a stage surrounded by signs calling for
the legalization of marijuana.

Gilbert Stuart's celebrated portraits of George and Martha Washington, which had
hung for so long in the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, were on display heretoday at
the National Portrait Gallery.  They are to be shared, under an unusual
arrangement that calls for the paintings to be sent back and forth between
Boston and Washington every few years. The portrait of George Washington was the
model for the one on the dollar bill.

A few blocks away, in the Smithsonian's Museum of History and Technology, an
exhibit hall filled with political posters and memorabilia was the scene of
naturalization ceremonies to 30 aliens from various countries. Federal District
Judge Harold H. Greene administered the oath that he had taken more than 30
years ago after fleeing Nazi Germany.

America, the Destination

''When people are free to come and go as they please,'' he said, ''America is
most often their destination.'' The judge listed a few of today's problems such
as unemployment, inflation, racial strife and crime, but commented that they
were no greater than the problems faced by ''the original settlers who crossed
hostile oceans to reach this land and transformed it into a beautiful
civilization.''

Tonight, the crowd watching fireworks filled the 16-block Mall from the Capitol
to the Washington Monument. Earlier there had been a symphonic concert on the
base of the Capitol steps,

On a day that included a symphonic concert on the steps of the Capitol and a
night-time fireworks display, Mayor Marion Barry of the District of Columbia
ordered the District flags's flown at half-staff in ''mourning for the residents
of the nation's capital,'' who still do not have voting representation in
Congress.

City residents, however, may vote in Presidential elections. A constitutional
amendment to grant the city two Senators and at least one Representative, though
approved by Congress, has failed to win ratificatison by the necessary number of
states.

----

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 5, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Brezhnev Sees Vietnam Leaders And Pledges Continued Support

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 104 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 4


Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, has pledged continued support for Vietnam
in a meeting at the Kremlin with three senior Vietnamese leaders. The Soviet
Union and Vietnam also accused China of stirring up trouble in Indochina with
the help of the United States.

Tass said Mr. Brezhnev and other Kremlin leaders met yesterday with Prime
Minister Pham Van Dong, the Communist Party chief, Le Duan, and Nguyen Lam,
chairman of the State Planning Committee.

Two weeks ago Vietnamese troops in Cambodia struck into Thailand in a bid to
wipe out Cambodian guerrillas battling the Vietnamesebacked Cambodian
Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

China Protests to Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 31 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 5


China strongly protested today against ''incessant armed provocations'' by
Vietnam along their border and demanded an immediate end to the incidents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY RECRUITERS TROUBLED BY POOR QUALITY OF VOLUNTEERS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, July 5


The Army recruiting sergeant stood up as the young man walked up to his desk. He
shook the potential recruit's hand and posed to him a brief series of questions.

Moments later the young man turned on his heel without another word and walked
out of the recruiting station in the Mondawmin shopping mall.

''Burglary,'' Sgt. Robert T. Parham explained to a visitor.  ''Besides, he went
to a high school for problem kids and he dropped out after the 10th grade. There
was no way I could put him in the Army.''

Sergeant Parham said he had found out all that in the several minutes of
questions, ''what we call APPLE-MD - age, prior service, physical, legal,
educational and marital status and dependents.'' He remarked, ''If he's got
problems somewhere in there, there's usually not much point in going on.''

60 to 65 Percent Rejected

The questioning is only the first of several tests in which 60 to 65 percent of
the young men and women who seek to enlist in the Army are rejected. But some
who do pass the screening are barely qualified, and therein lies a problem.

Sgt. First Class Gilbert F. Gray, in charge of the Conkling Street recruiting
station in a storefront across town, was understated in putting his finger on
what many believe is the most troubling issue in the Army today: ''The quality
of the people we're getting in, I wouldn't say is adequate.''

The numbers from the Pentagon show that the Army can get plenty of recruits. But
the sergeants say that too few of these can be trained to operate the
complicated weapons or service the sophisticated equipment the Army uses today.

By the midpoint of the current fiscal year, March 31, the Army recruited 80,500
men and women, up from 53,500 for the same period a year ago. That was 99
percent of the objective, which itself was unusually high because of inability
to meet the goal of the year before.

Fewer High School Graduates

But only 43 percent of those recruits were high school graduates, compared with
61 percent the year before. The proportion of recruits who fell into the lowest
acceptable mental category remained at 8 percent, but the actual number rose
because of the larger enlistment.

The reasons the Army is not getting enough well-qualified volunteers emerged in
conversations with a dozen recruiting sergeants in the district headquarters at
nearby Fort Meade, at recruiting stations across the city and at a testing
center that the Army shares with the other services.

''My biggest complaint,'' said Sgt. Michael B. Patrick, in a storefront
recruiting station on Belair Street, ''is the low level of education of the kids
around here.'' He and other sergeants asserted that relatively few young men and
women graduating from high school are qualified for any job, including those in
the Army.

''Who's failing?'' Staff Sgt. Earl D. Kindred asked, and answered: ''It's the
educational system that's failing.''

16 Out of 100 Points

Several recruiters said they doubted that half the high school graduates in this
city of 905,000 could pass the three-hour mental and aptitude test required to
enlist, and passing means making at least 16 points out of 100.

Of 70 seniors tested at Southern High School, considered an average high school,
only 14 qualified. One who failed was a supposedly good student who planned to
go to college. Several others made scores in the lowest acceptable category, 16
to 30 points.

It asks the applicant to identify Shakespearean plays, to display a knowledge of
electricity and automobiles, to solve problems of arithmetical progression and
geometry, and to demonstrate a familiarity with general science and mechanics.

The sergeants scoffed at the high school diploma as a measure of achievement,
and they called many high school graduates ''sitthroughs,'' young men and women
who have sat through 12 years of schooling without getting an education.

Senate Proposal Disdained

For that reason, they disdained a proposal of the Senate Armed Services
Committee that would have cut the Army's strength until it could achieve a
higher proportion of high school graduates. That provision was diluted on the
Senate floor this week and may not survive a House-Senate conference later.

The recruiting sergeants, however, pointed to two groups worth pursuing: high
school dropouts who had later gone to night school, and graduates of parochial
high schools.

Sgt. Andre D. Carter, at Mondawmin Mall, said, ''A lot of smart kids drop out
because they get bored with the schools.'' His eyes and those of other
recruiters light up at a dropout who has earned a diploma in night school,
considering this a sign of determination.  They note that these young people
generally score 30 to 40 points higher than high school graduates on the
military entrance exam.

And, said Sgt. Patrick, referring to a nearby Roman Catholic school, ''Anybody I
test out of Archbishop Curley is a guaranteed pass.''

Access to Schools Difficult

A major barrier confronting the sergeants is difficulty gaining access to the
high schools. Each school's principal sets the policy of whether recruiters will
be admitted, and many principals, the recruiters say, base this decision on
their own views of military service.

''The students are not the problem,'' said Capt. Michael E. Virgin, the officer
in charge of the Baltimore recruiting zone. ''The problems are the 30- to
35-year-old educators'' who were college students in the angry days of protest
against the Vietnam War.

''If I could get into all the high schools in my district twice a year,''
Captain Virgin said, ''we could recruit half again as many as we do now.''

Other barriers to recruiting, the sergeants said, are a combination of parents'
objections, a public perception of the Army as an undesirable branch in which to
serve, bad publicity and a lack of patriotism.

Staff Sgt. Rimantas S. Vitkauskas said he belonged to a nearby American Legion
post, ''and not one of the fathers there will give me his son's phone number.''

Sergeant Patrick said that he had one youngster just about signed up when the
youth called to say he had changed his mind because his parents had given him a
car on condition that he not enlist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOLLOW-UP ON THE NEWS;
Spurning Raises

BYLINE: By Richard Haitch

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 21, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


After New York's City Council had voted pay increases for itself and other high
officials last year, Mayor Koch signed the law and then declined to take his
raise. Even before then, Council President Carol Bellamy had refused hers. The
Mayor, whose salary was to rise from $60,000 to $80,000 in two increments,
returned $10,000 to the city in the last year. Miss Bellamy, whose pay was to go
from $50,000 to $60,000 -plus $6,000 in lieu of expenses - gave back $5,000.

The second half of the pay increases came due last week.  Both officials say
they will continue to reject the money for the remainder of their terms. The
Mayor will forgo cumulatively $30,000 more in pay and Miss Bellamy $15,000.

''So it cost me $40,000, but I don't regret it at all,'' the Mayor says. Though
the raise is ''absolutely proper,'' he says, he gave it up because it was ''an
irritant'' to taxpayers ''that cost me a halfhour a day to explain, and I didn't
want to waste my time explaining.''

Mr. Koch has indicated that he will accept the raise if he wins a second term in
November 1981. What if the taxpayers are still ''irritated?''

''If at the end of four years they want to throw me out, it's O.K.  with me,''
the Mayor responds, adding: ''I like my job very much, but it ain't the end of
the world if I don't have it.''

Solar Shrinkage

In a world already awash in crises, there was one more foreboding ripple a year
ago July 6: The sun was shrinking, two researchers announced. There was no
perceptible public panic - the shrinkage was estimated at one-tenth of 1 percent
every century - but it was frontpage news.

The report has ignited a controversy among scientists, says Dr.  John A. Eddy,
the astronomer who, with Aram A. Boornazian, a computer specialist, compiled the
evidence for shrinkage. They analyzed solar measurement records for 1836 to 1953
at the Royal Greenwich Observatory in England.

''There have been papers published saying, 'No, no, it can't be,' '' Dr. Eddy
observes. ''There are other papers that say, 'Yes, yes, it can be.' ''

He concedes that his estimate of the shrinkage is probably ''on the large side''
- other estimates are ''more like a half or a third'' of one-tenth of 1 percent
a century.

Dr. Eddy aims to have the last word. He says the High-Altitude Observatory in
Boulder, Colo., with which he is affiliated, is beginning a program to make
''real-time measurements of solar diameter.'' He hopes for a ''definitive''
answer after perhaps five years of direct, daily observations.

Dr. Coppolino

Twelve years after entering a Florida prison on a life sentence for murder, Dr.
Carl A. Coppolino walked out on parole last Sept. 26. The state charged that the
anesthesiologist had given his wife, Carmela, a lethal dose of succinylcholine,
a muscle relaxant used in surgery. Dr. Coppolino said after being freed that he
was ''committed to any avenue to clear my name.''

He is writing a book about it, ''The Crime That Never Was,'' and plans to
publish it in September through his own company, Justice Press. Distribution is
to be through Caroline House, a small enterprise in Ossining, N.Y.

Dr. Coppolino is living in a condominium in Tampa, Fla., with his present wife,
Mary. He is trying to develop his own company, Raintree Investments, but after
early success in commodities trading, business has slumped with the recession,
he says.

When he was freed from prison, Dr. Coppolino said he would seek a new trial with
new evidence that would exonerate him. ''Now,'' he says, ''I think I'll wait for
the fallout from the book before I decide what to do.''

Dining on Dogs

The wire service story said that a family in Salina, Kan., had added dogs to its
dinner menu. Assistant Police Chief Darrell Wilson was quoted as saying there
was no law against it. The Director of the County Health Department, Paul
Richardson, gave his view that dressed dogs were as permissible for home
consumption as rabbits.

The two officials report that the story, which circulated last month, was really
gossip based in part on fact. About a half year before then, they say, a refugee
Vietnamese or Laotian family in Salina had consumed a dog -as is the custom in
Vietnam and Laos. The family was quickly tipped off to American ways. End of dog
diet.

But not end of story for the two officials. ''You know,'' Chief Wilson says, ''I
got calls from all over the world on that.'' Mr.  Richardson says: ''I've gotten
so many calls about this, I can't even think straight anymore.'' Richard Haitch

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
BY DON WYCLIFF,MICHAEL WRIGHT AND CAROLINE RAND HERRON;
Looking to Detroit, Reagan Fails to Look In on Miami

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1385 words


In general, Presidential candidates would sooner appear on TV without makeup
than miss a chance to influence potentially important blocs of voters.
Accordingly, Messrs. Anderson, Kennedy and Carter trooped to Florida last week
to address the annual convention of the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People. However, Ronald Reagan, for whom black votes could be crucial
in Northeastern and Middle Western states in November, skipped Miami Beach to
begin a vacation in Mexico.

The N.A.A.C.P executive director, Benjamin L. Hooks, asserted that Mr. Reagan
''has written off the black vote.'' Mr. Reagan's aides said he was a no-show
because of a staff slip-up and attempted to make amends. The National Urban
League was quickly told that Mr.  Reagan would be glad to appear at its meeting
in New York City next month. Mr. Reagan's vacation was recast as a working
retreat, where, it was said, he would sift through Vice Presidential resumes and
rest up for the Republican National Convention set to nominate him next week.

Representative John B. Anderson, who did the expected and formally declared his
independent candidacy for the White House, was scheduled to depart tomorrow on a
swing through Europe and the Middle East, at least partly to keep his name in
the news while the Republican convention commands attention. Senator Edward M.
Kennedy could feel like getting away from it all himself before the week is
over. A party committee dominated by Carter supporters is due to consider
convention rules that would, among other things, make sure that Carter delegates
don't vote for Kennedy.

The President, still trailing Mr. Reagan, according to a Gallup Poll released
last week, attacked the former California Governor's positions during a West
Coast trip. He called Mr. Reagan's proposed 10 percent tax cut, which was
rejected again by the Senate last week, ''sheer deception.'' Late in the week,
though, it appeared that the Administration had shifted course somewhat and
decided it could live with a Democratic-sponsored tax-cut bill this year after
all. The White House might not have any choice. The House Ways and Means
Committee and the Senate Finance Committee announced that hearings would get
under way later this month, aimed at reductions in 1981.

By then, the need to stimulate the economy may be overdue. The Department of
Commerce reported last week that its index of leading economic indicators
dropped by 2.4 percent in May, and a staff analyst warned that ''the worst may
not be over for the industrial sector.'' Unemployment in June unexpectedly
declined 0.1 percent, but Labor Department officials said the change was a
statistical tick. In a move that could lead to easier credit for consumers, the
Federal Reserve Board said it would remove the last of the credit controls
imposed in March.

Billions for Defense

The armed services aren't losing many on Capitol Hill these days.  Last week,
before recessing for its Fourth of July break, the Senate approved an 11.7
percent pay increase for the military and a package of expanded and new benefits
designed to make the all-volunteer services more attractive.

The raise was roughly double the amount originally requested by the Carter
Administration. And it was but one element in a $51.9 billion weapons
authorization bill, $5 billion bigger than the White House's initial proposal.

The Senate bill has to be reconciled with a similar measure that has already
cleared the House of Representatives. Civilian government employees immediately
complained about the size of the military raises. But it seemed doubtful that
President Carter - who boarded an aircraft carrier in late May to make a
dramatic pitch for more military benefits - would be very receptive to their
protests.

Foreign aid, meantime, was trampled in the rush for the exits.  Congress
approved a $16.9 billion supplemental appropriations bill and, in the process,
drastically reduced a proposal for $528 million in foreign aid. The most notable
casualty was the Export-Import Bank. The House, over the objections of its
Democratic leadership and the White House, voted down $355 million in new funds
for the bank, and the Senate, with time running out, reluctantly went along.

The High Sign for Truck Deregulation

The trucking industry has been virtually alone among American industries in
recent years in not complaining about excessive regulation. Indeed, the industry
initially fought legislation to deregulate trucking, giving its support only
when it appeared the Interstate Commerce Commission might go even further than
Congress.

Last week, in a White House ceremony attended by his political rival, Senator
Edward M. Kennedy, President Carter signed the deregulation bill. His advisers
called it a significant antiinflationary action and predicted it would save
American consumers $8 billion a year in transportation costs for the goods they
buy.

Senator Kennedy was a leading supporter of the law, which seeks to foster
competition by eliminating I.C.C. rules that favor established trucking
companies and prevent or discourage new operators from entering the business. It
also exempts certain classes of products from commission regulation, allows
carriers more leeway in setting rates and, by 1984, ends the immunity from
antitrust action that has allowed companies to set rates collectively.

At Last, Some Balm For an Old Wound

Not a commonplace occurrence in any nation - commemorating a war that wasn't won
- but last week President Carter signed a bill for construction of a Vietnam War
memorial.

''A long and painful process has brought us to this moment today,'' Mr. Carter
said. ''For too long we tried to put that division behind us by forgetting the
Vietnam War and, in the process, we ignored those who bravely answered their
nation's call.'' The memorial, to be built in Washington on two acres near the
Lincoln Memorial, will include sculpture and a roster of the 57,661 Americans
who died in the conflict. The Federal government is providing the land; the
estimated $2.5 million needed to design and build the memorial will be raised
through private donations.

Haitian Refugees Win a Big Point

''If you're white, you're all right; if you're brown, stick around; if you're
black, get back.'' That old blues lyric summarizes what a Federal judge last
week said had been the policy of the Immigration and Naturalization Service
toward Haitian refugees.

District Judge James L. King, ruling in a class-action suit brought in Miami in
behalf of more than 4,000 Haitian refugees, said the immigration service,
apparently motivated by racial bias, had engaged in wholesale violations of
their rights. He ordered the agency to cease automatically deporting Haitians
and to consider each request for political asylum on its merits.

At least 30,000 Haitians have fled their nation, the poorest in the Western
Hemisphere, and reached the United States since 1972. The immigration service
adopted a policy of routinely denying their asylum requests on the ground that
they were economic, not political, refugees. Judge King scoffed at that, saying
the service had ''demonstrated its failure to grasp the fundamental rules of
Haitian politics and economics.'' Much of the country's poverty, he said, was
''a result of (President-for-Life Jean-Claude) Duvalier's efforts to maintain
power.''

Moreover, the judge said he was forced to conclude that the immigration service
had acted out of racial bias. Several pieces of evidence introduced during the
year-long trial admitted of no other interpretation, he said, noting that the
Haitians ''are part of the first substantial flight of black refugees from a
repressive regime to this country.''

The practical effect of the ruling is unclear. The plaintiffs, along with other
Haitians and Cubans who arrived before June 20, are covered by a Presidential
''parole'' allowing them to remain in the country at least six months, time
enough for Congress to pass legislation making them permanent residents.
Presumably, however, those who have arrived since June 20 would benefit from the
court decision. A Justice Department spokesman said a decision whether to appeal
would not be made immediately.

Don Wycliff, Michael Wright and Caroline Rand Herron

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF HAITIAN REFUGEES

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAMBY:HARD-LUCK CHAMPION

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KATZ

SECTION: Section 5; Page 4, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 933 words

DATELINE: BLOOMINGTON, Minn., July 5


He had been around the world twice when the dream suddenly came true with the
quickness of a straight right hand to the chin. Now Saoul Mamby is a world
champion and he is on the road again.

Some day, said the World Boxing Council superlightweight champion, he would like
to fight at home. Mamby was born, bred and bar mitzvahed in the Bronx.

''My dream is to fight in Yankee Stadium,'' he said. ''I walk by there, ever
since I was a six-round fighter, and I'll hear the crowd of the baseball people
and think, that's for me.''

Instead, he is here to make the first defense of the title few thought he would
win. His manager did not even accompany him to Seoul, South Korea, when Mamby
won the championship with a 14thround knockout of Kim-Sang-Hyun. On Monday
night, he meets Esteban DeJesus, the former lightweight champion and the only
man to ever beat Roberto Duran, on the nationally televised card headed by Larry
Holmes and Scott LeDoux.

A Bronx Survivor

Mamby is 33 years old, and this will be by far his biggest payday, ''six
figures,'' he said, in a career that has taken him from the Caribbean to Korea,
from Paris to Thailand.

He is a baby-faced black Jewish man who learned to fight and survive in the
Bronx but has been a virtual outcast from New York rings. His defensive style
earned him the nickname ''Sweet Saoul'' and that soured customers, who demanded
more action.

Mamby has seen enough action. He fought for a year in Vietnam and says he was
outraged ''by gung-ho sergeants and soldiers who would waste a village just so
they could go back home and brag about what they did in the war.''

When he finally won the title, he feared for his life and needed police
protection to take him from the Korean ring that was being showered with
bottles.

He had managers ''who ripped me off,'' and there were times he could not get a
fight, other times he had to ''fight the best for peanuts.'' He fought Duran for
$3,000 and six months later met Antonio Cervantes, the World Boxing
Association's 140-pound champion, for $3,500.

Lightweights and Welterweights

Since turning pro in 1969, he has crossed into the lightweight and welterweight
divisions and met them all: Benny Huertas, Edwin Viruet, Victor Ortiz, Harold
Weston, and he has usually met them on their home grounds. His won-lost-draw
record is 27-12-5.

For a few days after they returned from Korea, reported his 19-yearold fiancee,
Yolanda Montgomery, ''the phone didn't stop ringing, but Saoul said, 'later for
those people, they never wrote about me before.' '' After four days, the calls
stopped, anyway.

He said he should have won the title in 1977 when he was outpointed over 15
rounds by Saensak Muangsurin in Thailand.  ''When they took the title from me in
Thailand,'' he said, ''I figured it was God's way of telling me I wasn't ready
for it yet. I said to myself, 'I know I want it, I know I can do it, but maybe I
just can't hack what comes with it.' I would have wasted a lot of money on loose
women and big cars.''

Carl King His Manager

He has not lost since the Muangsurin fight, but he was not expected to beat Kim.
His latest manager, Carl King, the 23-year-old son of Don King, the promoter,
did not even go to Korea. Mamby did not invite him, either.

Carl King, who describes himself as ''the twig on the family tree,'' said Mamby
had ''a bad attitude toward managers; he wants to do everything himself.'' He
still does, with his long-time trainer, Al Smith, and an assistant trainer, Lee
Black.

The Korean promoter sent Mamby plane tickets to bring along only three persons.
He chose Smith, Black and Yolanda, ''people close to me.''

Saoul and Yolanda met four years ago on their elevator. She lived on the 38th
floor, he on the 17th of Tracy Towers in the West Bronx.  She was 15 years old
then, Mamby 29.

They started dating a year ago. On one of their first dates, Mamby took Yolanda
to see his good friend, Holmes, defend his W.B.C.  heavyweight title against
Mike Weaver at Madison Square Garden.

Holmes a Generous Friend

Larry Holmes means a lot to Mamby. They met 12 years ago when both were training
at the old Gleason's Gym in the Bronx. Both had to struggle to reach the top.

''Sometimes he'd see I was broke, and he was broke, too, but if Larry had $3,
he'd give me $2,'' said Mamby. ''Whatever he had, he would share it with me. He
told me to stick with Don King, that King maybe had a thousand and one things on
his mind, but that I was one of those things. King would loan me money, too, and
when I went to pay him back, he would just say, 'go ahead, keep it.' ''

Mamby washed windows and drove a gypsy cab before taking what he called his
''biggest gamble'' and dropping everything to concentrate on boxing.

His mother, a native Spaniard, and his father, a Jamaican, converted to Judaism
when Mamby was 4.  ''I had to fight every day,'' he said, ''especially on the
Sabbath coming home from temple. Kids would follow me down the street and I'd
have to tell them to wait a minute until I changed clothes. Then I'd come
outside and we'd fight.''

Yolanda, a Catholic, cooks kosher food for him, but he has never exploited his
religion. He refused, for example, to wear a Star of David on his boxing trunks.
''Christian fighters,'' he said, ''don't wear crosses, do they?'' It might have
helped his career, but Mamby says he has to do things his way.

''It hasn't been all that bad,'' he said. ''I've been around the world and seen
cultures I never would have had the chance to otherwise. I've met kings, queens.
That much I've gotten out of boxing. ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF SAOUL MAMBY

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY OPINION MEMORIES OF A CHILD OF ANOTHER REVOLUTION

BYLINE: By TERRI SETTEDUCATO

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 22, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words


The Revolution is not an event that takes two or three days ... It is a
long-drawn-out process in which new people are created ...  people who in their
turn reorganize the society so that it becomes a nonalienated human society free
from war, hunger and exploitation.  RUDI DUTSCHKE, March 7, 1968

WE HAD high goals back then. As a child of the revolution, I am a product of the
60's legacy. The crusade for a freer life style, for peace and for civil rights
was as vocal and persistent as the snap, crackle and pop that I ate for
breakfast every morning.

True, there have been some setbacks, but I believe that the 80's will be more
like the 60's. Families with young children, having incorporated the 60's
sensibilities into their attitudes, participate in antinuke rallies, vigils and
die-ins. Many of these protests are well planned and peacefully carried out.

The Wall Street protest marked the beginning of a new era in the antinuclear
movement. Protests would now focus on those who promote and profit from nuclear
technology, rather than on nuclear generating stations.

The lessons of the 60's are subliminal, yet the events affected the way that I,
for one, viewed the world.  When the United States entered the Southeast Asia
conflict, I entered another type of battleground: first grade in Brooklyn. I was
unaware of the world outside my family until John F. Kennedy ran for the White
House and my parents wore campaign buttons. When Mr.  Kennedy campaigned down
13th Avenue, my sister and I ran to the corner to catch a glimpse of the next
President.

On Nov. 22, 1963, I was in school when the Mother Superior announced that
President Kennedy had been assassinated. Everyone went home with tears streaming
down their cheeks. I saw my neighbors in tears, even the garbage men. And my
mother, who never allowed herself to cry in front of the children, stood in the
kitchen with a damp red face.

I lived on the edge of change because I was too young to participate or to
understand what all the fuss was about.  I watched from a cozy parlor chair as
the 6 o'clock news brought the Vietnam War home: naked babies torn apart or
limping through the streets, mothers crying, soldiers dragging plastic bags. I
was never moved; it seemed like just another war movie.

It wasn't until 1968 that I began to question the events around me, and then I
was horrified by the news on TV. The bloody scenes of Vietnam alternated with
gory views of civil disorder in America.

On April 4, a special TV bulletin announced that the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.
had been shot on the balcony of a hotel in Memphis.  Watching the telecast, I
suddenly felt I had missed something. A great man had come and gone before I
knew what he was all about.

Two months later, Robert F. Kennedy was assassinated in Los Angeles. I awoke the
next morning to hear the news. On the way to school, I stopped at my friend's
house and we cried in the doorway.

Again, it seemed that I was born too late. Senator Kennedy died before I had a
chance. I was 14 and all the heroes were dead, it seemed.

After student sit-ins, demonstrations and marches became permanent features on
the 6 o'clock news, I became frustrated. My father would mutter:

''Years ago, they told us that education would solve our problems.  Now, at
least half our children go to college to get an education, and they wind up
destroying the institutions. Terrible ...  terrible.''

But I knew there had to be a good reason for them to behave so violently. I
began to take a stand on the war and on the injustice in America. We would have
heated discussions over dinner, but I wasn't accomplishing anything.

The rest of my family opposed me, and my brothers reacted with disgust when I
asked if they would consider filing as conscientious objectors.

Between then and graduation from high school, my protests were limited to
boycotting the Memorial Day Parade, refusing to watch war pictures with the rest
of the family and wearing a patch on the seat of my pants with ''The Forgotten
Majority'' creweled over a picture of four Army graves.

But I was already caught up in the famous maxim of Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. -
''It is required of a man that he should share the passion and action of his
time at peril of being judged not to have lived'' - and I looked forward to
graduating so that I could join the antiwar cause before any more history was
made without me.

In 1973, I stood, together with other members of the Fair Lawn Committee for
Peace in Vietnam, outside the Municipal Building and listened to their speeches
against war. I wrote letters to my Congressmen and to President Nixon.

With the committee, I rode a bus to Washington to protest Mr.  Nixon's
inauguration in 1973, and later participated in other local and state
demonstrations against the war. I wore my ''Impeach Nixon'' button faithfully
and hooked other antiwar buttons to my tapestry handbag.

The buttons were as unwelcome as a belch at the dinner table. They were seen by
some as a breach of taste. When their meaning registered, some strangers
indicated agreement. Others lectured me that political statements shouldn't be
seen in certain places - churches, restaurants and family parties.

Where does one draw the line? One of my biggest problems then was choosing
between the personal and the political. Should I take a stand or keep my mouth
shut? If I took a stand, would it be out of emotionalism, self-righteousness or
principle? If I acted on conviction today, would I regret my participation
tomorrow?

These questions haunted me for quite some time. Looking back, I realize that the
personal and the political are really equivalent.  Noninvolvement is also a
political act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Terri Setteducato lives in Fair Lawn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 510 words


WORLD NEWS BRIEFS;
Pakistan Pledges Change, Ending Shiite Protests

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, July 6 (Reuters) - President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq made a
peace settlement today with 25,000 Shiite Moslem demonstrators besieging the
Government secretariat in Islamabad.

A Government communique said the President had promised changes by Sept. 15 in a
new tax law that the protesters said was contrary to the laws of their sect.
Within minutes, demonstrators, who had been protesting for three days, began
streaming back to their homes through a strong cordon of troops and policemen.

The settlement was reached after talks between President Zia and Shiite leaders
including Mufti Jaffar Hussain.  At least one man was killed and 13 were injured
in clashes with policemen yesterday.

Zimbabwe Minimum Wage Spurs Many Dismissals

SALISBURY, Zimbabwe, July 6 (Reuters) - A Government decision to set a minimum
wage for workers has backfired for thousands with dismissals reported throughout
the country.

Officials of the ruling party of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe said today that in
the Salisbury area alone more than 5,000 workers were dismissed before the
minimum wage bill went into effect last Tuesday.

Worst hit, according to the officials, were domestic servants and farm workers
for whom the minimum has been set at $45 a month.  Employees in the commercial
and industrial sectors, where the minimum has been fixed at $105 a month, have
also been dismissed. The officials said that every party office in the country
was dealing with hundreds of workers each day complaining of unfair dismissal.

Vietnam Reports Fighting With China Across Border

BANGKOK, Thailand, July 6 (Reuters) - Vietnamese gunners yesterday fought an
artillery duel with Chinese troops across the border between the two countries,
the Hanoi radio said today.

It said the duel was instigated by Chinese forces who poured hundreds of
artillery and mortar shells into an area of the northern Vietnamese province of
Cau Bang ''causing dozens of casualties and destroying many houses and crop
fields.''

The radio said Vietnamese artillery units returned the fire ''and duly punished
the aggressors.''

Burning Italian Liner Tilts Onto Its Side

LA SPEZIA, Italy, July 6 (Reuters) -The Italian luxury liner Leonardo da Vinci,
which caught fire three days ago, tilted onto its right side today in about 40
feet of water, port authorities here said.

The liner, listing at an angle of about 60 degrees, was still on fire, and it
appeared that the flames might have reached 1,200 tons of fuel oil in its tanks.
Smoke, which had subsided, increased as the ship heeled over and dense black
clouds billowed over the bay here.

''All our efforts now are concentrated on getting a mobile barrier into place to
avoid possible pollution damage if the oil escapes,'' a harbor official said.

Boats taking tourists to look at the smoldering liner were banned from coming
closer than half a mile.  The 20-year-old liner is expected to be sold for
scrap. It was insured for $7.7 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME THE COURT SPEAKS UP;
by Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 937 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, July 6


It is always a mistake to take the Supreme Court for granted - to assume that
its decisions will fit into a predictable mold. So we were reminded as its term
ended last week. In two dramatic decisions the Burger Court confounded critics
who put it down as insensitive to the Constitutional interests of equality and
liberty.

In Fullilove v. Klutznick the Justices upheld a strong affirmative action
program, a provision in Federal public works legislation setting aside 10
percent of the work for minority contractors. In terms of real economic and
social effect, the decision is likely to mean much more than the better-known
case of Allan Bakke.

In Richmond Newspapers v. Virginia the Court held that a judge had violated the
First Amendment when he closed a criminal trial to the public and the press. And
beyond the issue of closed trials, the Justices indicated that the arbitrary
closing of any public institution may violate the Constitution.

The Virginia case was a bold step forward from any previous First Amendment
decision. Chief Justice Warren, for one, never said that the First Amendment
included a right to acquire information as well as the right to speak or write
what one knows.

''For the first time,'' Justice Stevens said in a concurring opinion, ''the
Court unequivocally holds that an arbitrary interference with access to
important information is an abridgement of the freedoms of speech and of the
press.''

The decision was the more striking because of what some members of the present
Court had said earlier on the subject. Six years ago, in a much-cited speech at
the Yale Law School, Justice Stewart said: ''There is no Constitutional right to
have access to particular Government information.'' He and Chief Justice Burger
took the same view in opinions they wrote just two years ago.

How could these judges have shifted their positions so abruptly and so soon?
Oddly, the answer may lie in part in the defeat last year, in the Gannett case,
of a Constitutional challenge to the closing of a courtroom. A 5-4 majority
decided then that the Sixth Amendment, in assuring criminal defendants the right
to a ''public trial,'' did not give the general public or the press the right to
demand an open courtroom if the defendant did not.

Probably to the majority's surprise, judges around the country responded to the
Gannett decision by closing courtrooms. The Supreme Court was confronted with
the issue it had put aside in the Gannett case: the validity of such closings
under the First Amendment. Thus the question of access to information came up in
a context - trials - where history and public expectation were strongly on the
side of openness in the official institution.

The Virginia decision formally covers trials only, but the larger implications
for the First Amendment cannot be missed. Chief Justice Burger, in his opinion,
said: ''People in an open society do not demand infallibility from their
institutions, but it is difficult for them to accept what they are prohibited
from observing.'' That is a profound reason for close constitutional scrutiny
when any public institution is closed to the public.

It was not only at the end of this term that the Burger Court confounded some of
the critical stereotypes. Other decisions during the year marked advances for
individual liberty.

The Justices held, for example, that a warrant was required to arrest a criminal
suspect in his home; half the states allowed such arrests without warrant, so
the Supreme Court was not merely following a consensus. And the Court took an
expansive view of suits for denial of civil rights, allowing individuals to sue
for local officials' violations of Federal laws as well as of the Constitution.

It was of course not a consistently libertarian court, or a sensitive one. That
could hardly be said of a Court that, with a hearing, made Frank Snepp liable to
draconian penalties for publishing a book about the end in Vietnam without
clearance from his former C.I.A. superiors. But neither was it a Court to be
dismissed as always deferential to authority.

The other point brought to mind by the end of the Court's term is how its
decisions may have consequences beyond their immediate legal reach -moral and
political consequences.

That was notably true of the affirmative action decision. Legally, all the court
did was to say that Congress had not exceeded its power in setting aside work
for minority contractors. That left Congress free to do so again or not. But in
fact, the decision is likely to have a larger impact. It will tend, as the late
Alexander Bickel said, to legitimate the program - to make it more acceptable in
the society.

The same can be said of a decision less popular among liberals: the 5-4
upholding of legislation that denies Medicaid funds for abortions. Again, the
decision was in terms of Congress's power to make policy choices; the opinion
went out of its way to suggest that the Justices would not make the same choice,
if it were theirs to make. But the effect on the public and political climate
may still be to strengthen the anti-abortion movement.

A system that puts great issues to nine judges is stuck with the consequences.
They will disturb all of us, from time to time. But we do not trust any other
institution in this society to make final judgments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Memorial Flag Is Stolen

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 72 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, July 6


An American flag given a Miami man along with a posthumous Congressional Medal
of Honor for his son was stolen on the night of the Fourth of July. The flag,
which had flown over the Capitol building in Washington, was given to James
Robinson by President Johnson with the Congressional Medal of Honor that his son
James Jr. won as he died in Vietnam. Friday night, vandals and took the flag
from its pole in the Robinson yard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 8, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS MRS. THATCHER'S ECONOMIC CURE CAN KILL

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 733 words

DATELINE: LONDON, July 8


The one thing everybody agrees on here is that the British economy is going to
get a good deal worse before there's a hope of it getting any better.

Hamburger in a good restaurant costs $15, and inflation is still 22 percent.
Unemployment is at a postwar record of l.66 million, which at 7 percent is less
than that of the United States, but it is rising more rapidly in Britain and
likely to reach 2 million fairly soon.

Actual output is dropping by 3-4 percent this year. Bankruptcies, mostly in
small and medium businesses, have tripled in the last three months over the
first quarter of the year.

All this is a deliberate dose of horse medicine, applied by Prime Minister
Thatcher's Government on the theory put forward by Milton Friedman, the Chicago
economist, of relying on money supply to correct economic ills.

Britain has been pushed to extremes. The attempt now to ''squeeze out
inflation,'' in Mrs. Thatcher's words, and to force some basic changes in the
pattern of manufacture is putting the country through a painful wringer. It is
too early to say whether or not it will work, but some lessons about timelier
economic doctoring are evident for Americans.

They have to do with the relation between politics and economics.  For one
thing, Mrs. Thatcher can try her relentless cure because she counts on four more
years before facing an election. And the British parliamentary system enforces a
party discipline that is unimaginable in Congress, despite the distress of
''wets,'' Tories she considers too sissy to soldier through the rough treatment
without crying.

For another, the gravity of the ailment arose from letting things go much too
far in previous years, building big automatic spending increases into the
budget, and then clamping on wage controls that created explosive pressures when
they inevitably had to be relaxed.

There already had been some drastic swings between stop and go. One extreme
breeds the other. The habit derived from Keynesian ideas of deficit budgeting
has brought as reaction revival of the notion that market forces should be left
untamed.

The fallacy of Keynes, however, whose belief in pump-priming showed the way out
of the Great Depression of the 30's, wasn't his theory of compensating for
economic cycles to reduce their impact. It was his lack of political foresight,
not realizing how much harder it is to raise than to cut taxes, to limit than to
increase spending. He prescribed a pendulum going both ways, but vested
interests of both labor and business violated the laws of physics and kept the
pendulum stuck on one side.

Those laws, however, are reasserting themselves here with a vengeance. There is
serious doubt whether British industry can emerge from its current crash diet
with enough strength to resume healthy new activity.

The necessary investment isn't forthcoming on sheer trust that after recession
the market is bound to pick up, and no one knows when the Government will decide
enough medicine has been administered. Only the oil companies and the banks are
making money now, one big businessman said. Excess funds that exist tend to go
into speculation, driving up real estate and further depressing construction.

Not only the poor and the most exposed are paying for the squeeze.  The middle
classes, who were the main losers before, are still dropping down. A coal mine
manager just reported that ''we advertised for electricians and we're getting
electronics engineers'' among hundreds of applicants for limited jobs.

The danger is that there won't be a way to turn things around when the situation
becomes humanly and politically intolerable except to go too far again and
reproduce inflation.

Modern economics requires a constant and delicate balancing, recklessly
neglected in the United States when the Johnson Administration tried to pay for
the Vietnam War without tightening the national belt. Horse medicine, which may
or may not save the patient, is the terrible price for electoral economics and
rigidly dogmatic attitudes about how much or how little government should do for
the economy.

There is still no easy, one-shot way to maintain prosperity, and the British
experience is a warning about how hard it can get when panaceas are sought.
Avoiding the most terrible cures takes a constant mix of restraint and
initiative, thrift and compassion, regardless of the political calendar.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SUSPECT GIVES UP IN '70 EXPLOSION THAT KILLED 3 IN GREENWICH VILLAGE

BYLINE: By LEE A. DANIELS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1080 words


Cathlyn Platt Wilkerson gave herself up yesterday, more than 10 years after a
basement bomb factory exploded and killed three people in her father's Greenwich
Village town house.

The 35-year-old Miss Wilkerson, who had been active in the Weathermen, a radical
underground group, walked into the office of District Attorney Robert M.
Morgenthau at 9:30 A.M. yesterday, accompanied by two lawyers.

The presumably accidental explosion on March 6, 1970, had leveled the town
house, which the police said had been used in the making of dynamite bombs by
the Weathermen, a faction of the Students for a Democratic Society. Miss
Wilkerson had been in hiding ever since.

Released on $10,000 Bail

Miss Wilkerson was arraigned last night before Judge Rose McBrien in Criminal
Court in Manhattan on charges of illegal possession of dynamite and criminally
negligent homicide. The judge set bail at $10,000 and imposed several
restrictions on her movements. Miss Wilkerson met the bail and was released.

After the arraignment, she read a lengthy statement that charged in part that
the political and social conditions in the United States and abroad had not
basically changed from the situation a decade ago that had triggered the
Weathermen's actions.

''The conditions are the same and I have the same commitment to struggle against
them,'' she said.  She declined to answer questions, and her lawyers, Elizabeth
Fink and Margaret Ratner, would not discuss the explosion or her whereabouts
since her disappearance. They also would not comment on her reasons for
surrendering.

Two of the explosion victims were identified as Diana Oughton, 28, and Theodore
Gold, 23, while the third, a young man, was never identified. And there was
still no clue to the whereabouts of Katherine Boudin, who is believed to have
fled with Miss Wilkerson after the explosion at the town house at 18 West 11th
Street.

Miss Wilkerson and Miss Boudin, as well as Miss Oughton and Mr.  Gold, were all
associated with the Weathermen, one of the last vestiges of the turbulent
student radicalism of the 1960's.

The Weathermen battled the police and took credit for a spate of bombings of
offices and public buildings beginning in 1969. The movement went underground in
1970 and a number of its members are still being sought by authorities on
charges stemming from acts of violence.

Miss Wilkerson's attorneys contacted Mr. Morgenthau on Monday to arrange the
surrender. The actual surrender took only a few moments.  Mr. Morgenthau said
Miss Wilkerson looked ''normal'' during the brief time he saw her.

Miss Wilkerson's flight in 1970 began shortly before noon on the day that three
shattering explosions, followed by fire, tore through her father's four-story
town house in the heart of Greenwich Village.

When rescuers arrived at the scene, they found two women, one partially clad and
the other nude, who had been trapped in a pile of bricks and wood. The women
were helped from the building, then made their way to a neighbor's apartment,
where they cleaned up and were given clothes. Then, saying they were going for
medicine, they vanished.

60 Sticks of Dynamite Found

Sifting through the rubble over the next week, police officers and firemen found
more than 60 sticks of dynamite purchased in New Hampshire four days earlier,
four 12-inch pipes packed with dynamite and nails, and several blasting caps and
other instruments used to assemble homemade bombs. They also found portions of
three bodies.

The property where the town house once stood was sold to a couple in 1977 for an
undisclosed price. A new town house has been built on the site and the couple
moved into it in June of last year.

The City Medical Examiner's office subsequently identified Mr.  Gold, a leader
of the Columbia University S.D.S. chapter during the 1968 student demonstrations
there, and Miss Oughton, a member of the Weathermen whose great-grandfather had
helped to found the Boy Scouts of America.

After her surrender yesterday, Miss Wilkerson was held in tight security during
the day in a suite of rooms on the ninth floor of the District Attorney's office
in the Criminal Court Building at 100 Centre Street. She was brought to a
first-floor courtroom for her arraignment, which lasted less than 10 minutes.

A Number of Bombings

In the aftermath of the 1970 explosion, as if to avenge the death of their
members, the Weathermen were believed to have bombed a number of corporation
offices and government facilities in Pittsburgh, Washington and New York City.

The Weathermen, who first surfaced in June 1969, described themselves as
committed revolutionists whose aim was to bring down the capitalist American
society by provoking the government to institute oppressive measures. The
American involvement in the Vietnam War was still at its height, provoking
demonstrations and confrontations with authorities.

Never numbering more than a few hundred activists, the Weathermen began with an
orchestrated campaign of terrorist demonstrations, which were held in Chicago in
October 1969 and were called the ''days of rage.'' Miss Wilkerson, Miss Boudin
and Miss Oughton were all arrested in the Chicago violence. Miss Oughton was
fined $250 and the other two never appeared for trial.

By 1973, most of the widely known Weathermen had disappeared from public view.
In the next several years, some of them would emerge again to turn themselves in
to local or Federal authorities, but many are still fugitives.

Another Who Surrendered

One of those who turned himself in was Mark Rudd, who surrendered in 1977 after
seven years as a fugitive on charges of criminal tresspass during the Columbia
student riots in 1968. He was also accused of jumping bail and obstruction of
criminal justice but was set free after plea-bargaining to the first charge.

Among the Weathermen still being sought on a variety of charges, in addition to
Miss Boudin, are Bernardine Dohrn, Jeff Jones, John Gregory Jacobs, Michael
Speigel and Jeffrey Powell.

Miss Wilkerson attended elite preparatory schools and Swarthmore College. Her
father, James P. Wilkerson, is the owner of a chain of radio stations in the
Middle West. At the time of her flight, her stepfather, Harlan D. Logan, was
Speaker of the New Hampshire House of Representatives.

Miss Boudin's father, Leonard Boudin, is an attorney who has defended many
dissidents, including Dr. Benjamin Spock, who had been an opponent of the
Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo oof Cathlyn P.Wilkerson

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 817 words


AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood Enters Hospital For Psychiatric Evaluation

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., July 8 (UPI) - Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps,
charged with desertion and collaboration with the enemy during nearly 14 years
in Vietnam, went to a Portsmouth, Va., Navy hospital today to begin three days
of psychiatric evaluation.

A pretrial hearing, already in its seventh month, was recessed for five days so
Private Garwood could meet with a panel of three military psychiatrists.

The doctors have been instructed by the presiding judge, Col. R.E.  Switzer, to
determine Private Garwood's fitness to stand trial as well as what effect
''brainwashing'' may have had on the 34-year-old Marine's conduct while with the
enemy.

The findings of the psychiatric review board will be made available to Colonel
Switzer but are not expected to be made public.

Bergland Says Hot Weather Is Bound for Corn Belt

WASHINGTON, July 8 (AP) - The hot weather system that has gripped the Southern
plains is slowly moving north toward the nation's Corn Belt, where crops so far
have mostly escaped the withering heat, Agriculture Secretary Bob Bergland said
today.

Moreover, he said, there are indications that the heat wave, which has produced
record high temperatures for two weeks, shows signs of remaining for another
month.

Mr. Bergland said that he had been briefed earlier in the day by weather experts
who told him ''that this high-pressure cell of very high temperatures aloft is
moving north'' at a ''slow rate'' of speed.

''It's now probably centering on western Missouri and Kansas and continuing on
northward,'' said Mr. Bergland, who made his remarks in a telephone interview
with a group of farm broadcasters.

''That, translated, means continued high temperatures moving as far north as
South Dakota and Iowa, covering Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, Oklahoma and
Texas,'' Mr. Bergland said.

U.S. Will Release Boats Seized in 'Freedom Flotilla'

MIAMI, July 8 (AP) - The Federal Government has agreed to release all seized
commercial shrimping vessels that left the United States before President Carter
ordered an end to the ''freedom flotilla,'' officials said last night.

The announcement, made by Carter Administration officials and the United States
Attorney's office in Miami, expanded the effect of an earlier decision by
Federal District Judge Sidney Aronovitz releasing the boats of 19 commercial
fishermen who had opposed the seizures.

The boats left before the ban but returned after it went into effect.  More than
115,000 refugees have arrived in Key West since the boatlift began in April. Mr.
Carter issued his order in May.  The release is not without conditions. The
skippers must post personal surety bonds of $30,000 for any boat under 65 feet
or $50,000 for any boat over 65 feet. They also must sign a promise not to take
the boat back to Cuba and a notice that the boat owner will not to go foreign
ports.

Lawyers from both sides met until late last night working out details.

Strikes Slow Construction In Southern California

LOS ANGELES, July 8 (AP) - With the state's housing industry just beginning to
recover from a slump, construction in southern California was at a near
standstill today as more than 100,000 construction workers stayed off the job
for a second day.

The construction industry, already hobbled by walkouts in northern California
and San Diego County in mid-June, received another setback yesterday when 12,000
members of the Laborers Union walked off the job in southern California.

Picket lines set up by the laborers, who do heavy work such as digging ditches
and moving equipment, were honored by an estimated 100,000 skilled carpenters,
masons, operating engineers and teamsters, shutting down most major projects.

National news appears on pages A12-16 and B7-8; political news on pages B7-8.

24 Nuclear Plants Ordered To Test Shutdown Systems

WASHINGTON, July 8 (AP) - The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has ordered
operators of 24 nuclear power plants to test their manual and automatic shutdown
systems as a result of an incident at an Alabama reactor late last month.

The commission said that plants now operating would test the systems over the
next several weeks and that plants currently shut down would conduct the tests
before resuming operation.

The commission staff ordered operators of reactors using boiling water to
perform other types of tests of the shutdown system last week and to review
procedures to assure ''that reactor operators recognize the difficulties
encountered'' at the Browns Ferry unit in Alabama on June 28.

Engineers from the Tennessee Valley Authority and the General Electric
Corporation planned additional tests at the Browns Ferry plant near Decatur,
hoping to find out why 76 of the unit's 185 control rods failed to insert during
a manual shutdown for maintenance a week ago.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GUEST OF THE RUSSIANS: MOSCOW'S PROBLEMS, DILEMMAS

BYLINE: By Leslie H. Gelb

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 906 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


For 20 years of my professional life spent working on foreign policy in and out
of Government, the Soviet Union almost always has been at the other end of the
rope. It has never been easy to figure out why the rope was being pulled or
tugged or made slack, especially now when contacts between Americans and senior
Soviet officials are so rare. So when the Institute of the the U.S.A. and
Canada, an organization that specializes in American affairs, invited me to
spend two weeks in June talking with party, military and Foreign Ministry
officials, and scholars, and traveling, it was easy to decide to go.

One searing impression from the trip was this: Whether or not the Russians have
a master plan to trick the United States and take over the world, there is no
question that they are confronting overwhelming problems for which they do not
have good answers. They do not have a good idea of how to succeed in
Afghanistan, yet they are clear that they cannot afford to lose. While some
officials may see opportunity there, others know it is a trap. I could have
closed my eyes in Moscow and believed I was back in the Pentagon listening to a
debate over Vietnam.

While Soviet officials would like to have both Afghanistan and detente, they are
just beginning to appreciate that detente is in shambles and to weigh the costs.
I do not doubt that they are in the middle of a slugfest over how to deal with
America. Like officials in Washington, they are particularly concerned that
conciliatory gestures will be read as signs of weakness and encourage the other
side to even greater toughness.

They talk least frankly about their coming bind on resources, but that bind is
implicit in most other things they have to say. Economic growth may slow
considerably. Oil production will drop, leaving less to export to their Eastern
European satellites, putting more strain on those countries' economies and
therefore on political relationships with Moscow. They know they may have to
increase the very long lines for consumer goods to make even further increases
in military spending to match coming Western military outlays. They argue that
the military balance cannot be calculated, as we do it, as a comparison of
Soviet and American forces. They insist that in calculating the risks of war,
Moscow must count in as well the forces of China, Japan and Western Europe. This
is their explanation of why their forces are so large - just as American forces
used to be one-half again as large as they are today when we had to plan for
possibly fighting the Soviet Union and China. Further, how can they count on
their Eastern European allies when Rumania refuses to permit Warsaw Pact
exercises on its territory, will not let Soviet troops cross its borders, and
voted against Moscow on Afghanistan in the United Nations General Assembly?

Moscow's dilemma over Afghanistan was transparent. Moscow feels it must maintain
the essence of the new Brezhnev Doctrine, which holds that once in the Communist
orbit, always in it. Yet, many policy makers in Moscow also understand that the
Afghan guerrillas cannot be made to join a coalition Government headed by
President Babrak Karmal, cannot be crushed by the massive application of Soviet
power, and that the more force used, the more likely Moscow's position in the
Moslem and Western worlds will be seriously jeopardized. Thus, it seemed to me
that while Soviet leaders insisted that they could not aford to lose in
Afghanistan, they also realized that there would be serious risks in trying to
win.

Just as Richard M. Nixon tried to get out of a similar dilemma in Vietnam by
going to Moscow, Moscow is now looking for help from Washington. In the early
1970's, President Nixon sought Moscow's aid in putting pressure on Hanoi to slow
down the war against South Vietnam in return for which Washington would agree to
establish detente. Now, Moscow is seeking Washington's help in tamping down
military support for the Afghan guerrillas in return for which Moscow would be
willing to re-establish detente. The reasoning is simple: Without detente,
everything becomes more costly and more dangerous for Moscow and the West. This
time, the only hitch is that Washington is not making this calculation the same
way.

In the best of years, a world without detente is nothing Moscow likes to
contemplate. It is certainly something the Russians would like to avoid acting
upon at this time of their upcoming new fiveyear plan. The Communist Party
Congress is to convene next February to approve the plan. The five-year plan is
at the very core of the way Soviet officials control their society. The
decisions that party leaders will make this winter will set the framework for
the allocation of resources, military and civilian, and will also set general
policy toward the United States for the next five years.

Soviet leaders clearly do not want to allocate an even greater share of the pie
to the military, but most Western diplomats and correspondents in Moscow are
firmly convinced that they can and will. In the meantime, Soviet leaders are
casting about for alternatives or ways out of their dilemmas, looking for keys
to improve relations with Washington and for fallbacks should this fail.
Leslie H. Gelb, Director of the State Department's Bureau of Politico-Military
Affairs from January 1977 to July 1979, is a senior associate at the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

IF THAILAND IS PERILED;
by Peter

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 882 words


Navarro 2,314,0CAMBRIDGE, Mass. - The Vietnam War is not over - only America's
participation in it - and the next Vietnamese target, now that systematic
starvation of Cambodia has brought it to heel, appears to be Thailand.

Vietnam's given reason for its incursion into Thailand on June 23 was that Thai
soil was providing a sanctuary for Cambodian guerrillas who were attacking
Vietnamese troops in Cambodia. Some State Department strategists, however,
regarded the long-expected

Vietnamese move into Thailand as part of the growing global trend of Communist
expansion embodied in the Cuban involvement in Angola, the Soviet role in
Ethiopia and occupation of Afghanistan. From this standpoint, the fall of
Thailand would move Southeast Asia a giant step further toward realizing the
previously discredited ''domino theory.'' Laos and Cambodia are now Vietnamese
satellites; should Thailand go, only Malaysia and defenseless Singapore would
block Communist control of the strategic Strait of Malacca, a major shipping
route between Europe and the Far East.

Such a cold war interpretation of the Thai-Vietnamese conflict, while containing
germs of truth, nonetheless confuses world revolution with regional imperialism.
Indeed, having yoked Laos and Cambodia, Vietnam has successfully restored the
colony that was French Indochina. In that context, Vietnam is no longer the
''virtuous liberator of oppressed peoples,'' an image deftly propagated here and
in the third world, but rather an imperialist conqueror capitalizing on
large-scale military might to fill a vacuum left by the American withdrawal. The
booty is the resources and far more fertile rice fields of its neighbors, who
are historical enemies. In fact, rice may be Vietnam's main target. While
Thailand was the world's biggest rice exporter in 1979, Vietnam's less-fertile
paddies yielded last year only 9.8 million tons, the Agriculture Department said
- several million short of its requirements. In fact, Vietnam had to import
total of 1.3 million tons of rice and less-expensive corn and wheat substitutes.

Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie strongly condemned Vietnam's attack into
Thailand, and President Carter immediately ordered delivery of $3.5 million in
military aid, te airlift of which is just ending. However, no matter how
well-armed, the 160,000-man Thai Army is no match for Vietnam's. With 200,000
troops in Cambodia and one million overall, Vietnam has one of the largest
armies - and most experienced - in the world. Should border skirmishes escalate
into a full-blown war, a large-scale tank blitzkrieg across the Cambodian border
and down the short corridor to Bangkok would likely be successful.

Thus, America must consider other, more-direct actions - perhaps tactical air
support from a Philippine air base, or moving warships into the Gulf of Thailand
to provide naval artillery. However, such options - and any deeper involvement -
would of course require Congressional approval, raising the thorny issue of
whether Congress and the public would support a second war with Vietnam.

America has strong moral and legal obligations to help Thailand, a staunch ally.
Thai troops fought shoulder-to-shoulder with Americans in Vietnam, and Thai air
bases were staging areas for numerous bombing missions flown over Vietnam.
Further, under the 1954 Manila Pact, America pledged to assist Thailand against
any attack from outside, and Mr. Carter has renewed that promise. If we turn our
backs on nations that sign mutual-defense treaties with us and that give us
strategic bases, don't we risk endangering those alliances and losing those
bases?

Thailand is not a South Vietnam, a corrupt land that was torn by internal
conflict and was ripe for a Communist revolution. Rather, Thailand is a cohesive
country with a stable Government, bound by devout Buddhism and united through a
respected King - a rich land where the people are well-fed, and where, at least
by third-world standards, there is high regard for human rights. One would thus
not expect that American support against an external aggressor would, as it did
in South Vietnam, degenerate into a struggle in which the native army collapsed
and Americans were left to fight in a hostile population.

The prospect of another Vietnam War is alarming. How America responded would
show whether we had overcome our ''Vietnam syndrome'' - an apparent
unwillingness to stand up for our allies and global interests. Would
demonstrators again descend on Washington to decry ''American imperialism''?
Would the news media present the mistakes of the first Vietnam War as
''evidence'' that we should not be involved in another? Or would the 80's bring
an awareness that the Vietnamese in Cambodia, Russians in Afghanistan and Cubans
in Angola are playing for keeps in a game of global domination that America can
no longer afford to watch passively?
Peter Navarro, a doctoral student in economics at Harvard University, served as
a Peace Corps volunteer in Thailand from 1973 through 1976.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA AND VIETNAM IN A WAR OF WORDS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 444 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, July 9


China and Vietnam are shouting at each other once again over provocations along
their 480-mile border, but diplomats here and in Peking report seeing none of
the usual signs that a Chinese military move against Vietnam may be in the
offing.

Western diplomats here said today that they had no evidence that China had moved
three additional army divisions to Vietnam's border in the Gwangxi Zhuang
Autonomous Region, as asserted earlier this week by Nguyen Co Thach, the
Vietnamese Foreign Minister.

While the level of skirmishing along the mountainous border appears to have
risen during the last two weeks, with both sides reporting artillery barrages,
troop infiltrations and sniping incidents, a Western diplomat with access to
intelligence reports said there was no clear indication of a serious increase in
border tensions or of major reinforcements.

With a quarter of a million militiamen and regular army troops on each side,
Western military analysts say that China would need half a million more men to
launch a foray across the border similar to the one staged in early 1979. Such
movements would be difficult if not impossible to hide from radio monitors and
spy satellites, an analyst said.

Spring of Relative Quiet

After a spring of relative quiet, the war of words between Hanoi and Peking
erupted again after Vietnamese troops pushed into Thailand in pursuit of
Cambodian rebels two weeks ago.

Without mentioning this incursion, the official Vietnam News Agency accused
Chinese forces of staging raids and ambushes in Vietnam during the same period.
The agency said the raids were stepped up last week.

On Saturday, China sent a protest note to the Vietnamese Embassy in Peking,
charging ''incessant armed provocations'' along the border.  The Chinese said
Vietnam had stepped up border provocations to divert world attention from its
raids into Thailand, to ''lighten the pressure on world opinion for a Soviet
troop withdrawal'' from Afghanistan, to provoke China so that the Soviet Union
would give Hanoi more military aid, and to foment anti-Chinese sentiment in
Vietnam.

On Monday, Quan Doi Nhan Dan, the Vietnamese army newspaper, countered by
accusing China and the United States of mounting a ''new plot against Vietnam.''
As evidence it cited this week's visit to Peking of Richard C. Holbrooke, an
Assistant Secretary of State.

After their 1979 war, China and Vietnam held talks aimed at lessening tensions.
China has declined to renew the talks earlier this year, saying they were
pointless as long as Hanoi refused to talk about its occupation of Cambodia.
Hanoi says its dealings in Cambodia are none of China's business.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WARILY EXPANDS SOUTHEAST ASIA SECURITY ROLE

BYLINE: By RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 789 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 9


Vietnamese military pressure on Thailand has prompted the Carter Administration
to undertake a cautious expansion of its security role in Southeast Asia.

In recent staements, President Carter and Zbigniew Brzezinski, Mr.  Carter's
national security adviser, have compared the Vietnamese incursions into Thailand
last month with the Soviet drive into Afghanistan, suggesting that both actions
represented twin thrusts ultimately directed against Western trade routes in the
Indian Ocean.

State Department officials, however, take the position that the situation in
Southeast Asia is more complex than the one in Afghanistan and that the
Administration is pursuing a more subtle set of policies toward the region. The
Administration wants to aid Thailand in resisting further Vietnamese
encroachments, but State Department officials said they were strongly opposed to
any Chinese military move against the Hanoi Government.

Specialists at the Pentagon and State Department do not believe that Hanoi is
preparing a full-scale assault against the Thais, despite recent intelligence
reports that Vietnamese forces have recently been strengthened along the
Cambodian border. Instead, Hanoi is said to be mainly interested in deterring
Bangkok from helping guerrilla groups fighting the Vietnamese-supported
Government of Prime Minister Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh.

Several Factors Led to Decision

At the same time, officials said that several factors had led the Administration
to seek closer security ties with Thailand. Although Thailand, after the
collapse of South Vietnam in 1975, cut back on its links with Washington,
officials report that Thai attitudes toward military cooperation with Washington
are changing.

After the Vietnamese attacks along the Thai border last month, Bangkok swiftly
called Washington, asking for arms and diplomatic support. Secretary of State
Edmund S. Muskie said that the Administration would ''stand by its commitments''
to Thailand and Pentagon aides announced that the delivery of 35 M-48 tanks to
the Thai Army would be accelerated.

Last week the Administration sent C-141 cargo planes to Thailand, loaded with $3
million worth of ammunition and military spare parts.  Thailand paid for the
arms but the United States paid for the cost of sending them.

A Pentagon aide today called the emergency airlift a ''modest success,'' noting
that the Defense Department had impressed the Thai Government with Washington's
concern about the country's security.  Other officials compared Washington's
response to the decision, in the spring of 1979, to airlift tanks and aircraft
to Yemen after that nation came under attack by Southern Yemen.

Meant to Impress the West

Both operations, they said, were designed to impress pro-Western countries with
the Administration's determination to respond quickly to Soviet-supported
military aggression.

At the State Department, a high-ranking aide said the Administration's response
to the Thai request was not only meant to reassure Bangkok, but also to impress
members of the Association of Southeast Nations. Although the association is a
political and economic group and not a miitary alliance, the official said that
the leaders of the five-nation organization had privately expressed strong
support for a continued American military presence in the region.

Despite this, officials voiced caution about the future of American military
ties with Thailand. Last year Washington granted Bangkok about $40 million in
military credits and Thailand is reported to have bought about $400 million
worth of arms from the United States and other Western countries.

For fiscal year 1981 the Administration is seeking Congressional approval for a
total of $70 million in military aid and credits for Bangkok, and officials
believe that future requests are unlikely to go much higher. Thailand is
considered to be no military match for Vietnam and Pentagon experts said it was
unrealistic to expect that a huge increase in arms sales could solve the
country's security problems.

Chinese Attack Unlikely

They stressed that the likelihood of a major Vietnamese offensive against
Thailand was considered slim and that no thought had been given to introducing
American forces into the country. Under the 1954 Manila Pact the United States
is obligated to come to Thailand's aid in the event of direct aggression.

Administration aides also said that the likelihood of another Chinese thrust
into Vietnam, along the lines of Peking's incursion in early 1979, also seemed
low. Pentagon aides, for example, said that intelligence sources had been unable
to confirm reports in Hanoi this week of a Chinese buildup along the 480-mile
border with Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THOUSANDS OF VIETNAM REFUGEES ARE TRAPPED IN CHINA

BYLINE: By JAMES P. STERBA

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, July 9


Because they headed north on foot instead of south by boat, thousands of
refugees from Vietnam have found themselves trapped against their will on
Chinese state farms and communes, with fading hopes of ever being reunited with
friends and relatives who have been or are being resettled in North America,
Australia or Europe.

In interviews, refugee officials from the United States, Canada and Australia
said they no longer considered the refugees in China to be refugees since they
had been living there for more than six months.  The Hong Kong Government has
begun deporting as illegal migrants those refugees from Vietnam who have spent
six months or more in China.

''Many recipient countries take the view that the refugees in China have
exhausted their right to seek asylum elsewhere,'' said Ulrich Freyschmidt, the
Hong Kong resettlement officer for the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. ''I know of no plans for any major resettlement operations for the
refugees in China.''

The refugees have been in China for more than six months because of China's
generosity in accepting them without a fuss, the refugees' patience in the face
of Peking's sluggish bureaucracy and the relative indifference of international
agencies.

260,000 Fled Into China

Some 260,000 refugees from Vietnam have fled north into China in the last three
years. Most were ethnic Chinese from northern Vietnam who were willing to settle
in China's southern provinces, fishing and farming as they had done in Vietnam.

Thousands more, however, were ethnic Chinese merchants from southern Vietnam and
shopkeepers from northern Vietnam who chose to flee north into China for
temporary haven instead of risking their lives in small boats in the South China
Sea. About 30,000 ethnic Vietnamese also fled north into China to escape
banishment to the socalled new economic zones.

In interviews with Western journalists who visited their camps and farms in
southern China last fall, dozens of the refugees said they had gone to China
because they had no other choice and that they wanted to move on as soon as
possible to other countries, most of them to the United States.

Since then, Chinese officials have compiled a list of some 18,000 refugees who
said they wanted to leave China. Last year Chinese officials said the refugees
were free to settle in China permanently or to move to other countries that
would take them.

Other Countries Uninterested

The other countries, however, have shown little interest. Their refugee
officials said they had their hands full resettling the other 360,000 Vietnamese
refugees who had fled by boat to Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and
the Philippines.

Unlike China, these nations were reluctant to accept any Vietnamese refugees.
Malaysia and Singapore towed the refugees' boats out to sea. Hong Kong
authorities initially refused to allow them to land.  Only with guarantees from
international agencies and major nations that the refugees would be fed,
sheltered and resettled at no cost to the host government did neighboring
nations allow the refugees to land and stay in camps.

China, on the other hand, quietly accepted 260,000 refugees, feeding and
sheltering them at Government expense. Instead of being confined to camps and
detention centers, the refugees were integrated into state farms, fishing
villages and cooperatives, and other existing work units.

The Chinese Government did not seek international aid to help the refugees until
last year, when it received $6.1 million from the United Nations. This year the
United Nations provided $9.5 million.

Interviews Not Yet Begun

The tiny United Nations office in Peking, established late last year, has not
yet begun to interview any of the 18,000 refugees in China who said they wanted
to leave. There is some fear among refugee officials that once word spread among
the refugees that emigration might be possible, thousands more would try to get
their names on the list.

But since many nations have decided to lump them in with ordinary Chinese
seeking to emigrate, their chances are slim. Under Canadian immigration laws,
for example, even refugees with brothers or sisters living in Canada might not
be allowed to join them, said Gerry K. Campbell, first secretary of the Canadian
mission here.

''Under our immigration act a refugee cannot become resettled in another
country,'' he said.  Australia takes the same view. But Peter Hardie, senior
immigration officer for the Australian Commission here, said that exceptions
were made in cases where close relatives were involved. He said one refugee
living in China got word to Australian authorities that his children were living
in Australia. After an interview and medical treatment he was cleared to join
his children there.

Reunification Program Proposed

Through the United Nations refugee program, at least one international relief
agency has made approaches to Chinese authorities about establishing a family
reunification program to pick out refugees with close relatives living elsewhere
and reunite them.

Until recently many frustrated refugees in China simply left their farms and
communes and tried to make their way to Hong Kong. But China and Hong Kong have
stepped up border surveillance to stem the flow of thousands of ordinary Chinese
who attempt to sneak into this colony each week.

Of the 5,000 people who have arrived by boat in Hong Kong so far this year
claiming Vietnam refugee status, more than 2,000 have been rejected because they
had lived in China for more than six months and were officially considered to be
Chinese residents. Hong Kong authorities are awaiting permission from China to
send them back.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of refugees

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET TROOPS SAID TO TEST NEW WEAPONS IN AFGHANISTAN;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 766 words


The Soviet Army in Afghanistan is testing a new assault rifle, called the AKS,
shells filled with needle-like projectiles and also cluster bombs for use in
territory not under Soviet control, according to American and British
intelligence sources.

The roads and tracks leading from Kunar and Paktia provinces into Pakistan are
said to have been seeded with land mines, but the effect on movement across the
frontier is considered minimal.

American sources said that the Soviet troops had used napalm widely but that no
objective evidence was available they had used poison gas. There are reports
from insurgents of a gas attack in Badakhshan Province, in the north.

The pace of Soviet operations has slowed in the last two weeks.  United States,
British and other Atlantic alliance analysts of the campaign believe that the
present lull will continue until after the Moscow Olympics, starting this month
and ending early in August.

Their expectation is that the Russians will then mount a major operation,
involving as many as 200,000 soldiers, to crush the insurgents. The present
strength of the Soviet forces in Afghanistan remains what it was before the
well-advertised withdrawal of some armored and missile units: about 83,000 men.

One indication that the Russians are preparing for a major offensive is a
movement reported by Western experts of five motorized rifle divisions, about
65,000 men if the divisions are at war strength, into a nearby military
district.

New Weapons Used by Soviet

The three weapons widely used by Soviet troops in recent operations are not new
but are the type, analysts noted, that would be employed by a predominantly
infantry force against irregulars.

The AKS rifle has been introduced into the Soviet Army as a replacement for the
AK-47. The rifle, lighter than the AK-47, fires a 5.54-millimeter bullet with a
hollow point and a steel plug that slams forward when the bullet hits an object,
deforming the bullet into a mushroom shape that causes a larger wound.

Analysts speculated that the bullet might be akin to the dum-dum bullet first
made in British India and used by British and Indian troops to halt the charges
of fanatical Ghazis in the Afghan wars.  The dum-dum is outlawed
internationally.

Shells loaded with flechettes were called ''beehives'' by American troops in
Vietnam when they were used against the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese. The
flechette is a small, fin-stabilized projectiles that can be loaded into a shell
or a bomb. On the explosion of the carrying vehicle, flechettes fly over a wide
area and are especially effective against infantry concentrations.

Cluster bombs are made up of small bombs in a large casing. On impact, the
little bombs are spewed over a wide area. A single bomb can knock the track off
a tank and kill or maim a soldier.

American sources said that cluster bombs usually are dropped in areas outside
the control of the attacking force. One officer familiar with their use in
Vietnam did not think they were ''really that effective.''

The extensive mining of roads, trails and paths between Pakistan and the
frontier provinces also strikes some analysts as a relatively ineffective
exercise.

Soviet losses in manpower are estimated by British sources as about 6,000,
including about 1,000 dead, since the invasion began last December.

An official at Kabul's main military hospital estimated that 600 Soviet soldiers
were admitted in May and that 200 died.  Many of the wounded are being
transferred to resorts on the Black Sea or to Eastern Europe. The dead are being
returned in sealed coffins. This does not diminish concern on the home front
over casualties, according to one report.

American sources also report that losses in equipment are mounting. One estimate
is that the Russians are losing an average of l5 helicopters a month.

Soviet losses in tanks and armored personnel carriers, however, have not been
high and, as infantry increasingly assumes the burden of combat, these losses
can be expected to remain light.

The invading divisions were armed with the standard Soviet tanks and field guns.
Intelligence sources in the United States and abroad put little credence in
reports from New Delhi that the insurgents are using radar-controlled
antiaircraft guns.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Change in the Weather

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 402 words


Cathlyn Platt Wilkerson neither looked nor sounded like Rip Van Winkle when she
reappeared Tuesday after ten years underground. Rip was astonished to find the
world so altered that neither he nor his neighbors knew each other. Miss
Wilkerson would have it that neither she nor the world has changed ''basically''
during her absence. It seems to us that she is wrong on both counts.

Miss Wilkerson still talks as though the primary moral issue in the world is
America's involvement in Vietnam. But while she was underground, the North
Vietnamese Government came to power over the whole of Vietnam. Hundreds of
thousands of Vietnamese have fled, even at the risk of death in small boats.
Many people who ten years ago believed the American presence was the sole cause
of that land's misery, have gradually recognized that the subject is more
complicated than that.

Meanwhile, thousands of bombs have been exploded by terrorists in one country
after another; people of all ages have been stoned, burned and knee-capped by
militants as certain as Miss Wilkerson that they were producing a better world
by making the present one worse.  She need not look closely to find new scars on
an aging planet.

As to Miss Wilkerson herself, despite brave words of constancy, her own change
seems vivid. As a member of the Weather Underground, she was committed to the
belief that noble change justifies violence and that there can be no compromise
with an evil establishment. How, then, could an unchanged person consent to
surrender, flanked by lawyers who agreed on her behalf to establishment rules
that would gain her release on bail? Because of personal reasons, Miss Wilkerson
said, forgetting for a moment that in her ''movement'' there were no personal
reasons, only public causes.

Then, perhaps to make herself feel less changed, she asserted that she was
allowed to surrender peacefully, without vengeful violence, only because she is
white and middle-class. In fact, the circumstances of her surrender were
tolerant because they had been arranged in advance, just as they are routinely
arranged for defendants of every race and class. Ten years ago, one may not have
needed a weatherman to know which way the wind blew. Now, even the underground
could stand some fresh air.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
Reading Hua's Mind

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 875 words


This fellow Jimi Ka Te is shorter than I expected. I'll tower over him on
Chinese television, which is good, because I need all the stature at home I can
get.

We're in the same boat, the American President and I. We both came out of
nowhere five years ago, we both double-crossed our party's left wing, and we're
both headed nowhere today. He's running around the world, waving to crowds like
a head of state, but he keeps looking at Luonade Ligen over his shoulder; I keep
running around the world, walking on the red carpet and showing the red flag,
but I have Deng Xiaoping on my back.

Where did it all go wrong? I backed Mao and the radicals when the old man was in
power, and I inherited his title when he died. Then, when the power started
flowing to Deng and his anti-Maoists, I, Hua Guofeng, arrested the radical Gang
of Four and delivered them over to Deng. That way, I thought I would be the man
in the middle -against the ultra-Maoists, but still representing the younger
half of the party that came to power in Mao's day.

I figured I could outwait Deng and his oldtimers. I'm only 59, four years older
than this little American. When the old, anti-Maoists - the capitalist roaders,
we called them - died off, the true followers of Mao would take over.

But this Deng, he's a believer in the old Chinese saying, ''Don't get mad, get
even.'' He lets me hang around, but little by little, he's been nibbling away at
the leftover Maoists.

Not long ago, he fired Wang Dong-xing, Mao's bodyguard and the last of the
outright left-wingers still in the power center. Now I'm alone. At the National
People's Congress in Peking next month, at the same time this little American is
enjoying his last gombei, Deng is likely to give my title of Prime Minister to
one of his proteges.  That will leave me only with the title of Chairman.

Meanwhile, another of Deng's younger proteges, Hu Yaobang, is secretary-general
of the party. Last week, he told a group of Yugoslav newsmen that Mao himself
made major mistakes. That means me. Hu said a hundred million cases had to be
reversed and a hundred million cases reversed is a lot of turning around.

My problem is to survive, and the trick for survival is to drift to the right.
My friend here, Jimi Ka Te, is trying to do the same, telling Detroiters that
air pollution is good for them, and joining us in denouncing Soviet hegemony.

If only I could get the military over to my side. They support Deng, always
have, because he promises them modern equipment that only Western trade can
bring. Soon he will be getting the Americans to send us jet fighter simulators,
to train our pilots by computer.  And tactical radios with codex systems, so
that we can teach the Vietnamese another lesson. Next, tank retrievers, which
will go under the name of ''trucks.''

No, I cannot compete with Deng in modernizing the army with American weapons,
because I would lose whatever constituency I have left on the left. Jimi
understands - he cannot advocate obvious arms sales to China, and thereby
seriously worry the Russians, because he holds himself out as a man of peace.

Will my fall from power mean anything to the Americans? Not soon - Deng will
want to expand trade with the West and enter a military alliance against the
Russians. But years from now, my downfall will mean great turmoil in China -
that is what comes of getting even.

Will Jimi's fall from power mean anything to the Chinese? Yes. At first, Luonade
Ligen - difficult name to pronounce - will seem to irritate us by establishing a
liaison office on Taiwan. We know this means nothing -Taiwan is a talk-issue,
not a real issue, which we will resolve in the next generation. I did not tell
this to Senator Byrd, but most of us would respect a power that does not abandon
allies.

More important, he would probably reflect the true forces in his country. As I
know only too well, that is the only way an individual leader can make a
difference. That was why Zhou Enlai was willing to help Lichade Nikesong win in
1972.

China's interest is in having the barbarians of the East and West balance each
other, while we grow strong. Surely Ligen not Ka Te, is better to restore the
balance, and to make it possible for us to restrain Hanoi. The problem, however,
with Ligen - as it was with Nikesong - is that he will use his new strength to
bring about a new detente.

Why, if the stronger Ligen would be better for China, am I posing for pictures
smiling down on Jimi? First, because he has been nice, offering normalization
and asking nothing in return. This gives the appearance of a summit without any
of the work.

Second, if we move on Vietnam and the Soviets take a bite out of Sinjiang, Deng
will want me to get on the phone to Washington and it is good to know the person
on the other end.

Finally, one of us, or both of us, could make a comeback. Nikesong made it back,
why not Ka Te? Deng made it back, why not Hua? Today we may be a couple of lame
Peking ducks, but tomorrow - who knows? - I may be playing my American card.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 10, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 608 words


New crackdown in Chile greets appeal for changes A2
Vietnam refugees trapped in China A3
War of words erupts again between China and Vietnam A3
Vietnam prompts U.S. to expand security role in Southeast Asia A3
Ethiopia's military campaigns hurting economy A4
Israeli plan for 85 new West Bank outposts reported A5
Iraqi diplomat shot to death in Beirut A5
World News Briefs A7
South Korea ousts 232 high government officials A8
Computer study of Shakespeare starts a tempest A9
Kidnapped French industrialist freed by the police A15

Government/Politics
Computers helping New York State legislators redistrict B1
Bill signed prohibiting hazing by college fraternities B2
City seeks to hire consultant to fight Con Ed rate increase B4
Campaign Report B17
2 Anderson delegates unseated by Republican committee B17
Anderson wins preliminary ballot test in New Mexico B18
Libertarian Party, a blend of conservatism and liberalism B19

General
Around the Nation A12
Icebergs breaking off Alaskan glacier may endanger tankers A14
Rare visitor, a moose, touring resort area of Adirondacks B2
Reporter and editor ordered to testify in Abscam inquiry B3
Census takers tackle the ''hardcore'' cases B3
Jetliner pilot reports close traffic in sky east of Kennedy B9
Two young women guilty in slaying of Flatbush couple B14

The Home Section
Home The busy bedroom in apartment living C1

Design problems solved simply C6
Squire of his own 18th century village C1
Financial planning by the book C1
Hers C2
Helpful Hardware C2
Home Beat C3
The palm readers think it's real, too C3
Home Improvement C4
Sound C9
Design Notebook C10
Gardening C11

Industry/Labor
MCI to offer new long-distance phone service in New York B4

Health/Science
U.S. proposes health tests by industry on 7 chemicals B17

Arts/Entertainment
''Quality of life'' issues dominate Met Opera labor talks C12
Lauren Bacall, shooting film, returning to Broadway in '81 C14
Three creators of ''Airplane!'' bask in film's success C15
Diamond and Washington Ballet at Jacob's Pillow C15
Golden Fleece opera company offers 3 one-act works 16
Actors win $75 increase in pact with producers C16
''Assassination on Embassy Row,'' is reviewed C18
''The Human Face of China'' is on WNET tonight C19

Obituaries
Malcolm D. Talbott, a professor at Rutgers Law School B20
Jo Ann Yellow Bird, Indian activist who won rights suit B20

Sports
Cosmos defeat Fury, 2-1, as Chinaglia gets both goals B21
Yanks, hot team, taking nothing for granted B21
Commission doctors expected to approve Shavers boxing license B21
Golfers in U.S. Women's Open to face extreme heat B21
National League holds key to All-Star Game lock B22
George Vecsey on Mike Jorgensen and the brushback B23
Several Americans, beyond boycott, to participate in Olympics B23
Lyons wins New York State golf by a stroke B24

Features/Notes
Man in the News: Albert Carnesale, nuclear agency appointee A12
Notes on People B6
Issue and Debate: Future of New York rent controls discussed B13
Going Out Guide C16

News Analysis
Adam Clymer on the G.O.P. and the equal rights amendment A1
Drew Middleton on new Soviet weapons used in Afghanistan A8
Deirdre Carmody on Court's ruling on right to open trials B20

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18

That nostalgic G.O.P. platform The weather has changed Moot court in Albany
Letters A18
Anthony Lewis: the saddening truth about South Africa A19
William Safire: reading Hua Guofeng's mind A19
Leslie Gelb: the Kremlin's strate- gic choices A19
Ronald Fraser: testing Parkinson's Law A19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A.U.S. FOREIGN LEGION;
by Orrin E.Klapp

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Calif.


Now that we seem to have inherited France's and England's imperial burdens, why
don't we adopt France's ingenious method of solving its colonial military
problems? Why not form a foreign legion of volunteers who could fight in remote
places for causes that appeal to them?

Not only would such a force remove the need to draft unwilling young men, but
also it could prove to be a valuable outlet for penitentiaries that are, we're
told, overflowing, by allowing inmates to discharge their debt to society in the
service of their country. Such a force could be deployed anywhere in the world;
it could even be assigned, at request, to the United Nations.

Even if highly paid, such soldiers would be a bargain. They would not compromise
the Stars and Stripes, nor burden taxpayers, if a good part of the financing
came from multinational corporations and each unit fought under the trademark of
the corporation that contributed most to its pay and equipment.

It is only fair that multinationals have the major privilege of funding, since
the force would be fighting in their interests much of the time.

What a brave sight the legion would make when drawn up for review - the
fire-chief helmets and red star of Texaco, the red-winged horse of Mobil, the
double-x of Exxon, the black and orange of Gulf, the winged foot of Goodyear,
and so on - and the motorized missiles and tanks, all with trademarks plainly
showing. On Foreign Legion Day (a new and needed holiday), they could parade
through Wall Street, then up Fifth Avenue past St. Patrick's. Of course, such a
display would be only a token, since the majority of the force would be
stationed abroad and too busy in those faraway places to which they were called.

No idea is perfect, but let me mention a few advantages of this proposal.
First, with such a capable professional force, a draft might not be essential.
Second, unemployment would be reduced as thousands of able men and women flocked
to the good salaries offered by the multinationals.  Third, possession of this
admirable force could improve America's trade position and put us in a seller's
role. We would have a new export commodity. Let countries inviting our help bid
competitively.  The United States, or the corporations themselves, could hold
mortgages on the resources of rescued countries without other means of paying.

Fourth, this added inflow of gold would check our own inflation somewhat and
increase the world purchasing power of the dollar.  Fifth, the legion's
personnel could be used as part-time salesmen.  Cokes and cigarettes could be
distributed as samples; the Domino troops could hand out sugar cubes in starving
countries.

My final thought in support of this proposal is that multinationals can call off
their wars faster than nations can. If the multinationals had the privilege of
funding the Vietnam War, it is highly unlikely we would have stayed in it, for
they would have soon seen that it was not cost-effective.

Orrin E. Klapp is emeritus professor of sociology at San Diego State University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS READY TO BATTLE CITY HALL ON CUT IN PROPERTY-TAX EXEMPTION

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


New York City's war veterans, and widows of war veterans, opened their
property-tax bills last week and many of them immediately began making angry
calls to their City Councilmen.

They also wrote irate letters to their state legislators and are planning
protest strategy with the commanders of their local veterans organizations.

And they say they have just begun to fight.  The City Council voted that
recently to reduce the amount of the property-tax exemption customarily granted
to veterans and their widows. There was no public notice of the vote, and no
advance notice to the veterans.

Yesterday, leaders from seven veterans organizations from all five boroughs met
with Joseph C. Anderson, the state's Director of Veterans Affairs, in his office
at the World Trade Center. He promised to arrange a meeting between the veterans
representatives and the city officials who they say did them wrong.

''It was a great effrontery to all veterans and their widows,'' Milton Skelly,
leader of the United Veterans of Kings County, declared in an interview before
the meeting.

When the tax bills began arriving, the protests were so strong that many
embarrassed City Council members were moved to admit they had not realized they
were voting to reduce the exemption.

In the last few days a majority of the Council members have voiced support for a
resolution, introduced by Councilman Walter Ward, Democrat from Howard Beach,
Queens, calling for a state law that would help restore the exemption, and
others are asking that the City Council reconsider its vote.

State Senators Frank Padavan of Glendale, Queens, and Christopher J. Mega of the
Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn, both Republicans, are sponsoring a bill that
would require the city to restore the exemption in full, The Senators assert
that there is support for such a bill in the Assembly.

Robert Steingut, Democratic Councilman at Large from Brooklyn, who voted for the
resolution, said: ''I think the vote was sneaky and unfair, but we are somewhat
to blame - we should have done our homework better. We thought we were voting on
a pro forma issue, the property tax rate for the city. But when I went back and
checked, the exemption proposal was right there.''

The longstanding exemption reduces the real-estate tax bills of 97,000 war
veterans and their widows. It applies to veterans from the World War I through
Vietnam, and reduces the assessed value of a veteran's home by up to $5,000.
Some veterans, especially the disabled, qualify for the full $5,000 exemption;
others have lesser exemptions.

A spokesman for the Mayor's office said that New York City was the last in the
state to offer such an exemption and that the reductions would yield the city
about $7 million a year.

On June 12, during the closing hours of city budget deliberations, Council
members unanimously adopted a package of mayoral budget resolutions, including a
provision that effectively cut the amount of the veterans' exemption by almost
half, adding a maximum of $215 to their property-tax bills. F The tax on a house
assessed at $15,000 would rise to $1,090 from $875.

Leonard Krupp, a World War II veteran who lives in Flushing, Queens said: ''All
of a sudden, boom, I get my new tax bill and it's $215 more. Nobody told me this
was coming, and the bill is due July 15.  This was a sneaky thing to do.''

Mr. Krupp, a semiretired salesman, said: ''I've written letters, I've made phone
calls.  I want to fight this.''

His wife, Jean, said: ''It seems so unfair to be taking away from these
veterans. And the way they did it, with no hearing, no notice, I think it's a
dirty trick.''

Councilman Steingut said: ''Practically every City Council member has told me
they didn't know they were voting to impose higher taxes on veterans. I'm
outraged.''

The resolution voted by the Council separates veterans' city property taxes into
school and nonschool rates. By isolat-
ing the school tax, and witholding the exemption on that rate, the resolution
cuts the total exemption for veterans by about 43 percent.

It allows the city to conform to state law, which prohibits any exemption for
school taxes. Councilman Ward's proposal calls for state legislation to permit
such an exemption.

Senator Padavan said: ''Since the tax bills began arriving, my office has got
hundreds of letters and phone calls - 40 to 50 calls a day.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of leaders of veterans groups

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 11, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY;
Bufman to produce 'Flyers,' a fable of doomsday averted.

BYLINE: By Carol Lawson

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words


ZEV BUFMAN, the producer with a passion for old shows, is going to try a new one
next season. He plans to present ''Flyers,'' a $2 million musical comedy with
Tommy Tune in the starring role. Mr.  Bufman, who was involved in the Broadway
revivals of ''Peter Pan,'' ''Oklahoma!'' and ''West Side Story'' last season and
is working on ''Brigadoon'' for the fall, says that although Mr. Tune has not
yet signed anything, he has made an oral commitment to ''Flyers'' and has
cleared a chunk of time for the show in his busy schedule.

The lanky Mr. Tune, who cuts a remarkable stage figure with his
basketball-player physique, will have the role of Hermes, son of Zeus. The plot
concerns the arrival of that messenger of the gods on earth to post the closing
notice.

''Flyers'' has lyrics by Carolyn Leigh, whose previous credits in that line
include ''Peter Pan,'' ''Wildcat'' and ''Little Me.'' The music is by Lee
Pockriss, who wrote ''Tovarich'' for Broadway, as well as a number of operas,
and who doesn't like to see mention of the fact that he also composed ''Teeny
Weeny Itsy Bitsy Polka Dot Bikini.'' The book is by Miss Leigh and John Corry, a
member of The New York Times culture staff.

Mr. Tune has enjoyed such success in recent years as a choreographer and
director that it's almost forgotten that he first set foot in show business as a
dancer. Seven years ago, he won a Tony Award for his show-stopping dancing in
''Seesaw,'' but he hasn't been seen on Broadway since. He went on to direct
''The Club'' Off Broadway and then returned to Broadway as co-director of ''The
Best Little Whorehouse in Texas.'' Most recently, he directed the Broadway hit
''A Day in Hollywood/A Night in the Ukraine,'' and with his collaborator Thommy
Walsh won the Tony Award for choreography for ''A Day in Hollywood.''

Miss Leigh describes ''Flyers'' as a fable. ''The thrust of the plot is the
postponement of the demise of the human race,'' she says. ''It's very funny and
far out, in every sense of the word. It's full of flying. Geneva, Switzerland,
is the base locale, but a lot of it takes in the atmosphere, the ionosphere,
tops of mountains.''

''Ghosts of famous flyers get into the act,'' Miss Leigh adds.  These characters
include Amelia Earhart, Leonardo da Vinci and the Marquis d'Arlandes, the first
French balloonist. ''This show is an original,'' she adds, ''so I'm leaving out
many of the salient points. Otherwise, what's the point?''

Two years ago this month, Joseph Papp moved his Shakespeare Festival out of
Lincoln Center's Vivian Beaumont Theater, and the house has been dark ever
since. Several months ago the theater's new management stated its intention to
reopen the Beaumont in time for a fall season. But because no plans have been
announced yet, and time is growing short for building a subscription audience,
questions about the Beaumont's future are again being asked in theater circles.

The Beaumont's future has inspired a great deal of speculation. It has been
said, among other things, that Blythe Danner would star in ''The Philadelphia
Story,'' that there would be a new play by Woody Allen and that the season would
be made up of three plays instead of four, as previously announced.

Richmond Crinkley, executive director of the Beaumont, once said that the
theater would reopen last winter; then, Mr. Crinkley announced that the theater
would reopen next fall. Yesterday word was received from John Mazzola, president
of Lincoln Center and a member of the Beaumont's new board of directors, that
Mr. Crinkley would be ready to disclose specific details of the fall season next
week.

Dorothy Lyman, known to a big television audience as Gwen, the architect, in the
soap opera ''Days of Our Lives,'' is getting more and more involved with John
Ford Noonan's Off Broadway hit, ''A Coupla White Chicks Sitting Around
Talking.'' First, she made her debut as a producer with the play. Then she took
over as director.  Next Tuesday at the Astor Place Theater, she will add yet
another credit, when she and Dixie Carter replace Susan Sarandon and Eileen
Brennan in this two-character comedy.

Miss Lyman insists that ''White Chicks'' is not turning into a vanity
production. ''I'm going into the play as a short-term proposition,'' she says.
''Eileen and Susan decided to leave - Eileen is starting a film next month, and
Susan wants a rest - and this is the wrong time of the year to find actresses.
They already have their summer jobs lined up. I know the play inside out, and
Dixie is an old friend. The search for actresses is continuing. I hope we can
set up a premise whereby every four months a couple of great dames will come in
to show their stuff.''

Joel Higgins, who is starring as Curly in ''Oklahoma!'' at the Palace, had the
good fortune of being sent by the Army to Korea instead of Vietnam in 1968. Once
there, Mr. Higgins had the further good fortune of finding a splendid excuse for
getting out of the infantry.

''One day,'' recalled the 36-year-old actor, whose perfectly straight hair
belies his stage name, ''an officer asked if I could direct plays. I had no idea
of what directing was about, but I saw myself sitting in a foxhole if I said no.
So I said, 'Sure.' I lied my way into this business. A month later I became a
sergeant in charge of entertainment, and for two years I toured Korea as a
performer, singing from trains and trucks.''

Mr. Higgins, who worked his way through an advertising program at Michigan State
University by singing in coffeehouses, decided to stay in show business after
his Army stint. He made the rounds of dinner theaters and regional theaters for
a couple of years and then made his Broadway debut in ''Shenandoah.'' That was
followed by roles in two ill-fated Broadway musicals, ''Music Is'' and
''Angel,'' and steadier employment in television. For three years he appeared in
the soap opera ''Search for Tomorrow,'' and last year he starred with Andy
Griffith in the series ''Salvage I.''

''I had just given up my apartment in New York and bought a house in Los Angeles
when I was asked to come back here for 'Oklahoma!,' '' said Mr. Higgins, who
went into the show in May as the replacement for Laurence Guittard. ''I hadn't
sung in two years and had to work very hard to get back in shape. I've been
running and working out.  When you sing to 1,500 people and want to be heard in
the last row, you have to sing with your whole body, not just your throat.

''I've been wanting to come back to Broadway. It doesn't pay as much as
Hollywood, but nothing quite approaches it. It's kind of neat to open a whole
show singing by yourself.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Caricature of Joel Higgins in 'Oklahoma'

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 12, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CONVENTION IS A FAMILY AFFAIR FOR A REAGAN FAN FROM JERSEY

BYLINE: By JOYCE PURNICK

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 438 words

DATELINE: HOLMDEL, N.J., July 11


Ernest Cote of Monmouth County, N.J., is going to his first political
convention.  He is taking his wife and 3-year-old son. They are going in a
rented motor home and are making the journey at some financial sacrifice. But
Ernest Cote has decided the trip to the Republican Convention in Detroit is
worth it. He wants to see Ronald Reagan - ''my boy'' - be nominated for
President.

''I'd like to come out of this, if nothing else, with a picture of my son with
Ronald Reagan,'' said Mr. Cote, sitting in his modest split-level home in this
verdant suburban town an hour from Manhattan.

Mr. Cote (pronounced COE-tee), financial manager of a New Jersey chemical
company, is one of 132 delegates and alternates from New Jersey who are going to
the Republican Convention; unlike most of the others, he is something of a
political neophyte. As an alternate, he has little chance of actually voting at
the convention, and he does not expect to have much of a formal role in Detroit.
But now that the former Governor of California is guaranteed the nomination, the
suspense is gone anyway.

''At first I thought, 'Why bother?' '' said Mr. Cote, a slight, neat man with
close-cropped hair who somehow looks older than his 32 years. ''But I don't
think I'll have a second chance to be a part of an exciting experience like
that.''

Mr. Cote's political experience has been serving on the town planning board and
the township committee and running unsuccessfully to be a delegate in support of
Ronald Reagan four years ago.

It should have been Ronald Reagan in 1976, according to Mr. Cote.  ''He
believes, as the people who founded America believe, that goverment is a good
thing, but only for select purposes,'' he said.  He favors the abolition of
welfare and the minimum wage.

Ernest and Evelyn Cote, who teaches first grade, are both, he says, from
families of New Deal Democrats. The were high school classmates, and after Mr.
Cote served in the Green Berets in Vietnam and she became a teacher, they
married in 1972.

The 31-year-old Mrs. Cote will, when pressed, speak her mind on some political
issues, such as the proposed constitutional amendment affirming equal rights for
women, which both oppose. ''I make the same amount as male teachers do, but I
would not want to be drafted or use the same toilet as a man,'' she said.

The Cotes say that they know that some people find them atypical of their
generation, but that does not bother them. As Evelyn Cote drove the van
somewhere in northern New Jersey, her son, encouraged by his father, shouted,
''Weagan for Pwesident! Weagan for Pwesident!'' and ''To the flag!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF ERNEST COTE AND FAMILY

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BY SAMUEL TOWER;
STAMPS THE VA'S 50TH BIRTHDAY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 36, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1499 words


A commemorative to mark the 50th anniversary of the Veterans Administration is
being issued by the United States in Washington, D.C. on July 21, the exact date
on which President Herbert Hoover signed Executive Order 5398 in 1930, creating
the agency.

The order consolidated the Veterans Bureau, the National Home for Disabled
Volunteer Soldiers and the Bureau of Pensions into a new, independent Federal
agency to provide a comprehensive system of benefits for veterans and
dependents. This included death or disability benefits, a comprehensive program
of medical care, pensions for veterans in need, education and rehabilitation,
home loan guarantees, insurance and various ancillary services.

In addition to its Washington headquarters, the Veterans Administration
currently has under its jurisdiction 172 hospitals, 58 regional offices,
domiciliaries and special centers and a range of satellite facilities.

There were some 4,000,000 veterans in civil life when the new agency was
established a half century ago. But then came World War II, the Korean War and
the Vietnam War, and today there are some 30,000,000 veterans: about 26,500,000
living veterans of America's wars and more than 3,000,000 living peacetime
veterans. The agency's growth has kept pace with the increased numbers of men
and women in uniform.

The new stamp is the third in a four-stamp contract betwween the U.S. Postal
Service and two private firms working jointly, the American Bank Note Company of
New York and J.W. Fergusson and Sons of Richmond, Va. The contract represents an
experiment by the USPS to determine whether competitive bidding by commercial
printing establishments would result in lowered production costs.

The photogravure printing is done by the Richmond firm and then sent to New York
for final processing. The first two stamps to be printed under the contract were
the John Paul Jones commemorative of 1979 and the Benjamin Banneker
commemorative of early this year.

The dominant design element of the new issue is the new logotype, ''VA,''
adopted by the Veterans Administration in connection with its milestone
anniversary. Above the logo, in two lines of white type, is the name of the
agency, and below it, also in white type, is ''Fifty Years of Service.''

The vertical stamp is the standard commemorative size, 1.44 x .84 inches, or
21.34 x 36.6 millimeters in image area, and .99 x 1.55 inches, or 25.17 x
39.50mm in overall size, from perforated side to perforated side. It has been
produced by gravure in colors of red, white and blue.

There are 50 stamps per post office pane and, like the Jones and Banneker
commemoratives, there will be two sets of plate numbers.  About half of the
printed panes will bear one set of two numbers, and the other set of two numbers
will appear on the remainder of the panes printed. The numbers are preceded by
the letter ''A'' and run in sequence from A-0023 through A-0026. The use of the
letter ''A'' is to differentiate the commercially produced issues from those
produced by the Bureau of Engraving and Printing.

Collectors of first-day-of-issue cancellations have the usual fortnight's grace
period for placing their orders and the alternative procedures for acquiring
covers.

Collectors affixing stamps. After acquiring the new issue at a convenient post
office, collectors may send the stamped and addressed envelopes to
''Customer-Affixed Envelopes, Postmaster, Washington, D.C. 20013.'' Stamps go in
the upper right corner, 1/4-inch from each side; addresses at lower right, up
one inch from the bottom. Orders must be postmarked by Aug. 5. No remittance is
required.

USPS affixing stamps. Collectors may send addressed covers for processing by the
Postal Service to ''Veterans Administration Stamp, Postmaster, Washington, D.C.
20013, enclosing remittance of 15 cents per stamp to be affixed. Personal checks
are acceptable; postage stamps or cash are unacceptable. The postmark deadline
is Aug. 5.

More than 39,000,000 men and women have served in the U.S. armed forces since
the Revolutionary War. More than a million have lost their lives in periods of
war. Women served in World War I and every conflict since, and the number of
women veterans today stands at over 650,000. Veterans themselves comprise only
about one-third of those potentially eligible for VA benefits, the rest are
spouses and dependent children, widows and dependent parents who could under
certain circumstances qualify for benefits. The total of potential beneficiaries
is almost half the entire U.S. population.

The VA operates the largest centrally directed health care system in the nation.
Its 172 medical centers provide hospital and outpatient care; 91 also operate
nursing home care units; 15 operate domiciliaries, which are health care
facilities providing planned living in a sheltered environment for disabled
veterans not in need of constant medical care. These facilities are staffed by
almost 200,000 persons, including 11,000 doctors, 1,100 dentists and 27,000
nurses.

The medical research fostered by the VA in a variety of fields is a unique
national asset. Most of its research is done by clinicians investigating
problems arising during patient care, and then able to apply the results
directly in clinical practice. The VA doctors contribute to the nation's health
care by research in biomedical problems shared by veterans and non-veterans.

VA medicine has also given special attention to hypertension, sickle cell
anemia, dialysis, rheumatology and immunology. In addition, the VA assists in
the education of doctors through intern and resident positions at its hospitals
and in the training of personnel in associated health professions, such as
nursing or dietetics. Six VA facilities have made geriatric medicine a special
concern.

Millions of veterans from World War II on have received educational assistance
and vocational rehabilitation under the ''G.I. Bill,'' and wives and children of
dead or permanently disabled veterans have received similar benefits.

One house out of every six built in the U.S. since World War II has been
financed under the VA housing assistance program of guaranteed and direct loans
that enables veterans to acquire dwellings on more liberal terms than in
conventional home mortgage transactions.

Life insurance protection for veterans under five programs administered by the
VA and three programs supervised by the agency but provided by private
companies. More than 8,000,000 men and women are covered. The VA also provides
disability compensation and pensions for death and disability, and renders a
variety of additional services.

Concern for the Americans who have fought for their country goes back centuries
before the establishment of the VA and the agencies that preceded it. The
English colonies in America, following the custom of the mother country,
introduced benefits for disabled fighting men virtually simultaneously with
colonization.

The Pilgrims at Plymouth as early as 1636 enacted a law that any man who should
be sent forth as a soldier and returned maimed should be maintained competently
by the colony for life. Many of the 13 Colonies made provision for killed or
maimed soldiers long before the Revolution.

The Continental Congress in 1776 enacted the first national law providing
pensions and benefits for soldiers in the army of the fledgling nation. These
benefits helped encourage enlistments and prevent desertions. The next great
change in the provisions for veterans came in 1861 and 1862 under the impetus of
the Civil War.  Piecemeal modifications followed until the sweeping
reorganization of 1930.

Souvenir Cards

The Postal Service has issued a souvenir card for NORWEX 80, the international
philatelic exhibition held recently in Oslo, Norway.  The Bureau of Engraving
and Printing has issued a card in conjunction with the National Philatelic
Exhibition, NAPEX, held last week in Bethesda, Md., just outside Washington.

The NORWEX card is available in both canceled and uncanceled form.  It has the
NORWEX show cancel on a 15-cent Winter Olympics stamp.  Uncanceled cards are $2;
canceled cards $2.15 each. Orders should be addressed to the Philatelic Sales
Branch, Washington, D.C. 20265 and should indicate the card desired.

The cost of the NAPEX card is $3. Orders, accompanied by remittance in the form
of a check or money order made payable to the bureau, should be sent to NAPEX 80
Souvenir Card, Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Washington, D.C. 20228.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF VA STAMP

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By N. R. KLEINFIELD

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2218 words


INSIDE 30 Rock, as the National Broadcasting Company's headquarters at 30
Rockefeller Plaza is known, the early evening news flickered on a soundless
television set implanted in the wall. Irwin Segelstein, the president of NBC
Television and Fred Silverman's No.  2 man, alternately puffed on a cigarette,
sipped black coffee, peeked at the screen and spoke about how NBC was ''blocking
and tackling'' in order to climb out of the ratings cellar.

''It's a fight,'' he said softly. ''But I think the old situation of two
dominant networks and an also-ran is over. I think that there will be a
three-network horse race and I think this season will draw the horses closer
together.''

To many broadcast handicappers, however, that scenario looks like a long shot,
as the network that seems to do no right rolls toward its third fall season
under Fred Silverman, the man who lost the Midas touch. Many ballyhoos were
ballyhooed when he arrived as president and chief executive in June 1978 to
resuscitate the seriously ill network. But, if anything, NBC now is aching worse
than before.

For the fifth consecutive year, the NBC-TV network wound up in the basement of
the recently completed prime time ratings season. In the last three years, more
than a dozen affiliate stations have scampered to ABC and CBS, including the
defection to ABC last month of the Atlanta affiliate, tops in its market. ABC's
''Good Morning America'' recently powered ahead of NBC's ''Today Show,'' which
traditionally held a lock on the bleary eyes of early-risers.

NBC's rights to broadcast the summer Olympics are down the drain, along with $10
million in advertising and, more importantly, the opportunity to woo audiences
to the rest of its schedule. There has been the chastening sinkage of the ''NBC
Nightly News'' to third, from its long run as No. 2 behind CBS. And, last week,
Jane Cahill Pfeiffer was ousted as NBC's chairman. Although she was secondary in
importance to Fred Silverman and her departure was not expected to affect NBC's
performance, the stormy affair must have caused beet-red faces at both NBC and
the parent RCA Corporation because of the messy way it was handled.

''NBC is like Vietnam,'' said a long-time broadcasting official.  ''Wherever you
look, you're getting shot.'' To a certain extent, the gloominess at NBC has been
in keeping with other embarrassments at RCA. Last year, it lost a satellite in
the blackness of space. It hired a new president, Maurice R. Valente, and then,
finding him wanting, bluntly dismissed him last month after six months on the
job. ''A number of the things that seemed like they could have exciting futures
at RCA, like NBC, have remained out in the future,'' one Wall Street broadcast
analyst said. ''It's been a small step for mankind so far.''

As the most visible segment of RCA's sprawling kingdom, NBC has a potent effect
on how the public views the big conglomerate. Until the last two years, NBC had
also been RCA's biggest earner, often furnishing almost a third of pretax
income. Last year, it chipped in about 22 percent, and the Hertz car rental
operation was the biggest RCA cash register. A fully competitive NBC, according
to broadcast analysts, would have added an additional dollar to the $3.72 a
share that RCA earned last year.

Running dead last in network television, however, is not quite like trailing in
the auto business. Because of escalating commercial rates and big demand from
advertisers, nobody loses money. But while NBC is safely in the black, it loafs
well behind its compeers.

''It's no secret that NBC is earning far, far less than the other two
networks,'' said John Reidy, a broadcast analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
''Last year, we figure that, in terms of pretax operating income, the ABC
television network earned about $200 million, CBS television earned $170 million
and NBC-TV about $50 million.'' All of NBC, which also includes five local
television stations and a radio group, had pretax earnings of $105.6 million
last year, down from $122.1 million in 1978, which was down 20 percent from
1977. Some analysts expect NBC to earn well under $100 million this year.

NBC's prospects are bleaker in 1980, since there are write-offs from the
Olympics, steep costs to cover the political conventions and cautious commercial
buying because of the sluggish economy. Thus far, there has been much less
''upfront'' buying - advance buying, generally for an entire season - and the
economy is limiting price increases.

''The whole television network business is not in a wildly wonderful situation
lately,'' Mr. Reidy noted. ''Our earlier forecast of 13 to 15 percent price
increases and 50 to 60 percent of the time being sold upfront now looks like 10
to 12 percent increases and no more than half of the time being sold upfront. So
the networks will enter the new season with a fairly heavy inventory of scatter
time. What's happened is the summer Olympics went bye-bye and there's the
unusual situation of the recession at the time of a Presidential election. This
was shaping up as a super year. Now this looks like the super year that never
came.'' Many advertisers are also unenthused about the fall program lineups. ''I
think essentially all three schedules are disappointing this year,'' said
Richard Low, a senior vice president in charge of broadcast buying at Young and
Rubicam, an advertising agency. ''I think all of the programs are essentially
safe from the perspectives of the networks and are predicated on programming
that was successful last season. There seems to be very little that is new.
There are imitations of 'Dallas' and versions of what I call sensational
entertainment/journalism, such as 'That's Entertainment.' ''

This makes it all the harder for a No. 3 network to progress. Shows often
succeed less because they are terrific shows than because they air in time slots
either before or after established hits. Where a program is placed can be more
critical than the content of the show.  ''When you are in third place and have
just had an unsuccessful season, your chances are much less than the others
because you don't have the time slots to put the new shows,'' said Michael Dann,
a consultant who was once Fred Silverman's boss in the programming department at
CBS-TV.

Thus far, at least, the presence of Fred Silverman, who declined to be
interviewed, has not added much pep to NBC. When Mr. Silverman first arrived,
the 1978-79 NBC schedule was already etched, though he dumped the new midseason
shows and stuck in his own. The plan flopped. Last season, he had virtually no
luck in developing hits, though he did move NBC away from its heavy reliance on
costly specials. While NBC wound up closer to the top than during the previous
prime time season, the reason was chiefly the faltering of ABC, which was
narrowly replaced in the top spot by CBS.

But while NBC is nearer first place, it is also further away from second. During
the 1978-79 season, it was almost 4 points behind the leader, and 1.7 behind
second. In the 1979-80 season, it trailed the leader by 2.2 points and second
place by 2.1. A prime time rating point is reckoned to be worth between $50
million and $60 million in ad revenues. In virtually every segment of the day,
NBC is worse off now than when Mr. Silverman came. ''Daytime, which is probably
half of NBC's profit picture, is in very serious trouble,'' one broadcast
consultant noted.

The coming fall season is widely viewed as Mr. Silverman's judgment day. He has
himself made it that. A year ago, he vowed he would quit if the network had not
captured first place by December 1980, a possibility that most television
handicappers unblinkingly concur is no more likely than of a three-legged donkey
taking the Triple Crown. Most veteran sages predict a CBS victory and another
NBC loss, though not as bad a defeat as last season.

The one hope for major NBC improvement, many broadcast analysts agree, is if the
network somehow scores with a couple of runaway hits. It was a sudden flurry of
big hits that hoisted ABC from the ratings basement. ''One or two hits and there
can be a really substantial jump, not a quantum jump, but a really big jump,''
said Mr. Segelstein. He added that he thinks there is ''a shot that we can grow
and cross the line and move into second.''

Not many would agree. ''They'll still be in third place,'' said Jeff Manoff, a
vice president at Foote, Cone & Belding, an advertising agency. ''We see it as a
two-network race.''

One veteran television programming man, asked about NBC's chances of improving
this year, replied, ''If you're betting money, it's a fool's bet.''

Certainly, turning around NBC is a prodigious task. Possibly no one could have
done any better than Fred Silverman, though increasingly his name seems to be
coming up for blame. As he enters discussions on a renewal of his contract,
which expires next June, there is growing speculation that, despite RCA chairman
Edgar H. Griffiths's public declarations that he stands foursquare behind him,
Mr. Silverman will soon be out the door.

A confirmed workaholic, Mr. Silverman has been toiling at a feverish pace, from
Monday morning into Sunday night. But many of the problems at NBC, in the view
of people close to the company, are because of his refusal to delegate
responsibility. ''He won't build an organization,'' said a broadcasting
executive. ''He's a one-man band.'' There have been many personnel changes; Mr.
Silverman is on his third programming chief. One departed NBC executive jokes
that he was thinking of tossing a party of NBC people who have exited since Mr.
Silverman arrived, but he couldn't find a large enough room.

''A lot of Freddie's past success, like anybody's past success, was luck, and
now his luck has turned against him,'' said a former NBC official who asked not
to be identified. ''Silverman can be likened to a great strong-hand player in
poker. He can take a strong show and make it stronger and stronger and stronger.
But he's only an average bad-hand player. He tends to overbet. With the
second-best hand, he can lose a lot of money.''

There are some faintly promising signs for NBC. This season, the network has the
rights to broadcast both baseball's World Series (last season covered by ABC)
and professional football's Super Bowl (last year covered by CBS). It is looking
to make a splash with its ''Shogun'' miniseries based on the best-selling epic
novel set in 17th-century Japan, and NBC News just lured Roger Mudd and Marvin
Kalb from CBS. It looked like Johnny Carson was going to desert the ''Tonight
Show,'' until NBC finally managed to renew his contract, but at a cost that
could erode NBC's profits from the show. The program is said to produce some 20
percent of NBC's pretax profit.

It had looked like another important program, ''Saturday Night Live,'' was going
to bite the dust when the producer and original cast announced they would quit
the show, but it will return with a new cast. Whether they can excite audiences
the way Gilda Radner, Jane Curtin and the rest of the original stars did remains
to be seen. NBC has high hopes pinned on the new David Letterman daytime talk
and variety show, though the first-week ratings were appalling.

When one forgets about the television network, the National Broadcasting Company
looks a bit brighter. The radio group, after a sorry performance for years, has
finally started to jell. But it is still small potatoes, expected to earn only
about $3 million in net income this year. What's more, NBC owns just four AM and
four FM radio stations, compared with the legal maximum 14 for CBS, and 13 for
ABC. The five NBC-owned television stations have been important gold mines,
contributing more profit than the network, though analysts expect their business
to taper off this year because of the economy. Unlike its rival networks, NBC
has chosen not to dabble in programming for cable and other emerging video
technologies such as videodisks, though Mr. Segelstein says that NBC has just
begun to review its stance.

Still, even if it fails to happen next year, and even if it fails to happen
under Fred Silverman, at some point NBC is expected to rise from the basement.
''I would not take the viewpoint that NBC will not be rebuilt,'' said Mr. Reidy.
''All analysts without exception were saying a year ago that CBS would not come
close to ABC.''

''Before Silverman, you had something that was sleeping its way into a grave,''
added Robert Howitt, an analyst at the First Manhattan Company. ''At least
they're awake now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF NBCS STAFF (PAGE 4) PHOTO OF FRED SILVERMAN
PHOTO OF JANE PFEIFFER/CHART OF NBCS EARNINGS AND THE NIELSON RATINGS

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABLE,EXPERIENCED--AND 59 YEARS OLD

BYLINE: By DAVID I. SHAIR

SECTION: Section 3; Page 18, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words


''Two final questions, Mr. S., if you please.'' This was the culmination of an
interview that lasted more than 75 minutes. The interrogator was the district
superintendent of a school system north of New York City. We were in a large,
airy office on the second floor of a high school building. The purpose was to
screen candidates for the position of personnel director.

''First, how old are you? Second, how many more years do you plan to work?''
Were those questions illegal? Of course. The Age Discrimination in Employment
Act passed in 1967 bars the use of physical age, within certain defined
brackets, as the criterion for decisions on hiring, termination, promotion and
other job opportunities. Yet, and to a degree that comes as somewhat of a shock
and surprise to someone active in the personnel field, there is extensive
probing - both directly and indirectly - in job interviews concerning an
applicant's age.

I am a white male, educated (M.B.A.), experienced (25 plus years in personnel,
labor relations and administration), stable (two employers during the last 25
years), presentable (a married, relatively ''square,'' tie-and-jacket type.) My
salary demands are modest for someone with my background. For the past six
months, I have been engaged in an extensive job search within the metropolitan
New York area.

I have been employed since 1970 by a consumer products company that acted
primarily as a sales and distributing agent. Most of those interested in music
(especially the classics) would surely recognize the name. In happier days,
sales volume hovered around the $100 million mark.

An announcement was made late last year that the ''name, assets and inventory''
of the company had been sold. Only a handful of the 100 or so employees would be
transferred to the new corporate owner; the rest of us had become ''redundant.''
Except for a small band of specialists and support personnel - including myself
- that has been retained to complete the phase-out of operations, all employees
have been terminated, and the rest of us will soon go, too. So, although still
technically employed, I began my personal search for a new assignment.

Oh yes, one more fact. I am 59 years old, as of last May 1.  Actually, I do tend
to forget this fact under normal circumstances, but I have been repeatedly
reminded by executive recruiters, counselors, human resource specialists, and
others screening applicants for executive positions.

Cases of discrimination are almost impossible to document, of course. Unless a
large number of people is involved, and a pattern emerges, they are difficult to
prove. But, I have experienced enough age-reference straws, however subtle, to
comprise a sizable - though not yet back-breaking - burden for any respectable
camel.

Easiest to identify, of course, are the direct approaches:

* ''Do you mind if I ask you how old you are?'' This has to be the updated
version of that no-right-answer question, ''Have you stopped beating your
wife?'' If you boldly say, ''no,'' and provide an honest answer, you make it
easy. But you also emphasize the issue if you have the temerity to answer:
''Yes, I do. What is the relation between the question and your evaluation of my
competence to perform the job duties?''

* ''Oh, by the way, David. This is, ha ha, illegal, of course, but how old are
you?'' The procedure does embarrass some personnel pros.  Then there is the
indirect approach:

* ''What was the date of your graduate degree?'' ''1950.'' ''Right, and your
undergraduate degree?'' ''1940.'' (''Nineteen hundred and forty? Lord, let's see
- he has to be at least 62.'') I try to stress the fact that I was graduated at
18, but it doesn't make much of an impression these days.

* ''Was your Army service in Vietnam or Korea?'' In one of my testier moods, I
referred to the Spanish-American War. Someone called back to ''firm up'' the
dates.

One way or another, the information was elicited by the school district
superintendent, at least three senior human resource executives of major
corporations, a teaching hospital administrator, a partner in charge of
administration for a leading Wall Street investment firm, plus numerous
executive recruiters and employment agency ''counselors.''

Why not lie? Reference-checking is rare; everyone is afraid to ask and even more
afraid to answer. (''Remember soldier, name, rank and serial number only.'')

For ethical and philosophical reasons, I have rejected that approach. My
appearance would make it easy; my conscience won't let me do it. Besides, it
gets so complicated to refigure and foreshorten your whole life.

Why not sue? Why not make a test case, take advantage of the statute and its
remedies?  First, the publicity would be totally destructive of further career
positions. (''No, Mr. Wilson, I can't schedule an interview for tomorrow
morning. I have to be in court for a hearing on my age discrimination complaint
against one of your competitors.'')

Second, there is the problem of proof of discrimination.  Third, even if there
is evidence that might stand up in court, there are the considerations of time,
expense and trouble.  Last (and, realistically, first), you never really know if
your age actually affects the decision of the interviewer. You suspect. You have
''gut feelings.'' You get impressions. But it's always possible, just barely,
that someone came along with better or more experience in certain areas, who was
graduated from the same school as you but was class president, who is more
''aggressive'' - and just happens to be 15 years your junior.

I'm patient and persevering. I'll continue to read the statute, brave the
questions, and wait for the senior executive who values knowledge and maturity.
But I'm not getting any younger.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
For the past 10 years, David I. Shair has been in charge of personnel, labor
relations and administration at London Records Inc., a subsidiary of the Decca
Record Company, which was recently sold to the Polygram Corporation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF UNEMPLOYMENT OFFICE

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAST IN PROLOGUE

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1254 words

DATELINE: DETROIT


Ronald Reagan comes to the Republican National Convention this week for what he
hopes will be the first stage of a dramatic coronation, not only of his personal
ambitions but of the conservative values he champions.

As far as Mr. Reagan personally is concerned, this scene can either be one that
will be followed by an inaugural address on January 20, or it can be an event
with no second act, like Barry Goldwater's week in San Francisco at the 1964
convention. But that group of ideas collected under the heading ''conservative''
seems certain to last long after the bunting is removed from the Joe Louis
Arena.

For this year, to a degree unparalleled in this century, both major political
parties seem to have deliberately chosen their most conservative serious
candidates. And those decisions do not represent the fallible choices of party
bosses, but the choices - perhaps no less fallible but surely more
representative - of more Americans than have ever before participated in the
nominating process.

Any number of extenuating circumstances make Mr. Reagan's and President Carter's
successes this year something more complex than a victory for their ideas. Mr.
Carter had the advantages of incumbency, which showed both in the ways he
politicked and the ways he profited from events, most of all from the seizure of
the hostages in Iran.  His liberal challenger, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, was at
once the only plausible opponent and one with flaws - from the Chappaquiddick
issue to his campaign's early overconfidence - that surprised even Carter
partisans in their breadth.

Mr. Reagan had a big field to contend against, but one that didn't settle itself
out with George Bush until it was too late. After the early mistake of ducking
the Iowa Republican debate, Mr. Reagan starred in later televised face-offs. But
most important, he too was almost an incumbent in Republican terms; the
nomination had always been his to lose unless he blundered, and he didn't
blunder.

But frontrunners lose, too, if they are somehow out of step with what their
times or their parties demand. Consider Edmund S. Muskie in 1972, or Robert A.
Taft in 1952. It does matter that Mr. Carter, if hardly as conservative as Mr.
Kennedy sometimes says he is, argues for balanced budgets, tolerates
unemployment to fight inflation, and stresses his accomplishments in fields,
such as deregulation, that were once Republican preserves. And while it is easy
to exaggerate the ideological differences among the Republican hopefuls, there
is no question that Mr. Reagan was perceived as the most conservative of the
major candidates, and that the voters who preferred him thought that was what
they were getting.

So, taking both parties together, a majority of the 32 million Americans who
took part in the nominating process chose to go conservative. Why?

There is plainly a series of political reasons. Ever-increasing taxes breed
frustration with government. For that matter, government breeds frustration with
government. Mr. Goldwater's attacks on government came before their time,
perhaps, because the nation supported the purposes of the Johnson
Adminstration's war on poverty and its other steps in completing the unfinished
New Deal. But soon after the Arizonan's defeat, the other war, in Vietnam,
brought one sort of dispiriting distrust of government, and the lack of ready
success of the Johnson programs brought another.

It was not only the Great Society that became suspect. Much of the bureaucratic
red tape that Republicans (and Mr. Carter, too) denounce is the product of
Nixon-Ford era legislation, especially the establishment of the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Occupational Health and Safety Administration.

Along with the diminished confidence in government, in which Mr.  Nixon's
Watergate played a significant part, came a rate of inflation that discouraged
individual hopes for the future. For many Americans, and many politicians who
would lead them, this reality was combined with a desire for the remembered
values of the past. That is another key to the Carter and Reagan successes so
far in 1980. Not only do they argue, for example, for reduced government
spending, but they also convey stability in their own lives.

This is an important element in measuring the kind of conservatism that is
winning in 1980. No matter how hard polltakers try to get people to focus on
ideology in their answers, many of those who call themselves ''conservative''
plainly are referring to their life styles, not their views on welfare reform,
aid to the cities and other issues.

But the ''conservative'' issues somehow come together, especially in the
Republican Party, and it no longer seems very surprising.  After the party's
platform committee last week finished advocating every new weapons system the
Pentagon had heard of, abandoning four decades of support for the Equal Rights
Amendment and calling for anti-abortion justices of the Supreme Court, Senator
John G. Tower of Texas, the committee chairman, called it a ''pretty moderate
platform.''

Much of the platform and of the Republican campaign to come will be focused not
on the social issues that have intense constituencies, but on the economy. The
New Republican Economics will be used to justify the old politicians' tax-cut
campaign promise as one main theme. The denunciation of Mr. Carter for using
unemployment as a tool against inflation, a staple of past Democratic platforms
attacking Republican Presidents, will be another theme.

Such flexibility underscores a central truth about American politics. At one
time or another it may be all right to be liberal or conservative, but it's
better to seem pragmatic and it always hurts to seem extreme or even
ideological. The recognition of this is a Carter strength. It has also been a
Reagan strength, though many Republicans here say they fear that the combination
of a conservative platform with a Vice Presidential choice and an acceptance
speech that are also perceived as conservative, would make the party sound
extreme.

If that is one potential pitfall for conservatism, there may be another as well:
a temptation to think that American politics might change all at once. For one
example, the Roosevelt coalition was not the product of one election, but of
1928, when the urban vote started going Democratic, of 1932, with organized
labor and farmers, and of 1936, with blacks and Jews. So the 1980 election may
be part of a movement, even one that began with Mr. Carter and Gerald R. Ford in
the 1976 Presidential campaign. Or it may be a sport.

One way to tell will be to watch in 1984. Will the party whose candidate loses
this time conclude, in the amorphous way that American political parties act,
that it lost because it mistook the national mood? If the Democrats win, will
the Republicans decide to try a less conservative candidate and move back toward
the middle? If the Republicans win, will the Democrats decide their mistake was
in not holding their own turf, but in moving toward the Republicans?  If,
somehow, John Anderson wins, will they both decide they took a mistaken turn and
lean left?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: DRAWING

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
BY CAROLINE RAND HERRON MICHAEL WRIGHT AND DON WYCLIFF;
The Ties That Bind Have the Kennedy Forces In Knots

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1562 words


After the primaries, Edward M. Kennedy's last hope had been an outbreak of panic
at next month's Democratic nominating convention in New York. There, according
to the dream scenario, delegates anxious to keep Ronald Reagan out of the White
House would desert President Carter and rally round the also-ran.

Despite Mr. Carter's low standing in the polls, there have been few signs of
panic abuilding. Last week, a convention rules committee further lengthened the
odds against Mr. Kennedy. The committee approved a rule -technically a
recommendation to the convention - binding delegates on the first ballot to the
candidate they had initially pledged to back. The debate over the rule, which
wasn't on the books for the 1976 and the 1972 conventions, was bitter, even by
free-swinging Democratic standards.

A Kennedy backer said the proposal stemmed from ''paranoia.'' A Carter supporter
shot back: ''When you have a dying campaign on your hands, you do things you
wouldn't ordinarily do -just to prolong the agony.'' Dying campaign or no, the
Senator said he'd try to overturn the panel's recommendation at the convention.

The committee did toss Mr. Kennedy's supporters a bone. The Administration
didn't like the 1978 mid-term miniconvention (mainly because the Senator
dominated the scene and teed off on domestic Administration policies). But a
proposal to hold another in 1982 narrowly cleared, with the assistance of some
Carter delegates.

With a nod to voters who stand to be alienated by the Republican convention's
platform and its pronouncements on women's issues, the committee voted to make
permanent a requirement that half the delegate seats at nominating conventions
should be filled by women.  It also decreed that, with race, sex, age and
national origin, ''sexual preference'' should not be grounds for excluding an
individual from participating in the party.

Low-Octane Relief For Auto Makers

Like the Republicans, President Carter went to Detroit last week, just long
enough to display something he now has and they so far lack - the power to
provide White House help, or at least a package called help, for an ailing
bellwether industry.

After two months of study and wide disagreement in the Administration over
exactly what to do for the nation's car makers, beleagured by fuel efficient
foreign models and bedeviled by the recession, Mr. Carter announced only one
palpable item of assistance: relief from regulations, notably some emissions
standards and worker health protections. It was not clear how much this would
reduce the multibillion dollar retooling costs the industry faces in the next
few years, or how many autoworkers it would put back to work (40 percent are now
laid off). Neither special tax relief nor import relief, both of which the
industry wanted, were forthcoming.

What was clear last week were the industry's difficulties. Ford slashed its
quarterly dividends to 30 cents a share from $1 to conserve cash, and admitted
that it was discussing building cars in the United States with its Japanese
rivals. General Motors, declaring that consumer preference had made Government
fuel-economy standards irrelevant, declared it was going to exceed them by 1985;
only a year ago, it led the industry in demanding a relaxation of Washington's
timetable.

Chrysler, already underwritten by a Federal loan guarantee of $1.5 billion,
announced a rise in car prices by $160 on the average, or 2.2 percent. The
increase, like recent G.M. and American Motors hikes, will eventually show up in
the nation's price indexes, one of which last week confirmed that the underlying
inflation rate is between 9 and 10 percent.

But the June wholesale price rise of 0.8 percent, as R. Robert Russell, director
of the White House's Council on Wage and Price Stability, pointed out, also
''shows you inflation isn't over.'' Nor is the recession. In May, consumer
borrowing dropped a record $3.43 billion. One reason Americans are not buying
was the White House's now-dismantled anti-inflation credit controls. Another is
rising joblessness.

Fugitive Finds Winds Unchanged

Shortly before noon on March 6, 1970, three explosions and a fire tore through a
four-story town house in New York's Greenwich Village. Two young women, one of
them Cathlyn Platt Wilkerson, whose father owned the house, staggered from the
wreckage and quickly disappeared. Authorities sifting through the rubble found
parts of three bodies and evidence that the basement had been used as a bomb
factory for the radical Weathermen.

Last week, Miss Wilkerson reappeared, accompanied by two lawyers.  She
surrendered in the office of District Attorney Robert M.  Morgenthau and was
arraigned on charges of illegal possession of dynamite and criminally negligent
homicide. With a number of restrictions imposed on her movements, Miss Wilkerson
was released on $10,000 bail.

A fugitive no more, Miss Wilkerson would not say where she had been or why she
surrendered, and would not discuss the explosion.  Complaining that the
political and social climate was no better than a decade ago, when the Vietnam
War was raging and the Weathermen demonstrated their resistance by planting
bombs in corporate and government offices, she said, ''The conditions are the
same and I have the same commitment to struggle against them.''

Instead of Safety, A Desert Inferno

Even in a world where horror stories of Cambodian refugees and Vietnamese and
Haitian boat people have become commonplace, last week's story of what happened
to a band of Salvadorans in the southern Arizona desert was singular.

Two dozen men and women, led by two Mexican guides and two of their own
countrymen, whom they had paid $1,200 each to smuggle them into the United
States, walked in 115-degree heat across the border into the 516-square-mile
emptiness of the Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument.

Before one day had passed, they had exhausted their water and resorted to
fighting over and drinking anything liquid, including their own urine. Before
two days had passed, 13 of the group, including one smuggler, had died of
dehydration; 14 others, wandering through the desert, were rescued by local
authorities and the United States Border Patrol.

The survivors said they had left El Salvador because of the civil strife there
and that they were part of a larger group, some of whom had been caught as they
crossed the border at Yuma, Ariz. That the Border Patrol discovered the
Salvadorans before all of them died was almost an accident. Immigration and
Naturalization Service officials said last week that unusual demands - checking
the status of 50,000 Iranian students and processing a flood of Cuban refugees -
had overstretched their resources.

Abscam Reporter's Role on Trial

Abscam defendants have begun having their days in court, but an interested
bystander may draw one of the first jail terms to result from the investigation.
Jan Schaffer, a reporter for The Philadelphia Inquirer, was cited for contempt
of court at a pretrial hearing last week and ordered jailed for refusing to
confirm whether she had held a phone conversation with the local Federal
prosecutor.

Federal District Court Judge John P. Fullam's order - delayed until an appeals
court review - came during a hearing for three Philadelphia City Councilmen and
an attorney indicted in the Federal Bureau of Investigation's Abscam inquiry.
The defendants were trying to show that the Government had tainted its case by
leaking information to the press before grand jury proceedings began. Other
Abscam defendants elsewhere have made similar claims; last week, four
Congressmen, including Democratic Representatives John M. Murphey of New York
and Frank Thompson Jr. of New Jersey, went to court to argue the charges against
them should be dismissed because the Goverment had lured them into criminal
situations.

Earlier in the week, Peter Vaira, United States Attorney for the Eastern
District of Pennsylvania, testified that he had phoned Miss Schaffer on Feb. 2
to alert her that the first press accounts of the Abscam inquiry were about to
break. Mr. Vaira denied giving her any details beyond verifying information she
offered. The judge, who had earlier refused to call reporters to the stand, then
permitted questioning of Miss Schaffer because Mr. Vaira had, he said, waived
any claim of confidentiality. A spokesman for The Inquirer said Miss Schaffer's
silence was justified because merely confirming that she had spoken to Mr. Vaira
could lead to other questions designed to elicit confidential information from
her.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Caroline Rand Herron, Michael Wright and Don Wycliff

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF CATHLYN PLATT WILKERSON

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW FASHION OF TOUGHNESS AMONG THE EGGHEADS OF WAR

BYLINE: By RICHARD BURT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The relationship between Government policy and academic research has always been
ambiguous. While scholars have long sought to influence thinking in Washington,
more often than not the current concerns of policymakers have shaped the
interests of academics.

This is clearly true of international relations, where the careers of two former
scholars, Henry A. Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski, have greatly influenced
the ambitions of academics on campuses and at research institutions. It is
therefore not surprising that, after Afghanistan, the new hawkish tone in
Washington is reverberating in academia. National security and military studies,
almost banished from universities during the Vietnam period, are enjoying a
renaissance. Professors in several locations report that the research interests
of their colleagues and graduate students are coming to mirror Washington's
concern over the rise of Soviet military power and the strategic problems the
United States will face in the 1980's.

Typically, the academic community's new interest in national security is itself
receiving scholarly attention. One astute observer of changing fashions in the
field is Samuel P. Huntington. A Harvard professor and a former adviser to the
Carter Administration, he now directs the university's Center for International
Affairs.

According to Professor Huntington, military studies in the United States have
passed through two ''waves'' since World War II. The first, in the mid-1950's,
witnessed high-powered historians, political scientists and economists producing
still-quoted works on strategic policy, deterrence and nuclear war. At Harvard,
Dr.  Kissinger established a Defense Studies Program that made national security
a respected academic discipline. In California, Herman Kahn joined Bernard
Brodie and Albert Wohlstetter at the newly created Rand Corporation to study
nuclear strategy.

A Brief Spotlight on Disarmament

This Cold War preoccupation with military policy, says Professor Huntington,
melted away in the 1960's in ''the heat of Vietnam and the warmth of detente''
with the Soviet Union. Enter the second wave in national security studies,
emphasizing the role arms control negotiations could play in enhancing
international security.

In Cambridge, Dr. Kissinger's defense program was supplanted by an arms control
seminar that drew on the talents of several scientists committed to capping the
nuclear arms race, including Paul Doty of Harvard and Bernard Feld, George
Rathjens and Jerome Wiesner, all of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
In the mid-1970's, the Ford Foundation encouraged arms control studies by
spending more than $10 million to establish university research centers on
disarmament.  The Rockefeller Foundation spent several hundred thousand dollars
to support such ''second wave'' groups as the Aspen Institute in Colorado and
the Washington-based Arms Control Association.

But the intellectual authority of the ''second wave,'' says Professor
Huntington, is receding, a casualty of controversial arms control agreements,
such as the strategic arms treaty with Moscow, and of Soviet assertiveness in
the Third World. ''There is some reason to think,'' he says, ''that a third wave
may be gathering.  There are growing numbers of people who are not concerned
about arms control but are worried about the decline in American power.''

There are signs that Professor Huntington is right. At Tufts University, the
Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy's fastest growing graduate program is said
to be security studies. In Washington, Georgetown University's Center for
Strategic and International affairs has burgeoned, attracting Henry Kissinger
and younger specialists on national security, some of whom are advising Ronald
Reagan on defense and foreign policy matters. Professor Huntington, himself, has
seen increasing numbers of students knocking on his door ''interested in
national security and looking for a sympathetic guru.''

Not surprisingly, several leading figures in strategic thinking in the 1950's
are again prominent. After spending a decade looking at broad trends in
technology, economics and society, Herman Kahn, say his colleagues at the Hudson
Institute, is again interested in what he once called ''thinking about the
unthinkable'' - nuclear strategy. Other academics from the Cold War period have
begun to study a new range of security issues, such as the global spread of
nuclear technology and Western dependence on resources in the Third World. Pan
Heuristics, Albert Wohlstetter's small think tank in Marina Del Rey, Calif., has
just completed a study for the Defense Department that reportedly suggests that
the Carter Administration plan for creating and using a ''rapid deployment
force'' in crises in the Persian Gulf is unlikely to deter Moscow from seizing
Arab oil fields.

Some younger scholars, teenagers when the Vietnam war began, are also turning to
national security questions. One of Professor Huntington's recent graduate
students, Richard Betts, has quickly emerged as a specialist on nuclear
proliferation and intelligence at the Brookings Institution. At the Georgetown
Center, Edward Luttwak has combined his knowledge of military history and modern
arms technology to criticize current defense policy. He argues that in the
Vietnam war and the Iranian rescue mission in April, Pentagon planners ignored
the military lessons from past conflicts. Meanwhile, Geoffrey Kemp, a
British-born scholar at Tufts, is said to be perhaps the country's leading
analyst of the international arms trade.

It is still unclear, however, whether Professor Huntington's ''third wave''
represents the wave of the future. Michael Nacht, an assistant director of
Harvard's arms control program, agrees that students are becoming more
conservative on security matters and that foundations such as Ford are losing
interest in arms control. But he suggests that ''academics, like other
Americans, are searching for a concept of national security for the 1980's. So
far we haven't found one.'' Mr. Nacht feels that ''a third wave in national
security thinking will be a combination of the first two. We need to find out
how to use and control force in a more complex and interdependent world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LEADER AND THE LOST PEOPLE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1374 words


WAR AND HOPE The Case for Cambodia.  By Prince Norodom Sihanouk.  Translated by
Mary Feeney.  Illustrated. 166 pp.  New York: Pantheon Books.  $10.95.

By HENRY KAMM

ONLY the first noun of the title of this political pamphlet, first published
last year in Paris, still applies. The continuation of war in Cambodia remains a
certainty, but as it does, hope vanishes.  Although he has occasionally changed
his mind during his remarkable career, Prince Sihanouk has apparently abandoned
hope and last month announced his withdrawal from all political activity.

Decolonized Cambodia's first king and later chief of state, Sihanouk embodied
all that was known of his country to the outside world until Pol Pot became a
household word for a different Cambodia in 1975. When the Prince wrote this
essay - part historical analysis, part political program - Vietnam's liberating
invasion of the most oppressed nation in recent history had not yet settled into
longrange occupation and vassalization. Sihanouk's agile and fertile mind could
still conceive of a possible political solution. But even then, with his
customary political lucidity, he was haunted by the evident irreversibility of
his country's fall under Vietnamese dominion. Vietnam clearly is serious about
its oft-stated assertion that there is no more Cambodian problem and that its
occupying army of about 200,000 is there under a treaty between the two
governments for an indefinite period. And this makes a Vietnamese withdrawal as
unlikely as a Soviet withdrawal from those Eastern and Central European
countries in which the stationing of Soviet troops provides the strongest
guarantee for survival of immensely unpopular regimes.

In ''War and Hope'' Sihanouk offers a reasonable and modest program that
resembles proposals to end an earlier Indochinese war: withdrawal of foreign
troops, general elections in which all factions, including Pol Pot and the
Vietnamese puppet Heng Samrin, would participate, an international military
force to supervise the cease-fire and a new Geneva conference to neutralize
Cambodia and guarantee its independence from hostile powers.

But in his impassioned defense of these proposals, Sihanouk marshals as many
arguments against their acceptance as in their favor. He argues for Khmer
self-determination and neutrality, to which he has devoted his life, fully aware
that Cambodia is ''miserable, desperate, vanishing.'' He puts forth the
unobjectionable notion that Cambodia cannot survive in hostility to Vietnam, but
entitles one of his chapters ''The Visceral Hatred of the Vietnamese Felt by
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Henry Kamm is Chief Asian Diplomatic Correspondent of The New York Times.
Khmers of All Ideological Persuasions.'' Likewise, the Prince may well be right
when he declares that ''Cambodia's last chance is Norodom Sihanouk.'' He is
clearly Cambodia's most astute, no doubt its only, statesman, as he proved by
keeping his country out of the war until his overthrow in 1970. But he also
argues convincingly that both Vietnam and the Soviet Union (the latter with
''visceral hatred'') are firmly opposed to his return to power.

These contradictions do not arise from any confusion in Sihanouk's all-too-acute
mind; they indicate the exceedingly narrow possibilities for his country's
survival as an independent nationstate - and indeed for the very survival of the
Cambodian people, once
again in the grip of devastating famine and ravaged by disease.  Sihanouk always
recognized Vietnam as the principal threat to Cambodia's independence, and his
policies, so often described as erratic, inconsistent and opportunistic by those
who know Indochina less well than he, were always motivated by the constant
objective of defending Cambodia, small and on the wane, against a stronger and
ascendant neighbor.

In the 1950's and early 1960's, the Prince turned to the United States, which
was unclear in its purpose and ignorant of the complexities of Indochina, for
help against the threat of Vietnam - only to reject it when he realized that the
Vietnamese enmity that this policy incurred constituted a greater danger to his
country. He then set out on a policy of defending Cambodia against Vietnam by
trying to render Vietnam grateful to Cambodia. ''Until the day I die I will keep
on believing that the Vietnamese will have no regard for our national
independence and territorial integrity
until they have reason to be grateful to us,'' Sihanouk says in the concluding
chapter.

Identifying the eventual winner in the Vietnamese civil war, the Prince gave his
open support to the Communist side in the hope of earning its gratitude and with
it Cambodia's salvation. The passages describing his diplomacy toward the Hanoi
leadership during his five years as figurehead chief of the Khmer Rouge in exile
in Peking, which ended in January 1976, are the most revealing in the book.

Sihanouk had no illusions about Vietnam's plans in Indochina. In 1969, while
still in power in Phnom Penh, he published a series of articles in his glossy
propaganda magazine in which, with the candor that always distinguished him and
disconcerted statesmen and diplomats, he outlined his views on the postwar
future of his country. Those who now hail him as ''progressive,'' Sihanouk
wrote, will turn against him as a vestige of feudalism when they have won their
war. Only China, whose interests are opposed to those of Vietnam, can protect
Cambodia against its triumphant neighbor. But China, he continued, is also a
Communist power and ideologically has nothing in common with a Sihanoukist
Cambodia. The United States, he said, should give up its war in Indochina
because it cannot win it, and withdraw from the region. But with China's immense
shadow in mind, Sihanouk concluded that the United States should not go too far
away.

While the last article of his series was still on sale in Phnom Penh, Sihanouk
was overthrown, and the conduct of Cambodian affairs was wrested from him. He
never regained a significant role under either the American puppet Lon Nol or
the mindless ultra-radicals of Pol Pot, with whom he sided in desperation. They
used his potent name and imprisoned his body and spirit until they liberated him
at the moment of Vietnamese conquest last year, in the vain expectation that he
would again lend his force to their cause. While condemning the invasion, he
excoriated Pol Pot and his regime of terror with even greater eloquence.

Occasional flashes of Sihanouk's eloquence illuminate this hastily written
tract, which no doubt would have been more reflective had he written it in his
present state of mind. But throughout it reveals the strong spirit of
Indochina's most tragic leader, a man who, by his wits alone, protected seven
million people from war until the forces arrayed against him - internal foes as
well as foreign powers involved in the miseries of Indochina - at last defeated
him.

''War and Hope'' is clearly not ghostwritten; it resounds with Sihanouk's
skepticism about Cambodia's survival. It is thus unlike his earlier ''My War
With the C.I.A.,'' in which the Prince's candor clashed with the simplistic
ideology of his co-author, the Australian Communist propagandist Wilfred
Burchett. This book is a moving document, less for its argument than for its
pervasive sense of the impotent rage of a leader who has lost, probably beyond
redemption, his lone battle against all the forces of hatred and unreason that
he kept from doing their worst, for as long as he could.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF PRINCE NORODOM

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AT CENTER STAGE,RONALD REAGAN TAKES HIS BIGGEST ROLE:PERFORMANCE AT

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1635 words


CONVENTION MAY BE VITAL FOR PROSPECTS

By HEDRICK SMITH

DETROIT, July 13 - As an actor and politician, Ronald Reagan has spent a
lifetime on stage. But never has he taken on a more important performance than
this week's Republican convention, for the impression he makes now on an uneasy
American electorate can vitally influence the fate of his candidacy.

His Vice-Presidential selection, the tone of his acceptance speech and his every
move will be watched as a gauge of his style of leadership and his acceptability
as a President. Even with a convention virtually stripped of political drama, no
other event in the campaign except the probable Presidential debates is expected
to draw such an audience or to bear so vitally on Mr. Reagan's prospects.

Not since Thomas E. Dewey ran against President Truman in 1948 has a Republican
challenger stood to profit more from a wave of public discontent with a
Democratic incumbent. Already, the former two-term Governor of California has
surged ahead of President Carter in the public opinion polls.

Overconfidence and Democratic loyalties cost Mr. Dewey the 1948 election, and
today the Republicans remain a distinct national minority, needing to court
broad support from independents and Democrats to win the White House. Moreover,
though this is Mr.  Reagan's third quest for the Presidency since he emerged in
1964 as a politician of national interest, he is still unfamiliar to many voters
and he has encountered wide uncertainty about his conservativism. Above all, as
his aides concede, he is vulnerable to his own mistakes.

Bitter Goldwater Legacy

There remains the bitter memory of Barry Goldwater, the conservative champion
from Arizona, who won the party's nomination in 1964 but virtually killed all
hope of election at once by the stridency and ideological right-wing purism of
his acceptance speech.

Thus, with the nomination readily in hand after an easy run through the
primaries and with recession-riddled Detroit as a backdrop to remind voters of
the nation's economic woes, Ronald Reagan steps into the national spotlight this
week to let the public take his measure, to demonstrate his appeal and to seek
in advance to disarm the credibility of anticipated Democratic attacks on him
this fall.

His lieutenants are determined to avoid the blunders of Senator Goldwater. They
have prepared a script to display Mr. Reagan practicing the politics of
reassurance. They want his image to be strong but not trigger-happy, firm but
not belligerent, positive but not divisive, calm but in command. They intend to
cast him as a responsible, pragmatic conservative rather than a strident,
uncompromising ideologue, as a compassionate, fatherly Republican populist with
blue-collar appeal, not a cool, uncaring advocate of traditional laissez-faire
Republican economics. And they feel confident that their man fits the role.

But so far he has kept his counsel on the most serious test of his general
direction - his Vice-Presidential running mate. Because Mr.  Reagan is 69 years
old, that selection has assumed special significance, not only to test whether
he will put ideology ahead of practical politics but also to reveal his judgment
on who could best fill his shoes as President.

Choosing a Running Mate

That choice will signal whether he is reaching boldly for the support of
moderate voters with a well-known running mate from outside his own camp, such
as George Bush of Texas or Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee; whether he
prefers to satisfy his conservative partisans by choosing Representative Jack F.
Kemp of Buffalo or Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada; or whether he settles for a
safer, less prominent compromise candidate such as Senator Richard G. Lugar of
Indiana, Representative Guy Vander Jagt of Michigan, or Donald H. Rumsfeld, the
former Illinois Congressman and Defense Secretary.

''I feel this whole election is going to be won or lost here in Detroit by who
is chosen for V.P.,'' a Reagan aide commented. ''It's not that there's only one
good choice. But there are some bad choices that could hurt us the way Ford hurt
himself by picking Bob Dole (the Kansas Senator) in 1976. The best choice is the
one who most helps us win.''

From that standpoint, the Reagan camp has long felt that former President Gerald
R. Ford would be ''the dream candidate.'' But Mr.  Ford said firmly today that
he would take the No. 2 spot ''under no circumstances.'' He indicated that his
preferences were Senator Baker or Mr. Bush.

A couple of months ago the go-for-victory mood had some Reagan strategists
thinking that the best choice would be Senator Baker because of his national
stature. But Mr. Baker has become the target of a determined campaign by
conservatives, angered by his promotion of the Panama Canal treaties and his
votes in favor of Federal financing of abortions and ratification of the
proposed equal rights amendment.

With Senator Baker seriously wounded by this opposition, Mr. Bush has lately
emerged as the favorite of the Reagan pragmatists. A poll conducted for Mr.
Reagan showed the former Texas Congressman and diplomat was the best known
potential running mate, except for Mr.  Ford.

Moreover, as the most persistent challenger, Mr. Bush has shown the most
strength in such big swing states as Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois and Michigan
that may ultimately tip the election. He would balance Mr. Reagan's strength in
the West and South. Also, Mr. Bush has an appeal for the kind of affluent,
educated, suburban Republican and independent voters who have drifted to
Representative John B.  Anderson, the independent candidate, whom Reagan
strategists want to lure back. But as a rival, Mr. Bush has differed with Mr.
Reagan and offended some of the Californian's supporters.

In fact, however, Mr. Reagan rolled so easily to the nomination this year that
the Republican primaries hardly provided an adequate rehearsal for the tough,
hard-fought general election campaign that the Reagan camp expects from
President Carter and Mr. Anderson.

This year, Mr. Reagan entered the race virtually as ''the incumbent Republican
challenger'' to the Democrats, a solid favorite in the Republican field whose
most worrisome foe was his age. He had made a modest try for the nomination in
1968. But in 1976 he barely lost out to President Ford.

In 1980, Mr. Reagan stumbled only once. By playing it too safe, he lost the Iowa
caucuses to Mr. Bush last Jan. 21. Then, taking the offensive, he quickly
recovered a month later with a stunning victory in New Hampshire. Senator Baker
fell out of the race soon afterward and on March 8, Mr. Reagan knocked out John
B. Connally, the former Governor of Texas, in a showdown in South Carolina.

A Decision Day for Ford

By mid-March, Mr. Reagan had built up such invincible strength that after Mr.
Ford ventured to the brink of running, he had to conclude on March 15 that it
was already too late to stop Mr. Reagan. With momentum and a solid core of
support, the Californian with a jaunty smile and easy manner simply outdistanced
Mr. Bush, despite losses in primaries in Connecticut, Massachusetts,
Pennsylvania and Michigan.

By the end, the primary marathon had not only dispelled many doubts about his
age and energy and re-established him as a formidable television campaigner, but
it had also demonstrated his capacity to draw crossover votes from the ranks of
blue-collar Democrats and independents. This set him up for an assault this fall
on the traditional Democratic big-state strongholds in the Northeast and Middle
West.

By late June, a New York Times/ CBS News Poll had Mr. Reagan in the unusual
position for a Republican of running 11 points ahead of Mr.  Carter - and
farther ahead of Mr. Anderson - in union households, a sharp reversal of the
Carter-Ford results in 1976. ''Ronald Reagan's strength among members of our
union increases with each percentage point in unemployment,'' Douglas A. Fraser,
president of the United Auto Workers, warned President Carter last week.

Doubts About Reagan

But Mr. Reagan will not be without problems in the fall. Quick criticism of his
failure to speak to the N.A.A.C.P. pointed up his meager support among blacks
and other minorities. Union leaders remain largely skeptical of the
free-enterprise ring of his economic philosophy.

Many other voters voice concern that he does not have a firm grasp of the
issues, a worry heightened by his tendency to make misstatements. In Kansas, he
could not explain the farm price parity system or give his own stand. In
Detroit, he said there were thousands of regulations on the automobile industry
that should be repealed, but could not name one. Later, he did not seem to know
that Vietnam veterans were covered by the benefits of the G.I. Bill.

Moreover, he may find resistance from many voters to a Republican platform so
conservative that it abandoned the 1976 Republican endorsement of the equal
rights amendment, backed an anti-abortion amendment, opposed gun control and
called for ''military superiority'' over the Soviet Union.

His economic policies are certain to be challenged. Many of the educated
moderates whom Mr. Reagan hopes to woo will have to be convinced that he can
simultaneously provide a $36 billion tax cut, step up military spending and
balance the budget, as he has promised.

But ultimately, the biggest Reagan hobgoblin is that late in the election
campaign -''the third week in October,'' Reagan aides suggest - Mr. Carter will
turn his incumbency into an unbeatable advantage by pulling off a spectacular
move like freeing the hostages in Iran or a Middle East peace conference. ''If
he tries something like that late enough in the game,'' observed Mr. Nofziger,
''the public may not have time to catch on.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AN ALTERNATIVE OT THE DRAFT;
by Roger

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 914 words


Landrum WASH INGTON - As we move ever closer to a draft, because of the serious
shortcomings of the all-volunteer forces, the matter of conscientious objection
to military service should not be treated as an afterthought. In 1971, there
were 61,412 conscientious objectors.  If only 10 percent of the people who must
line up this summer to register for a future draft were to seek this status, the
number would approach half a million. In a post-Vietnam generation, the
percentage could be considerably higher.

What will we do then? Will the right of conscientious objection be narrowly or
expansively defined? Will the terms of equivalent service be designed to punish
or rather to involve productively conscientious objectors in meeting nonmilitary
needs?

There is a larger question here that involves how we think about national
security and service to the country. Is military manpower the single
consideration for defining the terms of debate, or should we be thinking about a
form of national service that encompasses a variety of options for service to
the country related to a broader conception of national security?

A number of people have been arguing that the United States should avoid the
problems of dissension and inequity that would result from a selective draft and
move directly to universal, mandatory national service. All young people would
have to serve either in the armed forces or in programs addressed to other
domestic and international needs. Practical problems of scale, along with
libertarian considerations, weigh heavily against this approach.

Another line of reasoning proposes that in peacetime we move forward boldly with
a large-scale system of voluntary national service. The armed forces, Peace
Corps, conservation corps programs, Vista, and a wide variety of new programs
would form the system.

Skeptics argue that a voluntary approach could not be made to work, and it is
true that only the cooperation of young people would make it work. Many more
from diverse backgrounds would have to participate in both the armed forces and
nonmilitary programs. But if the need for service to the country is clearly
stated, isn't it likely that young people would prefer this approach to a
military draft? Social sanctions and rewards by the public and private sectors
could also increase the motivation of young people to enter national service.

In addition to avoiding a draft, there are other potential benefits. Unemployed
youth would have a range of new opportunities for productive activity in
association with their more privileged peers. These opportunities would be
especially important for large numbers of Hispanic and black youth, and might
prove more valuable for many than the highly-segregated Comprehensive Employment
and Training Act programs. A powerful case can also be made that large numbers
of middle-class youth would benefit from involvement in programs that give them
a sense of purpose. This broader approach could involve young women on equal
terms with young men.

A number of environmental and social needs at home and abroad could benefit from
the energies of youth in national service. Energy conservation, housing
rehabilitation, maintaining the quality of human services without ever-expanding
taxation and bureaucracy, and development programs overseas are only a few.

But unless the terms of debate about national security are altered, we seem
likely to have involuntary military service by select draftees and alternative
service by conscientious objectors, accompanied by another bitter polarization
among young people over fidelity to conflicting conceptions of patriotism.

Consider West Germany, which has a peacetime draft. In 1967, there were 5,963
declarations of conscientious objection from a base population of about 400,000
18-year-old males. Even without a war to protest, the number rose to 19,363 in
1970 and to 40,618 in 1976.  Today, 10 percent from each age group become
conscientious objectors, which is their right under the West German
Constitution. This phenomenon caused a political crisis in West Germany that was
resolved only by the creation of an impressive system of equivalent civilian
service.

An alternative to the draft is possible. We desperately need a better-balanced
strategy of peace and national security instead of a myopic focus on a mighty
defense machine to face a world perceived as increasingly hostile. A strong
national defense is critically important, but much more is involved in national
security and cohesion.

Voluntary national service on a large and imaginative scale deserves our most
careful consideration as young men line up to register for a future draft. It
could help solve the militarymanpower problems, and also establish the
equivalent value of nonmilitary service to this country without forcing
thousands upon thousands into the status of conscientious objectors. It would be
a far more powerful message for America to send to the Russians and to the rest
of the world.

Roger Landrum, a staff member of the Potomac Institute, an urban-oriented
research organization, was study director for the Committee for the Study of
National Service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SEOUL NAMES NEW INTELLIGENCE CHIEF

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 284 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, July 14


A leading army general was named today to be the new director of the Korean
Central Intelligence Agency, replacing Chon Too Hwan, the military strongman,
who will, however, remain as head of the Defense Security Command, a military
intelligence unit.

General Chon's yielding of one of his two concurrent posts is not expected to
diminish his power. He will continue to guide the Standing Committee of National
Security Measures, a junta-like organization that overshadows the civilian
Government headed by President Choi Kyu Hah.

The new chief of the intelligence agency, Gen. Yu Hak Song, is one of 15
generals from the army, navy and air force who guide the country's political
life during what they say will be a transition to a new civilian regime in 1981.


New Chief to Quit Active Service

A statement by President Choi's office said that General Yu, now the commander
of South Korea's Third Field Army, would take up his new post Friday, following
his retirement from active service. The 53-year-old general has been responsible
for the defense of strategically important northern corridors leading to Seoul.
He will be the agency's ninth director since it was established in 1962.

General Yu previously served briefly as deputy chief of the Defense Security
Command, now headed by General Chon. He first won prominence in 1967 when he led
the South Korean logistical forces in Vietnam.

In a sweeping purge of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency, General Chon
recently ousted more than 300 agents accused of having been corrupt, high-handed
or incompetent. He has said that the agency should be concerned only with
national security and no longer be involved in political activities.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 717 words


AROUND THE WORLD;
Envoys at Palestinian Talks Fail to Agree on an Agenda

CAIRO, July 14 (AP) - Egyptian, Israeli and American negotiators met here for
three hours today but failed to agree on an agenda for future talks on
Palestinian self-rule in the territories occupied by Israel.

The Egyptian and Israeli delegates clashed yesterday over the status of
Jerusalem. The Israeli delegate, Justice Minister Shmuel Tamir, reiterated at a
news conference that Jerusalem was the capital of Israel.

Egypt's delegate, Foreign Minister Boutros Ghali, responded that ''our position
was expressed in an exchange of letters with the United States and we received a
positive answer from the United States.''

Most of the countries that have diplomatic relations with Israel do not
recognize Jerusalem as Israel's capital and maintain embassies in Tel Aviv.

Cuban Accuses Morocco Of 'Brutal' Attack on Ships

LAS PALMAS, Canary Islands, July 14 (AP) - The Cuban consul here accused the
Moroccan Air Force today of carrying out a ''brutal and cruel'' strafing of two
Cuban ships off the West African coast. He said the captain of one ship was
killed and three crewmen were badly injured. The Moroccan Government had no
immediate comment.

The consul, Jesus Fernandez Ponce, said the crewmen reported that a small plane
had flown over their ships, apparently to identify them, and the attack came
immediately afterward, without warning, from two Moroccan fighters.

Cuba's official press agency, Prensa Latina, reported yesterday that two
warplanes without markings had strafed two Cuban ships 30 miles off the coast of
the former Spanish Sahara. It said the attack occurred Saturday when the ships
were delivering fuel to Cuban tuna boats.

80,000 Cambodians Return To Camp Near Thai Border

NONG SAMET, Thailand, July 14 (AP) - About 80,000 Cambodians returned to a
refugee camp on the Thai-Cambodian border today, a week after fleeing fighting
between rival anti-Communist guerrillas.

At least 10 Cambodians were reported killed and 114 wounded in three days of
fighting last week. The authorities said a mortar round landed near the camp
today but caused no casualties. They did not say who fired it.

The anti-Communist forces have often worked together against the Vietnamese
soldiers who invaded Cambodia 18 months ago. Lately they have fought among
themselves for control of international relief supplies intended for refugees.

U.S. Aide Discusses Missiles With West German Official

BONN, July 14 (AP) - Deputy Secretary of State Warren M.  Christopher met for an
hour today with Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany to
discuss proposals to limit intermediate-range nuclear weapons in Europe.

Sources in the West German Foreign Ministry said the talks centered on NATO's
response to recent modifications in the Soviet position on missile talks.

Mr. Christopher was to fly to London and Paris for talks also expected to deal
with the missile issue. He met in Washington last week with the Soviet
Ambassador, Anatoly F. Dobrynin.

Moscow had insisted that talks on intermediate-range nuclear weapons could not
start until the North Atlantic Treaty Organization dropped plans to deploy new
atomic weapons in Europe.

But the demand was dropped during Chancellor Helmut Schmidt's meeting with the
Soviet leader, Leonid I. Brezhnev, two weeks ago in Moscow.

Political Violence Is Blamed In Deaths of 68 Salvadorans

SAN SALVADOR, July 14 (AP) - The authorities said today that 68 Salvadorans were
slain over the weekend, apparently in political violence.

No groups took responsibility for the killings, but most of the victims appeared
to be leftists slain by rightists, according to the authorities.

Thirty-one of the victims were identified as leftists slain in Santa Ana, 60
miles northwest of the capital. The authorities said 28 bodies were found here,
including the managing editor and a photographer of an opposition newspaper.

----

GUATEMALA, July 14 (AP) - A police colonel was killed today when gunmen attacked
his car, the authorities said. His driver and two guards also died. Later, four
students at the national university, and a professor and his wife at another
campus, were shot to death.  No one claimed responsibility for the killings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Agent Orange Detected In Half of Test Subjects

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 170 words

DATELINE: LINCOLN, Neb., July 14


Traces of Agent Orange, the chemical defoliant used in the Vietnam War, were
found in slightly less than half of the veterans checked in a University of
Nebraska study.

Dr. Michael Gross, director of the university's mass spectrometry laboratory,
said today that the levels of the defoliant found in the tissue samples were
between 10 and 100 times less than the dosage proved fatal to guinea pigs. But
whether the concentrations could cause long-term medical effects in humans is
unknown, Dr. Gross said.

The study, commissioned by the Veterans Administration, included samples of fat
tissue surgically removed from 33 veterans. Twenty had reported being exposed to
the defoliant during their tour of duty. Ten others were believed to have had no
contact with the chemical. And the final three were Air Force officers who had
conducted research on Agent Orange.

Half of the first group, two members of the control group and two of the
researchers had traces of Agent Orange in their fat tissue, Dr. Gross said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Foreign Aid Needs Help, by Any Name

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 507 words


To the departing Secretary of State, Cyrus Vance, the decline in United States
aid to the developing countries was ''disgraceful.'' To his successor, Edmund
Muskie, there is also a practical reason for alarm. He points out that
Congressional cuts are depriving the nation of a weapon of influence to block
Soviet and Marxist advances in the third world.

This return to cold-war rhetoric should not be shocking in the wake of the
invasion of Afghanistan. Even leaders who have no taste for simplistic
sloganeering are desperate for ways to arouse the public to a major issue of
national security.

The American record is devastating. As a percentage of the gross national
product, development aid dropped from better than .5 percent in the
Eisenhower-Kennedy years of 1960-63 to less than .25 percent in the
Nixon-Ford-Carter period of l973-78. Last year, the proportion fell to a low of
.19 percent. Among the 17 aid-giving industrial democracies, only Italy ranked
lower.

We and others have always believed in the old saying that ''foreign aid has no
constituency.'' But the Agency for International Development disagrees, citing
an opinion survey which shows that there are two unorganized but potentially
influential constituencies for aid: a ''constituency of conviction,'' favoring
an enlightened foreign policy and an overlapping ''constituency of interest''
that depends on third-world trade. If so, well and good. But what seems more
important than the ineffectiveness of the aid constituencies is the skill and
persistence of the opponents of aid.

One reason may be that in recent years the argument for aid has been cast not as
anti-Communist but as pro-American: meeting ''basic human needs'' in the poorest
countries would also advance the American interest in political stability and an
open, growing world economy. The argument is sound, but doesn't sell well.

The opponents of aid, meanwhile, have exploited the Communist bogey. They have
endangered the World Bank and regional development institutions by enacting
unworkable prohibitions on help to Communist Vietnam and other regimes of a more
ambiguous stripe. The year-long Congressional hold-up of bilateral aid to
Nicaragua to hinder what they call a ''Marxist Sandinista'' regime has instead
strengthened those who prefer to get help from the Communist world and has
weakened the allies of private business and democracy. American aid for an
important land reform in El Salvador, for example, will be impossible unless
Congress removes Senator Helms's prohibition, which the Senate accepted last
month without debate.

As Mr. Muskie noted, declining American aid and influence ''help the Soviets
exploit internal instability in Nicaragua, in El Salvador and in many other
places.'' Mr. Muskie knows Congress. With the 1980 aid bill still stalled in a
political season, he is meeting the opposition on its own ground. It is
regrettable that the appeal for aid has to be based on fear and negative
reasons, but the need for it, on any ground, is obvious and urgent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE REAGAN FAMILY:HUSBAND AND WIFE INSEPERABLE,4 CHILDREN GO OWN WAY

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1377 words


When Ronald Reagan flew from Los Angeles to Detroit yesterday on his chartered
campaign plane, he was accompanied as usual by his wife of 28 years, Nancy.
Although three of his four children live in the Los Angeles area, none were on
board: the older two preceded him by commercial airliner and the younger two are
scheduled to arrive tomorrow at the convention where their father is expected to
receive the Republican Presidential nomination he has sought for 12 years.

Mr. Reagan has long extolled the virtues of traditional family life and
criticized nontraditional choices. But away from the cameras that focus on a
smiling family unit, all the Reagan family seldom gathers together. Such
indicators as separate travel arrangements provide a symbol of the inner dynamic
of the Reagan family in which husband and wife are virtually inseparable while
the children, often to their displeasure, are left to go their own ways except
when called upon to make a formal public appearance.

Children on Independent Paths

Mr. Reagan's children - a daughter by his first wife, Jane Wyman, and an adopted
son, and a daughter and son by the former Nancy Davis - have chosen independent
paths, holding views that have often diverged markedly from those of their
father. Like him, the older two have been divorced; both younger children have
lived with partners outside marriage, a practice of which Mr. and Mrs. Reagan
strongly disapprove. All four are college dropouts.

Although they frequently have not been included in the nuclear family unit
provided by his second marriage, Mr. Reagan's older children, Maureen and
Michael, have been deeply involved in his candidacy, having campaigned nights
and weekends all year. Patricia and Ron, the younger children, say that they
will not campaign because they are busy with their own lives.

Active in Party 20 Years

Maureen Reagan, 39 years old, has been active in the Republican party for 20
years and said that she would be campaigning this year no matter whom the party
nominated. ''To me, Ronald Reagan is just another in a very long list of
candidates I have campaigned for,'' she said.

She disagrees sharply with him on several issues. An ardent feminist, she has
been an outspoken activist for the proposed Federal equal rights amendment,
which he opposes; although she does not believe in abortion, she is highly
critical of this year's platform stand against it.

Over the years, she and her father have apparently come to accept each other's
differing views; she describes their relationship as ''friendly.''

''We are beyond a daddy-daughter situation,'' she said, ''and so we can enjoy
the things we like about each other and overlook the things we don't
particularly like. He's not trying to train me, and I'm not trying to train
him.''

Child of Two Movie Stars

This year's limelight is nothing new for her; as the child of two movie stars,
Maureen Reagan was born in the sometimes harsh glare of public attention. With
both parents often away at work, she wanted a brother more than anything in the
world, and when she was 4 her parents adopted a baby boy. Michael and Maureen
remain very close.

''We were raised by nannies and maids,'' said Michael, now 35. When their
parents divorced, both children were sent to boarding school.  Maureen said that
to this day ''I get sick to my stomach at goodbyes,'' and Michael spoke
poignantly about the envy he felt for other children who went home to their
families every night.

When she divorced him, Jane Wyman complained that she and Ronald Reagan had
fought constantly over his political views, and that he was not interested in
her opinions. In his second wife, Mr. Reagan found a woman eager to abandon her
own film career, unlike Miss Wyman, and devote herself to him. ''Nancy lives for
Ronald Reagan,'' Michael said.

Others Feel Excluded

Mr. Reagan's remarriage did not enhance his relations with his older children,
in part because of Nancy Reagan's hypersensitivity to his previous marriage.
''She is very much in love with him and would like to be the only person there
ever was,'' Maureen said.

The Reagans' relationship has often made others, even those within the family,
feel excluded. ''They don't need anybody else but themselves,'' Maureen said.

Like her siblings, Maureen has had a varied career. For many years she sought
success as an actress but 18 months ago she gave up show business. She is now a
director of Sell Overseas America, an organization that promotes American
exports.

Married and Divorced Twice

In her early 20's she was married and divorced twice, once to a policeman and
once to a Marine Corps lieutenant. She said that she has since had little
interest in marriage and lives alone in Los Angeles. ''I've been somebody's
daughter all my life,'' she said.  ''I'm not going to spend the rest of it being
somebody's wife.''

Michael Reagan believes that a search for individual identity has characterized
each of the Reagan children and attributes the floundering they seem to have
experienced to the stress of having a famous father. For many years after he
dropped out of college, Michael's main interest was speedboat racing, and he was
a boat salesman until recently.

Michael, who is married to his second wife, is the father of a 2-year-old son.
He is trying to establish his own business selling gasohol equipment to farmers,
an enterprise he runs from his modest home in the Sherman Oaks section of Los
Angeles.

Looking for an Apartment

Ronald and Nancy Reagan's first child, Patricia, is now 27, and after years of
turbulence in which she was at times estranged from her parents she is living
temporarily at their Pacific Palisades estate while she looks for an apartment
in Los Angeles.

When her father was Governor of California, Patricia opposed the Vietnam War,
which he supported. Mr. Reagan was harshly critical of student dissent in those
years, and his daughter counted herself among the dissenters. Their
philosophical differences endure; although Patricia said that she was
apolitical, she is vehemently against the development of nuclear power, which
her father advocates.

During the 1976 Presidential campaign, Patricia lived with a rock musician,
Bernie Leadon, a member of the Eagles. That relationship has since ended.
Patricia said that she would never marry anyone without living with him first.
Asked her parents' opinion of that view, she hesitated and then said, ''Well,
it's better than it was.''

Uses Mother's Maiden Name

She is primarily interested in acting and is looking for jobs. She uses her
mother's maiden name, Davis, and said, ''I felt I'd have a better chance of
having my work judged by its own merit if people weren't constantly reminded of
who I was.''

The youngest Reagan, 22-year-old Ron, had his parents' relatively undivided
attention in much of his childhood. He was eight years old when his father
became Governor of California, and his father's 9-to-5 schedule usually meant
that his father was home for dinner.  Patricia was at boarding school, and Ron
recalled, ''I was kind of an only child for that period.''

Like his siblings, he was an indifferent student. As a teen-ager, he was
conscious of a need to find ''something I could give myself to,'' and four years
ago he finally found it in ballet. He left Yale after one semester, began
studying dance at the Stanley Holden school in Los Angeles and is now a member
of the Joffrey II troupe, whose director describes it as ''the farm team'' for
the Joffrey Ballet.

Rumors Are Denied

Ron denies persistent rumors that his parents were upset by his career choice,
asserting that they had always been supportive. They have never seen him
perform.

He lives in Greenwich Village with a woman, and he declines to discuss his
personal life. He said that he was not particularly interested in politics, did
not vote for his father in this year's primaries and had not registered for the
fall election.

Ron resents any implication that his family does not get along.  ''Like any
family, there are bad times and good times,'' he said.  ''But I don't think
there was anything too cataclysmic that happened. There are lots of families
that are more fragmented than we are.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTOS OF THE 4 REAGAN CHILDREN

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 15, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF THE ADDRESS BY FORMER PRESIDENT FORD BEFORE REPUBLICANS CONVENTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2211 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, July 14


Following is the text, as prepared for delivery, of former President Gerald R.
Ford's address tonight to the Republican National Convention:

Betty and I are deeply grateful for your wonderful welcome, your many kindnesses
and especially your friendship. This country and our party have given us every
honor any two people could hope for. It is good to be home in Michigan.

Some call me an elder statesman. I don't know. I don't mind telling you all that
I am not ready to quit yet. I've got news for this convention and Jimmy Carter -
this Republican is going to do everything in his power to elect our nominee to
the Presidency of the United States.

We've got a lot of work to do, and you are looking at one volunteer who will try
harder, work longer and speak with more conviction to get this country a
competent President again.

Elder statesmen are supposed to sit quietly and smile wisely from the sidelines.
I've never been much for sitting, and I never spent much time on the sidelines.
Betty'll tell you that. This country means too much to me to be comfortable
parked on the bench. So when you field the team for Governor Reagan, count me
in.

Four years ago all of us were given a new way to measure Presidential
effectiveness. It was called the misery index. In 1976, candidate Carter said if
you added the unemployment rate and the inflation rate you had a true measure of
the misery in America. He said then that the misery index was so high that the
President should be removed from office. When I left the Presidency, the
so-called misery index was 12 percent. Just two months ago under Carter, it was
24 percent, twice as high. That's twice as many reasons Jimmy Carter has got to
go.

Depression and Fear

But no statistics can tell of the misery and depression of workers who have lost
their jobs. No statistics can explain the fear of senior citizens whose life
savings are gone. No statistics can relate the suffering of hostages who have
lost their freedom. Statistics cannot explain the agony of allies who have lost
their confidence in America. No statistics can tell the jeopardy of a nation
whose leaders lose faith in its future.

This election may be the most important in the long and proud history of this
country because our faith in ourselves is on the line, which means that our
country is on the line.

By his own statistics, Mr. Carter has failed. There is no alternative - he's got
to go. We cannot take four more years like the last four. We cannot stand four
more years of soaring inflation, skyhigh interest rates, rising unemployment and
shrinking take-home pay. We cannot stake our survival on four more years of weak
and wavering leadership and lagging defenses. We dare not fall another four
years behind with dangerous dependence on foreign energy. We cannot sink
helplessly into second-rate status in the world, with economic stagnation at
home.

Always Overcome

Let's talk about the future.  We've had miseries before. But we've always
overcome before. We've always had the grit in every crisis to know this great
nation of ours can do anything it sets its mind to do. I know that Ronald Reagan
believes that. Republicans, Democrats, most Americans believe that. I don't know
what the Carter Administration believes. They have sold America short. That's
good enough reason to turn them out of office in November.

Our confidence in the future is up to the leadership of this country. If our
leaders are inept and timid, America will be inept and timid. If our leadership
is confident and bold, America will be confident and bold. And we will be
successful.

You've all heard Carter's alibis. Inflation cannot be controlled.  The world has
changed. We can no longer protect our diplomats in foreign capitals, nor our
workingmen on Detroit's assembly lines. We must lower our expectations, we must
be realistic, we must prudently retreat. Baloney.

There is something seriously wrong with the White House leadership today. They
have no faith in the people of this great country.  Perhaps they believe that
the American adventure is at an end. You and I know it is only beginning.

The American people don't need convincing that we are in trouble.  We know that
our Republican candidates can do a better job in the White House and in
Congress. We promise no more than we can deliver and will deliver everything we
promise. We will be responsive and responsible in making this nation prosperous
and strong once more.

Platform That Faces Facts

We must adopt a party platform that faces facts, that will assure our people we
understand and will take prompt and practical action to deal successfully with
the grave problems which the Carter Administration has created and ignored. We
will be candid, consistent and confident. There is nothing the American people
cannot do when we try.

Our Republican Party endures so long as it speaks and acts for the American
people, who suffer in silence. During my term in office as your President, I
learned once again the importance of knowing how to listen and what to do. We
must keep our minds open as well as our ears.

In uniting our own party, let generosity and good will demonstrate for all to
see that the Republican Party is capable of dealing justly and tolerantly with
dissent and minority opinion, for this is crucial in governing a country.

It was my responsibility and privilege to lead our nation through a tragic and
troubled time into a third century of freedom. Faith in our heritage, in our
record of achievement and our future was never more evident than during the
Bicentennial celebration four years ago. That faith has been shaken, but we're
still strong. Despite the double talk coming out of Washington, despite the
setbacks we have suffered, there is no doubt in my mind that we are going to dig
in like we always have and get it done like we always have.

Finds Doubting Leadership

If there are some of you listening who have come to doubt the future of America,
it is the result of leadership filled with its own self-doubt, that gives up
before the battle has begun. Leadership whose only answer is to retreat.

They tell us it's just a harsh fact of today's economy that workers must give up
their jobs.  They tell us it's an inescapable price of this inflationary age
that America's elderly must give up their savings.  They tell us that America's
young people must give up the dream of owning their own home.  They tell us it's
just a sign of the times that American industry must give up hope for growth and
prosperity.  They tell America's farmers they must give up all trade with the
Soviet Union, and the Olympic team must give up their golden dreams.  How much
better it would have been to have had the intelligence and foresight to maintain
our military strength to deter our adversaries before Afghanistan rather than to
penalize our own people after Afghanistan.

They give up and accept the ''unacceptable'' reality of a Soviet combat brigade
in Cuba. They give up to Soviet and Cuban adventurism in Ethiopia, Cambodia, the
Middle East and Central America. They give up to terrorism in Iran and Pakistan
and Libya.

Negotiating From Strength

They give up on plans to build a stronger Navy. That give up the neutron bomb.
They give up the B-1 bomber. And then they say the SALT II Treaty they
negotiated is necessary because we are so weak. I am not against a SALT II
Treaty, but we better have one negotiated from strength.

Now, after four years of retreat before every challenge, Mr. Carter wants to be
re-elected. He says, ''Don't blame me.'' The problems are too tough, too
serious, too complex for any President to do a good job. He asks the American
people to be satisfied with good intentions. He says the job is too big for any
one person. He has given up on the Presidency. And still wants the job.

Well, I know something about the job. I've been there. To give up on the
Presidency is to give up on America. If Jimmy Carter doesn't feel up to the job,
he shouldn't be in it.

You can ask the American people to sacrifice but you cannot ask them to give up
hope. When our President thinks our greatest days are behind us, is it so
strange for the people to doubt the future?

When America gets trimmed back to limited vision and limited skills in the White
House, we've got the wrong President. We need a new one, a President who
believes in America's future.

Beacon to Refugees

When the refugees from Vietnam, Cambodia, Cuba and Haiti leave their oppression
and squalor behind, where do they go? They come here. Because we offer freedom
and opportunity and human dignity. And those people know America's greatest days
are still ahead of us.

We are a peaceful nation because we are a free, happy and united people in a
system that works, unlike the Soviet Union, which uses fear to keep a death-grip
on its people. It hasn't worked and it won't work.

The 60-year experiment in Communism is a failure without a future.  Our 200
years of freedom is still man's most important achievement, and the best days
are still to come.

Just look around the world at other nations. Assassins who got there by force.
Despots who came to power by fear, not by free elections.

Our leaders come from our people. A continuous constitutional line of men and
women from the people - from places like Grand Rapids, Michigan; Plains,
Georgia, and soon from Eureka, Illinois.

Let's never doubt America's greatness. Let's have pride in it.  Let's embrace
it. Let's start talking like winners and being winners. That's the real spirit
of America.

The America that overcame every obstacle to open our own West can overcome every
obstacle to open new energy sources for a safe future.

Fuel-Efficient Cars

The America that put a man on the moon in the 60's can put man in a
fuel-efficient car in the 80's.  The America that developed the destructive
power of nuclear energy to end a world war can now safely harness the
constructive power of nuclear energy to fuel our own land.

We launched the clipper ships to trade anywhere in this world. We can rebuild
our industrial base to compete with anyone, anywhere.  We nurtured a nation of
Horatio Algers. We can sever today's red tape and regulation that's strangling
business, big and small.  We compassionately provided welfare for those who
needed help. We must provide and safeguard the jobs of those who want to make it
on their own.

We made housing and voting and civil rights real for all our people. We must
give them real economic oportunity in the future.  Our country that has met
every generation's challenge of equal rights throughout its history can surely
meet today's obligation to the mothers, sisters, wives and daughters of this
land.

Our country gave job opportunity to yesterday's workers. We can give security to
them as today's senior citizens.  Our country that twice gave its sons and
daughters for the peace of Europe can regain the confidence of our NATO allies.
Our country that fought and won a global war can commit itself to a modern Navy.


For Service Pay Raises

Our country that has paid for the most sophisticated weapons in the history of
mankind must pay our servicemen and women what they deserve for defending our
country.

We have forged a giant government out of compassion for the needy.  Now we can
trim that government out of compassion for the taxpayers.  We controlled
inflation four years ago. We can do it again.  I am an optimist. So is Governor
Reagan. So are most Republicans.  So are most Democrats. The choice before us is
as clear as it is critical.

When Mr. Carter looks to the future, he sees problems - he asks how much misery
and humiliation will America accept.  When we, the American optimists, look to
the future, we see opportunities, and ask how much excellence will America
achieve?  If we believe in God and in ourselves, America's future can be as
bright as her glorious past. We just need to remember who we are - the most
blessed, the most creative, the freest, the most optimistic people on the face
of this earth. And we're going to stay that way.

Last Nov. 4th, more than 50 among us were taken hostage in Iran.  This Nov. 4th,
with their tragedy burning in our conscience, we will vote to elect a new
American President.

And when we do, we're not gonna give up on America's future. We're gonna live up
to America's greatness. America must lead again, and with your help it will.

Thank you.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF GERALD FORD

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN WOOS FORD AS TOP REPUBLICANS DENOUNCE PRESIDENT:KISSINGER'S a ddition to
a photo of delegates at the convention on page (A16)

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1787 words


SPEECH IS HARSH:HOOKS OF N.A.A.C.P. ADDRESSES THE CONVENTION AFTERTHREAT OF A
BLACK DELEGATES' WALKOUT

By HEDRICK SMITH

DETROIT, Wednesday, July 16 - Ronald Reagan sounded out former President Gerald
R. Ford yesterday about becoming his Vice-Presidential running mate, though he
stopped short of a formal offer, and Mr. Ford deflected the proposal without
categorically rejecting it, according to Reagan sources.

The two men met in the privacy of Mr. Reagan's skyscraper hotel suite before an
array of speakers led by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, Senator

Kissinger's remarks, Page A15.
Barry Goldwater of Arizona and the House minority leader, John J.  Rhodes of
Arizona, lashed out at President Carter and his policies at the second day of
the Republican National Convention.

But after what had been a smooth convention operation so far, the Reagan
leadership had to head off a threatened symbolic walkout by some black delegates
by hastily adding Benjamin L. Hooks, executive director of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People, to last night's list of
speakers. And later, because they were running behind, they had to postpone the
keynote speech by Representative Guy Vander Jagt of Michigan until tonight's
session.

Party Platform Passed

Last night the convention moved through easy passage of the party platform, a
sentimental moment with Senator Goldwater, the 1964 nominee, and a short but
noisy demonstration for Representative Jack F. Kemp of Buffalo, one of the small
handful of final contenders for the second spot on the Reagan ticket.

But Reagan sources asserted that Mr. Ford was Mr. Reagan's first choice and that
the former California Governor had made it clear to Mr. Ford that he wanted the
former President on his ticket, although after their one-hour meeting Mr. Reagan
told reporters no formal offer had been made.

''I just sought his counsel and advice,'' Mr. Reagan said on his way to a rally
of black delegates, one of several meetings in a day in which he sought to mend
fences with blacks, women and moderates.  ''We just discussed all the people who
are presently under consideration. He made no recommendations. He analyzed and
gave his thoughts on everybody.''

Sentiment for Bush

Going into the session, Mr. Ford had told associates he preferred George Bush,
the former diplomat, Congressman and Director of Central Intelligence who had
been the most persistent rival to Mr. Reagan in the primaries. Yesterday, while
Mr. Reagan consulted with a string of top party leaders, an increasing number of
conservative delegates said they could go along if Mr. Reagan picked a moderate
like George Bush.

But the Reagan camp preferred to focus on Mr. Ford and Reagan sources were
hopeful late last night that the two men might meet again today. One remarked
that Mr. Ford had plenty to think about and might not sleep well, though Ford
associates have described the former President as strongly reluctant to join the
ticket and impatient with pressures from the Reagan camp for him to do so.

Periodically, the delegates were roused to cheers or to their feet by sallies
against President Carter. Mr. Rhodes accused Mr. Carter of playing politics with
the Iranian hostage crisis. Mr. Kissinger, in one of his sharpest speeches in
recent months, urged the need to check Soviet expansionism by a strong new
administration that in all parts of the world could ''show that blackmail does
not work.''

Although Mr. Kissinger and some Reagan leaders had feared demonstrations against
the former Secretary of State, a symbol of the northern liberal wing of the
party, he was courteously received with warm applause.

The session first erupted into real cheers when Mrs. Reagan, in a stunning white
dress, made her first appearance in the Joe Louis Arena and again later when
Senator Goldwater was introduced by his son, Barry Jr. The hall echoed with
chants of ''We want Barry'' and as they subsided, he quipped: ''Thank you,
folks. Can I accept the nomination?''

Goldwater Comes From Hospital

Senator Goldwater, who came out of the hospital where he was recovering from a
hip operation to appear here, looked fragile as he took a dig at officials in
Washington ''who need crutches under their brains'' and then warned, more
seriously, that ''weakness leads to war.''

One unexpected change in the evening was the sudden inclusion in the program of
Mr. Hooks, a long-time Republican, at the urging of black delegates who
persuaded Mr. Reagan personally to approve the invitation under threat of a
walkout.

Warning that high youth unemployment in the cities was ''a ticking time bomb
that threatens to destroy the whole of our nation,'' Mr.  Hooks won applause
with his call for a full-employment policy. But there was only respectful
silence when he urged the delegates to reconsider their opposition to abortion
and the equal rights amendment and their support of capital punishment. The
applause resumed when he urged the audience to support more black Republicans
for elective office.

Some of the sharpest charges against President Carter came from Mr. Rhodes, who
took the President to task for rising unemployment and for his handling of the
Iranian hostage crisis.

Rhodes Attack on Carter

''The President,'' said Mr. Rhodes, ''has conducted affairs of state and
responded to human tragedy by the political calendar, with primary election
dates boldly marked in red. Who will forget the Tuesday morning of the Wisconsin
primary when the President, using the White House as his forum, promised us an
end of the hostage crisis? Who will forget the morning after the Wisconsin
primary this promise was ignored?''

Mr. Kissinger, whose appearance here had been opposed by conservative delegates
because of his links to the liberal-Northeastern wing of the party and his role
in the Vietnam War and in detente policy, cautioned the Republican audience
against expecting quick fixes in foreign affairs or contending that America
could expect to control or influence all crises abroad.

But then, in his speech, he charged: ''The Carter Administration has managed the
extraordinary feat of having at one and the same time the worst relations with
our allies, the worst relations with our adversaries and the most serious
upheavals in the developing world since the end of the second World War.''

''We can assert that these multiplying crises are the natural result of a naive
philosophy, which, since 1977, has recoiled from our power and fled from our
responsibilities,'' he said. ''Sooner or later our weakness will produce a
catastrophe.''

Kissinger Meets Reagan

Mr. Kissinger, who met yesterday morning with Mr. Reagan and later told
reporters that he was not seeking a job in a Reagan administration, called for
closing ranks in the Republican Party. He urged a strategic doctrine ''adequate
for the era ahead of us,'' a revised strategy for the Western alliance, a common
energy policy and a new defense force created ''on a crash basis to overcome the
grievous challenges certain to face us in the next 3-4 years.''

For Representative Kemp, last night's speeches were virtually an audition for
the Vice Presidency, and he was rousing cheered by delegates carrying
''Reagan-Kemp'' placards. The hall was festooned with banners proclaiming ''Jack
Kemp -the G.O.P.'s No. 1 draft choice.'' Representative Vander Jagt had hoped
for a similar opportunity but was deprived when his keynote speech was
postponed.

Both were reported by Reagan aides to be among the small group of candidates
still under consideration by Mr. Reagan as possible running mates.

Along with Mr. Bush, the others are Donald H. Rumsfeld, the former Defense
Secretary and businessman, and Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, both of whom
addressed the convention Monday night, without stirring any sudden new upsurge
of support.

Kemp Presses Tax Reduction

Mr. Kemp, articulating his case for new tax reduction policies to revitalize the
American economy, asserted in his speech that the 1980 election would offer a
choice between ''an era of despair or one of hope'' and forecast that it would
bring ''a political tidal wave'' for Republicans as powerful as the Democratic
sweep of 1932.

But while the orators berated the Democrats and Mr. Reagan deliberated in
private about his choice of a running mate, more and more conservative delegates
expressed their willingness to accept Mr. Bush as their Vice-Presidential
nominee if that were Mr. Reagan's choice.

Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, long an elder in the conservative
wing, said that the party needed a Vice-Presidential candidate who would
''broaden the base,'' language that he acknowledged was normally used to refer
to Mr. Bush.

Senator Jesse A. Helms of North Carolina, who has been saying that he would let
himself be formally proposed as a Vice-Presidential nominee if he were
dissatisfied with Mr. Reagan's choice, said yesterday in a television interview,
''I am in Detroit to help Ronald Reagan in any way I can. I'm devoted to him and
I want to do everything I can to help.''

The Senator and his supporters have been apprehensive that an unacceptable
liberal may be chosen as Mr. Reagan's running mate.  Even among conservatives in
Mr. Reagan's own delegation from California, sentiment seemed to be shifting.
''It's more Bush than Kemp now,'' commented Representative John H. Rousselot.
''It's a heart versus head situation,'' added former Lieut. Gov. Ed Reinecke,
one of the conservative leaders in the California delegation. ''The heart would
be with the philosophy, and that would be Kemp. The head is more pragmatic. Who
strengthens the ticket? And that would appear to be Bush.''

All day, Mr. Reagan took his own soundings, beginning with a group of women
delegates who were upset over the party's decision not to endorse the proposed
equal rights amendment in its platform this year, through groups of governors,
senators and representatives with whom he met most of the afternoon and evening.

Although aides said that Mr. Reagan had asked that time be set aside in case he
wanted to meet individually with potential running mates, his spokesman, Lyn
Nofziger, said last night that Mr. Reagan had ''no intention to meet alone with
persons who might be considered for the Vice Presidency.''

But Mr. Nofziger said that this did not mean that some of the contenders might
not be included among the groups with whom Mr.  Reagan was conferring.
Yesterday, as previously, the Reagan high command has predicted that the final
decision will be made tonight after Mr. Reagan's nomination and will be
announced at a news conference tomorrow morning.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Henry Kissinger. Senator Goldwater, and
Benjamin Hooks,in

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 839 words


AROUND THE WORLD;
Discrimination Charge Ends U.S. Contracts for Firestone

WASHINGTON, July 15 (UPI) - Secretary of Labor Ray Marshall today barred the
Firestone Tire and Rubber Company from current and future Government contracts
because of Federal job discrimination violations.

A department administrative law judge had recommended dismissal of the
complaint. A Firestone spokesman said the company planned to appeal Mr.
Marshall's decision in Federal court.

Firestone handles about $40 million annually in direct Federal contracts,
according to Assistant Labor Secretary Donald E. Elisburg.  The action grew out
of a complaint against a Firestone facility in Orange, Tex., but it bars the
company from all Federal contracts nationwide. The Orange plant employs about
650 people.

Mr. Marshall said Firestone's affirmative action plan at Orange was ''deficient
in several respects.''

Bombings in Puerto Rico Detour U.S.-Latin Air Traffic

SAN JUAN, P.R., July 15 (UPI) - A series of predawn explosions have demolished
three aerial navigation stations and a Coast Guard navigation beacon, forcing
the rerouting of air traffic between the United States and Latin America. No
injuries were reported.

A Federal Aviation Administration official, Michael T. Fenn, said airline
traffic between South America, the Caribbean and the United States would have to
be rerouted for a week until all of the units were back in operation.

Mr. Fenn estimated that it would cost $1 million to replace the three navigation
facilities.  A Coast Guard spokesman said it would take $2,000 and two weeks to
replace a beacon at the entrance to San Juan harbor that guides ships in on
foggy nights.

Victor Gonzalez, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said no
group had taken responsibility for the bombings yesterday.

Garbage Pickup in Mobile Halted in Firefighter Strike

MOBILE, Ala., July 15 (AP) - Garbage collection in this port city of 200,000
people was halted today after sanitation workers refused to cross picket lines
set up by striking firefighters.

About 400 union firefighters walked off the job late yesterday afternoon in a
dispute over wages and benefits. About two dozen supervisors were providing fire
protection and an equal number of National Guardsmen were stationed at
firehouses.

The firefighters were served with warrants ordering them to appear in court
later this month to show why they should not be held in contempt for violating a
restraining order issued against the strike last night. There were no arrests.

Fire Capt. T.R. Anderson, president of Local 1349 of the International
Association of Firefighters, said the City Commissioners had ''17 months to
settle this thing and the last 59 days of this has been intense pressure on them
to settle it, and they've chosen not to settle it.''

The current annual salary for firefighters is about $12,800. They demanded a 20
percent pay increase and improved job conditions.

U.S. Agency Finds Bias By City of Wrightsville, Ga.

WRIGHTSVILLE, Ga., July 15 (AP) -This small east-central Georgia town, the scene
of racial violence last spring, has been accused of deliberate racial
discrimination by an agency that could withhold Federal funds.

The civil rights division of the Office of Revenue Sharing, in a report released
yesterday, charged that the city discriminated against blacks in local
government jobs and generally offered inferior services to the black community.

''I see some things we will have to give answers to, but what those answers will
be, I'm not at liberty to say now,'' said Mayor Willis G. Wombles.

Wrightsville is one of 21 local governments in middle and south Georgia under
scrutiny by the agency. The report on Wrightsville is the first to be completed.

City officials have 15 days to respond to the charges, then 30 days to submit
corrective plans or risk suspension of $44,000 in revenue sharing funds, the
report said.

Black leaders have demonstrated in Wrightsville for months.

Dispute Between Lawyers Delays Garwood Hearing

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., July 15 (UPI) - A bitter dispute between former and present
legal counsel for Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps today caused a
one-day delay in pretrial proceedings here.

Private Garwood, 34 years old, of Adams, Ind., is charged with desertion and
collaboration with the enemy in nearly 14 years he spent in Vietnam. The
private, whose court-martial is expected to open next week, could face life
imprisonment if convicted.

The controversy arose when Dermot Foley, former defense lawyer, refused to turn
over to Private Garwood's current lawyer, John C.  Lowe, work he had done while
representing him from the time of the marine's return to the United States in
March 1979 until his resignation from the case last month.

Mr. Foley said the defense was not entitled to documents he had prepared for the
case unless arrangements are made to pay him for his services.

National news appears on pages A10-20; political news on pages A14-18.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A SUMMARY OF REAGAN'S POSITIONS ON THE MAJOR ISSUES OF THIS YEAR'S

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2707 words


CAMPAIGN

By DOUGLAS E. KNEELAND

DETROIT, July 15 - Ronald Reagan, the Republican Presidential nominee in
waiting, is a man of clear convictions.  Critics may complain that in the long
campaign season this year, and in 1976, he has not always fleshed out his
tenaciously held conservative positions with detailed proposals for carrying
them out. But seldom in his years of public life has he been accused of
ideological acrobatics.

As Governor of California, he once declared that his feet were ''set in
concrete'' on the issue of withholding state income taxes from workers'
paychecks. In opposing such a plan, he argued that taxes should hurt and that
once-a-year payments made Californians aware of how much government was costing
them.

When he finally backed down and signed a bill instituting withholding, it was
not because he had changed his mind. Rather, it was because Democrats in the
Legislature had forced him into an untenable political position after it was
disclosed that one year while he was Governor he had paid no income tax himself,
having qualified for enough deductions.

Despite Mr. Reagan's generally unwavering philosophy, two issues on which he did
undergo a change of heart in the last decade came back to haunt him at the
sometimes bitter platform committee meetings that preceded the Republican
National Convention here.

Actions as Governor

While Governor, Mr. Reagan signed what at the time was one of the most liberal
abortion laws in the country. He also supported the proposed Federal equal
rights amendment. Since then he has contended that the California abortion law
was interpreted much more freely than he had expected. He now says he believes
that abortion is ''taking a life.'' He supports the idea of a constitutional
amendment to prohibit abortions except when the life of the mother is
endangered.

On the rights amendment, he says he continues to believe in equal rights for
women but is opposed to the amendment as potentially harmful to families.

Taking heart from Mr. Reagan's current stands, opponents of the equal rights
amendment and of freedom of choice on abortion won their battles to prevent the
Republican Party's platform committee from endorsing either.

The party had supported an equal rights amendment in all but two of its
platforms since 1940. Despite some warnings that a shift might hurt Republicans
in the general election, the committee produced a compromise that said the party
''acknowledges the legitimate efforts of those who support and oppose the
ratification of the equal rights amendment.''

Stress on Unity

In 1976 the platform voiced support for the efforts of those favoring the
constitutional amendment on abortion. This year the platform goes a step
further, declaring, ''While we recognize the different views on this question
among Americans in general - and our own party - we affirm our support of a
constitutional amendment to restore our protection of the right to life for
unborn children.'' It also supports a law barring Federal funds for most
abortions.

Although the fights over these issues may have tarnished the bright gleam of
unity that the Republicans have been assidulously polishing since it became
apparent that Mr. Reagan would be the nominee, it was perhaps notable that there
were no other major challenges to the known positions of the prospective
standard-bearer, who has long been recognized as the leading spokesman of what
has usually been considered a minority, albeit a substantial one, on the party's
right.

Mr. Reagan contends that the nation and the party have moved closer to his
philosophy, not the other way around. And his feet have long been ''set in
concrete'' on quite a few issues.

Here is a summary of Mr. Reagan's positions on many of this year's campaign
issues:

Social Policy

Mr. Reagan is opposed to Government-mandated limits on hospital costs, as he is
to all forms of national health insurance. However, he supports tax credits for
private health insurance programs.

Mr. Reagan advocates transferring responsibility for many Federal programs to
the states. In 1976 he got into political trouble when he said that his plan
would save the Federal Government $90 billion.  Many people in the states
believed that they would be asked to pick up the costs through additional taxes.
This year he has been careful not to put a price tag on his plans and to
emphasize that he would also transfer the sources of revenue for the programs to
the states, allowing them to administer the services in what he insists would be
a more efficient manner.

The first responsibility that he would like to see the Federal Government
divested of is welfare programs, but he has also suggested that Washington end
its involvement in education and mass transit.

Federal welfare programs have always been one of Mr. Reagan's principal targets.
In his years of campaigning he has often recounted his experiences as Governor
of California, where, early in his second term, he reached a compromise with the
liberal Democrats in the legislature that tightened requirements for welfare
recipients but increased payments for those who still qualified. The legislation
resulted in a drop in the welfare rolls and some reduction in total cost.

An advocate of private education, Mr. Reagan has sought ways to help parents
meet tuition costs through such methods as tax credits to offset payments, or
vouchers that could be used for either public or private education.

As for mass transit, he says he believes that it ''belongs at the local level
and is the decision of the people.'' ''Why doesn't the Federal Government leave
these priorities and problems to the local governments,'' he asked in one
interview this year, ''and, as I've said so repeatedly, make the tax sources
available for them to solve their own problems?''

In the past Mr. Reagan has suggested that Social Security might be made
voluntary or that its funds be invested in the ''industrial might of America.''
Aware that this frightened some members of an increasingly aging population, he
has limited himself this year to saying that he would have a commission study
ways to improve the soundness of the system, while promising that payments to
current beneficiaries would not be reduced.

Mr. Reagan is opposed to gun control, and he advocates capital punishment as a
deterrent to serious crimes.  On civil rights, he has abandoned over the last
few years his opposition to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits
discrimination in hotels, restaurants and other public facilities.

He says that he was against it in his first campaign for Governor in 1966
because he thought that it ''infringed on the individual rights of citizens
which are supposedly guaranteed by the Constitution.'' Now, he says, he
recognizes that the antidiscrimination laws are ''institutionalized,'' adding
that they have ''hastened the solution of a lot of problems.''

He opposes busing to desegregate schools and any form of quota for employment or
school admission.

PICKUP 1ST ADD ISSUES

1st & LAST ADD ISSUES

The Economy

Mr. Reagan did not wait until his nominaion to attempt to put his mark on the
economy.  All year he campaigned hard on the premise that, if elected, he would
try to push through Congress the Kemp-Roth plan, which calls for an
across-the-board tax cut of 30 percent over three years.  Supporters of the plan
say it would so stimulate the economy that it would produce more revenue than it
would cost, while easing unemployment and increasing productivity enough to
offset any inflationary effect, especially if coupled with restraints on
Government spending.

On June 25, obviously hoping to steal a march on any Democratic cry for a tax
cut to revive the sagging economy, Mr. Reagan joined Republican Congressional
allies in calling for a $36 billion reduction in taxes to take effect Jan. 1. In
what was labeled a ''first installment'' of the Kemp-Roth bill, Mr. Reagan
proposed a 10 percent tax cut for individuals, which he estimated would amount
to $31.5 billion, and accelerated deductions for business on new investments
that total from $4 billion to $5 billion.

Mr. Reagan also reiterated his support for a three-year cut and for adding in
the fourth year a permanent, annual adjustment of taxes so that individuals
would not be pushed into higher brackets because of inflation.

As he has in the past, Mr. Reagan stressed reduction of Government spending.
However, he did not say how he would achieve this except by ordering a freeze on
hiring and attempting to cut waste that he estimates at between $25 billion and
$100 billion in the Federal budget, which is now at roughly $575 billion.

Mr. Reagan has consistently favored a balanced budget, contending that he could
bring it about while increasing military spending and not cutting social
programs for the truly needy.

Mr. Reagan advocates removing taxes on interest from savings accounts to
encourage thrift. He vigorously opposes wage and price controls and would like
to see the minimum wage eliminated, contending that it contributes to high
unemployment rates, especally among the young. If he could not end the minimum
wage, he would push for a lower minimum for young people.

In an area that he says is still being studied by his advisers, he has suggested
that the United States might do well to return to the gold standard as a basis
for the dollar.

Energy

Unlike many politicians, Mr. Reagan does not blame the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries for the high price of oil and gasoline in the United States.
Instead, he attributes the nation's problems to ''price-fixing and regulating
and controlling'' of the energy industry by the Government.

He would remove all price controls from oil and natural gas, maintaining that so
much exploration and development would be stimulated that the United States
could stop importing oil in five years.

As for OPEC, he says that the cartel countries cannot be faulted for raising
prices since oil prices are figured in dollars and the dollar has rapidly been
losing strength against foreign currencies over the last few years.

Mr. Reagan does not believe that conservation is the best answer to the energy
problem. Nor does he feel that solar energy will provide a solution in the
forseeable future. Nuclear energy, he contends, should be developed as much as
possible ''with strict safety rules.''

Role of Government

If Mr. Reagan is elected and lives up to his words, he will enter government
swinging a meat cleaver.  Not only would he put a freeze on hiring, set out to
cut billions of dollars worth of fat in the Federal budget and try to shift some
responsibility for services to states and localities, but he would also attempt
to abolish the new Cabinet-level Departments of Education and Energy. Moreover,
he has said that he questions seriously the need for the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration.

''Government exists to protect us from each other,'' Mr. Reagan has said
repeatedly. ''Where Government has gone beyond its limit is in deciding to
protect us from ourselves.''

For example, he approves of food and drug laws that protect consumers from
harmful products, but he does not believe that Government has any business
making companies prove that drugs are effective as well as harmless.

On the environment, Mr. Reagan had a record as Governor of having supported
steps to improve air quality and preserve open space.  However, he frequently
charges that the Environmental Protection Agency may have gone too far in
pressing some of its standards.

A harsh critic of most regulatory agencies, Mr. Reagan has said he would conduct
''a total review of thousands and thousands of regulations,'' eliminating those
he considers unnecessary and burdensome ''to the shopkeeper and the farmer and
the individual as well as to business and industry.''

As for his own role as President, if elected, Mr. Reagan has indicated that he
would likely return to what has frequently been described as the
chairman-of-the-board style he adopted as Governor of California.

Questioned in the primaries as to whether he would follow the 9-to-5 schedule he
reportedly kept as Governor, Mr. Reagan denied that he always limited his work
to those hours, but added: ''You show me an executive that works long and long
overtime hours and I'll show you a bad executive.''

Foreign-Military Policy

In at least one interview this year, Mr. Reagan referred to the Russians as
''monsters.'' Over the years he has insisted that the Cold War has never ended,
that it is kept alive by the Soviet Union's unending and singleminded effort to
spread what he still calls ''Godless communism'' throughout the world.

He is strongly opposed to the second treaty with the Soviet Union to limit
nuclear arms, as he was to the first such treaty, on the ground that it is
advantageous to the Soviet Union, but he has said he would negotiate a treaty
''to genuinely limit strategic nuclear weapons.''

He has also said that he would never tell ''an enemy or a potential enemy'' what
the United States ''won't do'' as far as using nuclear weapons, although he has
added that that did not mean he would have used nuclear weapons in a situation
such as the Vietnam War.

Mr. Reagan has said that he believes that the renewal of relations with China
has been good but that ''it should be done with our eyes open, it should be done
with a cautious holding of one foot back.''

Moreover, he has been extremely critical of what he sees as President Carter's
abandonment of Taiwan. He has said he would support re-establishment of
''official relations'' with Taiwan but has indicated that that might have to be
limited for the present to making the nonofficial liaison office in Taipei
official ''so that they knew they had a government relation.''

Mr. Reagan is a staunch supporter of Israel, which he has said is not only ''a
stable democracy sharing our own values'' but also a ''deterrent to Soviet
expansion in that troubled part of the world.''

He has criticized the Carter Administration's vote against Israel in the United
Nations - a vote that was disavowed by the Carter Administration several days
later - on the question of settlements of occupied territory, including the
former Jordanian sector of Jerusalem.

He would like to see an American ''military presence'' in the Middle East. He
has proposed sending arms to Pakistan that could be passed on to rebels
resisting the Soviet Union in Afghanistan. And he has suggested that the United
States could have responded to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan by blockading
Cuba.

Criticism on Hostages

In the Iranian situation, he has criticized President Carter for not having
reacted swiftly or strongly enough to free the American hostages. He has said
that he would have pursued the matter through diplomatic channels for two or
three days and then would have warned the Iranians that if the hostages were not
released by a ''date certain,'' something would happen to their country.
However, he has not said what action he would have taken.

Mr. Reagan has fervently opposed the Panama Canal treaties. In his announcement
of his candidacy last November, he called for a ''North American accord''
between the United States and Canada and Mexico, but he has said little about it
since.

On military matters, he has supported the B-1 bomber, the neutron bomb, the
Trident submarine and the MX missile. He is opposed to peacetime registration
and a peacetime draft, favoring a greatly expanded reserve force that would be
''combat ready.''

He also has called for a buildup in planes and Navy vessels, which he says are
not being replaced ''at the rate of obsolescence.'' ''In national defense you
have to spend whatever is necessary to deter the enemy,'' he said, refusing to
put a percentage or dollar figure on the sharp increases in military spending
that he believes are necessary.

The keynote of Mr. Reagan's foreign and military policies appears to be the
message that he repeatedly tells his followers he would send to the world if
elected: ''No more Taiwans, no more Vietnams, no more betrayal of the friends of
America.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Reagan

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

KISSINGER, ADDRESSING CONVENTION.CALLS CARTERR'S POLICIES 'INCOHERENT'

BYLINE: By STEVEN RATTNER

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Wednesday, July 16


In a strongly partisan address before the Republican National Convention, Henry
A. Kissinger today called for an end to President Carter's ''diplomacy of
incoherence'' and spoke glowingly of Ronald Reagan as ''the trustee of all our
hopes.''

''Another four years like the last four will make disaster irretrievable,'' Mr.
Kissinger said in a speech that began late last night and ended shortly after
midnight. Perhaps his most graphic criticism of the Carter Administration's
foreign policy was his assertion that the American people ''understand that
confusion, timidity, impotence and incompetence risk war.''

In a speech that was interrupted by applause, Mr. Kissinger spoke of
''dedicating ourselves to containing Soviet expansion.'' And, in what was both a
call for increased military spending and an attack on the Administration, Mr.
Kissinger said, ''Sooner or later, our weakness will produce a catastrophe.''

Two Former Goals Not Mentioned

Mr. Kissinger did not mention two of his principal foreign policy goals as a
member of the Nixon Administration -strategic arms limitation and normalization
of relations with China. Both goals have been harshly criticized by Mr. Reagan's
conservative allies. Nor did Mr. Kissinger mention the Vietnam War, which was
brought to an embarrassing close during his tenure in office, further angering
conservatives.

Whether Mr. Kissinger will succeed in assuring himself a role in the Reagan
campaign remained in doubt, particularly because Mr.  Reagan's principal foreign
policy adviser, Richard V. Allen, left the Kissinger staff in a policy dispute
with Mr. Kissinger during President Nixon's first term. But there was little
doubt that Mr.  Kissinger was an object of intense interest here.

Wherever he went, he attracted a crowd. His news conference overflowed with
several hundred reporters. His speech was one of the most eagerly awaited of the
convention. His forays included a phalanx of security men and a straggling group
of politicians, reporters and onlookers who brought the entourage to a halt
every few steps.

Mr. Kissinger's prominence reflected his new position as a controversial figure
among conservatives, as the leading remnant of the era of a moderate Republican
foreign policy and detente.

''I hope I get credit for the ability to unify the American people because I've
been booed by liberals and now I'm threatened to be booed by conservatives,'' he
told reporters.

Worried About Being Jeered

That was Mr. Kissinger's public answer to the question of his controversial
status. Privately, he had expressed concern to friends and associates about the
reception he would receive, worrying in particular about the possibility that he
would be jeered.

Publicly, Mr. Kissinger also took pains not to express any differences with Mr.
Reagan on foreign policy, to support his candidacy and to appear as something
other than a job seeker while at the same time not ruling out the possibility of
accepting a position in a Reagan Administration.

''We discussed primarily those issues giving me concern,'' Mr.  Kissinger said
of his meeting this morning with Mr. Reagan. ''On those issues, I felt the
Governor's position as it was explained to me was one that I find compatible
with my own.''

Later, Mr. Kissinger told a reporter that he would campaign for the Reagan
ticket if asked but that he would not press his services on the former
California Governor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of demostrators at convention

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 16, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CONVENTION JOURNAL GOLDWATER BRIEFLY RELIVES THE GLORY OF '64

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, July 15


For one brief fervid moment, Senator Barry M.  Goldwater reigned at the
Republican convention tonight, being hailed at the podium as the patriarch of a
cause that glinted sharply in 1964 and glows more strongly again in 1980.

''In our hearts, we knew he was right,'' his son, Representative Barry M.
Goldwater Jr. of California declared in introducing his father, white-haired and
square-jawed as he faced the applauding convention.

The 71-year-old Arizona Senator, who was reported to have left a sick bed for
his appearance, was weak-voiced, but he attempted a party pep talk with the
spirits of his familiar bluntness intact.

''Weakness leads to war,'' he told the Republicans who rose to cheer him. ''If
we had leadership worthy of the name, Vietnam would not have lasted more than a
few days.'' And they rose again for him, obviously taking the occasion - the
Reagan convention unified around strong conservative themes -as proof of this
party elder's vindication.

''A prophet in his own time?'' his son told the delighted throng.  ''You're damn
right.'' The father beamed. ''Can I accept your nomination?'' he asked the
conventioneers. As he delivered his formal speech, the crowd's attention
wandered a bit and Mr. Goldwater suddenly commented that the hall was ''the
hotest damn place I've been all year.''

They loved this vintage touch and he quickly said of the convention: ''But I
love it - I'm not knocking it.''

The Senator was the most fondly received of an assortment of evening speakers, a
kind of statesmen's display that carefully threaded its way through the party's
past. Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger was here, too, although in
this second day of the convention once again managed to avoid a formal mention
of the Nixon Administration or the Watergate era.

While honoring Senator Goldwater, New York delegates complained that convention
officials had rejected a request for some sort of memorializing of the late
Nelson A. Rockefeller, Mr. Goldwater's liberal adversary in the impassioned
party politics of 1964.

''Liberal'' seems an antique word at this convention, as forgotten as Mr.
Rockefeller. Almost three out of five delegates identify themselves as
conservative, according to a CBS News Poll, which also reported the delegates'
attitude mellowing toward former President Richard M. Nixon, who drew a 2 to 1
favorable rating among the conventioneers. As if bearing out that reading, Mr.
Nixon's former press secretary, Ronald L. Ziegler, was observed around the
convention today, looking prosperous and operative once again.

Aside from the glimmers of feeling for Mr. Goldwater, the main emotion tonight
was patience as the conventioneers sat and waited on the eve of nominating Mr.
Reagan, 16 years after he made his first mark on the party by speaking for the
conservative cause of Mr.  Goldwater.

The delegates carefully followed the instructions from the podium.  ''All stand
for the convention picture, please,'' they were ordered as the reading of the
rules report was accomplished with the usual drone.

Most of the 1,994 delegates were quickly up on their feet. ''Please face the ABC
anchor booth,'' they were told, and they turned to the right, posing politely,
happily for the photograph of the class of 1980.

Until tonight, the public address system had been troublesome and mushy
sounding. But it seemed to clear in an instant as Faith R.  Whittlesey, a
slender delegate from Haverford, Pa., arose and offered a metallically sharp
reading of a platform plank on military preparedness. People out in the buzzing
indifference of the hall instantly wondered who was speaking. Some flinched at
the sound knifing through the hall, but they actually paid attention to a
platform plank.

Carefully, the tableau pieces of a well run convention are falling into place.
One now-ritualistic scene - the arrival of the Presidential nominee's wife to a
special arena box - went off smoothly this evening, interrupting the convention
on cue for applause and a serenading of Nancy Reagan with a brassy rendition of
''California, Here I Come.''

Just as efficiently, the fanfare and greeting was cut off by the chair, and the
featured speakers were led into prime televiewing time. There was always
rhetoric to fill in the gaps in this process - talk of the ''epidemic malaise''
attributed to the Carter Administration, and one speaker's notably plain riposte
to any and all Democratic positions: ''I say baloney!''

The thwacking of an oversize gavel was once the symbol of the national political
convention, but it is becoming clear that the modern symbol could be a scene
familiar to any American living room: The convention house lights dim, a big
screen appears and filmed images of personalities arise with messages as urgent
as any television commercial, messages laced with canned laughter to prime the
seated conventioneers.

They do laugh and applaud, and this vast public living room cycles the delegates
back through the media images that sustain the weeklong gathering; they witness
even as they are witnessed. They go back through the looking glass in the
convention dimness and they respond. There is a small adjustment - first they
expect the grand introduction of Jimmy Stewart will produce him in the flesh.
But they applaud anyway and settle for him on the larger-than-life-sized screen
that descends, upon which he speaks well of family, community and world peace,
wooing them softly with the same cadenced sincerity he has shown over the years,
whether as Mr. Smith in Washington or as the friendly Firestone tire man.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 17, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
FROM FILM STAR TO CANDIDATE: RONALD WILSON REAGAN

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2177 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, July 16


Like most good Ronald Reagan crowds, they brought their autograph pads and their
Instamatics. Some had come in pickup trucks with ''America: Repent or Perish''
signs and others in Mercedeses. There were stout women in their Sunday church
dresses and slender ones who clearly had done their shopping in the stylish
shops down in Atlanta. Almost all of them were white, and all of them were
pleased on that drizzly April night in Greensboro, N.C., to applaud wildly when
Senator Jesse Helms said that the Reagan candidacy had cosmic significance.

''That is why I am standing with him in this crucial election,'' the Senator
said in introducing Mr. Reagan, ''because it may very well be that the Lord is
giving all of us just one more chance to save this country.''

Fervor of Supporters

For the 16 years of his political career, the former Governor of California has
evoked such responses, and it was the fervor of these conservative supporters
that swept him past his Republican primary opponents and to the Presidential
nomination tonight. Mr. Reagan, demonstrating an innate grasp of the source of
his appeal, has never hesitated to refer to his quest for the Presidency in
evangelical terms. ''It isn't a campaign,'' he likes to say. ''Let's make it a
crusade.''

The first battle of Mr. Reagan's crusade for the Presidency ended here tonight
amid the applause of the Joe Louis Arena. His nomination marked an impressive
political comeback. He lost the Republican nomination four years ago in what was
assumed to be his last hurrah, for he was then 65 years old. But this year, at
69, he defeated both the ''age question'' and an array of younger, vigorous
Republican primary opponents in his campaign to become the oldest man ever
nominated for the nation's highest office by a major political party.

Now he faces the second and decisive battle of his crusade - the contest of
born-again candidates. President Carter, the Democratic incumbent, and John B.
Anderson, the independent candidate, both refer to themselves as born-again
Christians. Mr. Reagan, too, says that he is devoutly religious, but he was
born-again in another sense. Once a ''hemophiliac liberal'' Democrat, he
switched political philosophies in midlife to become a born-again Republican.

The two main themes in Mr. Reagan's life, in fact, have to do with conversion
from liberalism to conservatism and from the profession of acting to that of
politics.

Significance of Acting Career

Mr. Reagan's background as a movie actor has been both a blessing and a curse.
Political critics who characterize him as banal and shallow, a mouther of
right-wing platitudes, delight in recalling that he co-starred with a chimpanzee
in ''Bedtime for Bonzo.'' Even now, 24 years after his last film role, he stews
about being typed as the nice guy who didn't get the girl. ''I always got the
girl,'' he sometimes assures supporters.

Mr. Reagan got something else from the movie business - the oratorical skill
that carried his campaign when its staff was in disarray and its treasury almost
drained. At times, Mr. Reagan's fondness for simple answers and statistics
memorized from the Reader's Digest led him into rhetorical excess. But no one
has ever questioned that his ability to stir Middle American audiences like the
one in Greensboro is his campaign's indispensable asset. ''The most effective
thing we can do,'' says Lyn Nofziger, a top aide, ''is put him on television
whenever we can.''

Ronald Wilson Reagan is a product of Middle America, spiritually, intellectually
and geographically. He was born Feb. 6, 1911, in Tampico, Ill., the second son
of Nelle Wilson Reagan and John Edward Reagan, a first-generation Irish American
who loved the shoe business, the Democratic Party and whisky. One of the searing
memories of Ronald Reagan's youth was coming home at the age of 11 to find his
father passed out on the front porch.

A Cultural Conservative

But it was, on balance, a happy boyhood now remembered with deep nostalgia. Mr.
Reagan's biographers have noted that he reversed the small-town Middle West that
Sinclair Lewis satirized. Long before he became a political conservative, Mr.
Reagan was a cultural conservative - loyal to family, trusting of businessmen
and critical of those who did not hold the same values.

The Reagans were poor enough so that the older son, Neil, was sometimes
dispatched to the butcher shop to ask for the free liver given out as cat food.
There was no cat. The Reagans ate the liver themselves. In the Depression, John
Reagan lost his job and found work with the Works Progress Administration, one
of Franklin D.  Roosevelt's make-work agencies. In those days, Ronald Reagan
recalled recently, ''I was an enthusiastic New Deal Democrat.''

But World War II, most of which Mr. Reagan spent in relaxed soldiering as a
captain at ''Fort Roach,'' an Army Air Corps studio in Hollywood, brought
disenchantment with the laziness of Civil Service workers. About this time, Mr.
Reagan underwent a political epiphany described in his autobiography, ''Where's
the Rest of Me?''

''I was truly so naive I thought the nearest Communists were fighting in
Stalingrad,'' he wrote. ''Finally, I was a near-hopeless hemophiliac liberal. I
bled for 'causes.' I had voted Democratic, following my father, in every
election. I had followed F.D.R.  blindly. The story of my disillusionment with
big government is linked fundamentally with the ideals that suddently sprouted
and put forth in the war year.''

By 1962, Mr. Reagan was a nationally recognized and increasingly controversial
spokesman for conservative causes. When General Electric nervously tried to cut
back on his speaking engagements, he left the company and joined the Republican
Party. Two years later, supporting Senator Barry Goldwater, he made a speech
that some commentators have called the most brilliant national political debut
since William Jennings Bryan's ''Cross of Gold'' speech in 1896.

In California, it set off a wave of enthusiasm that swept Mr.  Reagan toward a
candidacy in the 1966 gubernatorial race.

Aided by Wealthy Friends

At first he was reluctant, but a small circle of wealthy southern Californians
led by Holmes Tuttle, a multimillionaire automobile dealer from Los Angeles,
organized a draft movement that in short order raised the seed money for a
campaign.

In the gubernatorial race, Mr. Reagan defeated Edmund G. Brown, the politically
seasoned incumbent and father of the present California Governor, by almost a
million votes. The Tuttle group became part of the new Governor's ''kitchen
cabinet'' and key advisers in Mr.  Reagan's plan to ''cut and squeeze and trim''
state spending. But Mr. Reagan found that Mr. Brown had left too little money in
the treasury to run the nation's largest state.

So the man who had campaigned as a hardline tax-cutter, in the first major act
of his governorship, put through a $1 billion tax increase that was at that time
the largest state-government tax increase in American history. Later, however,
over the next eight years, he sponsored property tax rebates totaling $4.7
billion.

Doubled University Budget

While blustering at student militants, he doubled the state university budget
over eight years. The state budget had grown by $6 billion when he left office
at the end of 1974.

Two years after Mr. Reagan took office as Governor, Mr. Nofziger and the
''political hawks'' on the staff were pushing Mr. Reagan for the 1968
Presidential nomination, arguing that both Richard M. Nixon and Nelson A.
Rockefeller were too liberal and that Mr. Reagan could be the champion of a
conservative revolt.

Mr. Nixon, of course, crushed the Reagan effort.  ''I think the Governor
suffered from that experience,'' said Mike Deaver, one of the few close advisers
who is also close to the Reagans socially. ''He also grew from it, because after
that he was much more cautious about pols coming up to him and saying it's easy
to run for President.''

Caution, in the form of a belated and sporadic challenge of President Ford, cost
Mr. Reagan the nomination in 1976. So this year, when John P. Sears, his
campaign director, devised a cautious frontrunner strategy that kept Mr. Reagan
under wraps, Mr. Sears was dismissed, and Mr. Reagan took to the stump,
unlimbered the heavy artillery of his conservative rhetoric and banged through
to victory.

Values His Privacy

As much as he loves to fire up the crowds with red-meat oratory, Mr. Reagan is a
deeply private man. Aides call him ''kind to a fault'' and perhaps too
undemanding of his staff. But some who have worked with him for years know
virtually nothing of his personal life.

They do know that his private life centers on his 58-year-old wife, who Mr.
Reagan calls ''Mommy.'' In Sacramento, he eschewed the bars and other political
haunts for dinner at home, where he liked to don his pajamas and work through
his briefcase while watching television with Mrs. Reagan. Staff members recall
that Mr. Reagan often quit work at 5 or 6 in the evening, and as he left the
Capitol, he frequently urged late-working aides to go home to their wives and
families, too.

Mr. Reagan has a flash-fire temper that sometimes leads him to dash his reading
glasses against his desk before the anger departs, often as quickly as it
arrived. He also has, Mr. Deaver said, a secret humanitarian streak that leads
to such private acts as handdelivering two dozen roses to the wife of a
serviceman who had written to Mr. Reagan about the pain of being in Vietnam on
his wedding anniversary.

While family bonding is a favorite theme, the ties that bind Mr.  And Mrs.
Reagan seem wound much more loosely around his four children. Maureen, his
39-year-old daughter by Miss Wyman, and Michael, 35, the adoptive son of that
marriage, recalled being raised mostly in boarding schools. The children of the
second marriage are Patricia, 27, and Ronald, 22. Patricia Reagan, a song writer
whose professional name is Patricia Davis, is once again living at her parents'
Pacific Palisades home after having lived with a rock musician in a period that
severely strained her relationship with her parents. Ronald dropped out of Yale
to apprentice himself to the Joffrey Ballet ''farm team'' in New York. The
Reagan campaign staff has responded awkwardly to his new career, apparently
fearful of the image that his choice of profession sometimes raises.

Becomes a Millionaire

With his high salaries from the movies and General Electric, Mr.  Reagan
invested in the California real estate that made him a wealthy man. He became a
millionaire by selling a Malibu Canyon ranch for $1.9 million in 1966, far more
than the $65,000 that he paid for the property in 1951.

The ranch is Mr. Reagan's favorite place. It is there that he relaxes with his
horses and indulges his taste for, and broad knowledge of, good wines.

Unlike some politicians, Mr. Reagan is not one to trade political gossip with
his staff or reporters. After an ethnic joke that he told in an unguarded moment
wound up in print, Mr. Reagan became even more guarded and distant. Reporters,
parodying the description of Mr.  Reagan as ''the oldest and wisest'' candidate,
dubbed him ''the oldest and coldest.''

But if Mr. Reagan is distant, he is also genial in a practiced way, and the
combination of his manner and his age has infected the campaign press corps with
a curious and uncharacteristic courtesy. It is a rare press conference at which
anyone really presses him to explain his sweeping generalities about economic
and military policy.

Support From Wife

Those who do are likely to draw an icy look from Mrs. Reagan, the quiet,
precisely groomed woman who is in her way an indefatigable campaigner. Her eyes
seldom leave her husband during a speech, and she laughs at his standard jokes
and claps at the same applause lines a half dozen times a day, each time as if
for the first time.

The Reagans make much of saying that Mrs. Reagan will not sit in on Cabinet
meetings, in the fashion of Rosalynn Carter, the First Lady. But Mrs. Reagan
does not hesitate to assert herself if her husband seems threatened, as he
seemed to be by a female reporter demanding to know why he did not support the
proposed Federal equal rights amendment. ''May I speak to that?'' Mrs. Reagan
said, stepping firmly between her husband and the microphone.

Friends and foes alike say that Mr. Reagan's ideas have not changed in two
decades. But in the Reagan camp, there is a strong belief in the historical
inevitability of a Reagan Presidency. This is based on the belief that the
American electorate has moved sharply to the right, duplicating the shift that
Mr. Reagan himself made many years ago.

In the matter of inevitability, Mr. Deaver likes to recall a remark that Senator
Strom Thurmond, one of the few active politicians older than Mr. Reagan, made in
1968, when it became clear that Mr. Nixon would be the nominee. ''You ought to
be President, son,'' Mr.  Thurmond said, ''but not this year.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo Ronald and Nancy Regan

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 17, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN WINS NOMINATION AND CHOOSES BUSH AS RUNNING MATE AFTER TALKS WITH K emp,
and George Bush

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1709 words


FORD FAIL:DRAMATIC ABOUTFACE:TILL LAST MINUTE DELEGATES EXPECTED EX-PRESIDENT TO
TAKE NO.2 SPOT

By HEDRICK SMITH

DETROIT, Thursday July 17 - A jubilant Republican Party formally proclaimed
Ronald Reagan as its nominee last night and then heard this morning, after one
of the most dramatic aboutfaces of recent convention politics, that George Bush
would be his Vice-Presidential running mate.

Up until the last moment, the delegates had been expecting that former President
Gerald R. Ford would bow to Mr.

Text of Senator Paul Laxalt's nominating address and remarks by Ronald Reagan
and George Bush appear on Page B9.
Reagan's entreaties to join the ticket. But Mr. Reagan broke precedent by going
to the hall himself to announce that Mr. Ford had declined and that he had
chosen Mr. Bush, the former Texas Congressman who had been his most dogged rival
in the primaries.

After 24 hours of negotiations with Mr. Ford over the possible conditions of his
serving as Vice President in a Reagan administration, Mr. Reagan told the
national convention that the two men had ''gone over this and over this and over
this and he and I have come to the conclusion, and he believes deeply that he
can be of more value as the former President, campaigning his heart out, as he
has promised to do, and not as a member of the ticket.''

Announcement by Reagan

Then very quickly, and with a taut smile on his face, Mr. Reagan announced that
he had chosen Mr. Bush as his running mate, ''a man we all know and a man who
was a candidate, a man who has great experience in government, and a man who
told me that he can enthusiastically support the platform across the board.''

Although many had said that the only item of suspense in the Republican
convention would be Mr. Reagan's choice of a running mate, none had expected it
to unfold so unpredictably as in the 24 hours before Mr. Reagan announced his
choice of Mr. Bush.

Inside the convention hall, it was a day of personal but predicted triumph for
Mr. Reagan. For he finally claimed the Presidential nomination that he had
sought first in 1968 and again unsuccessfully in 1976 before routing all his
adversaries this year and winning an overwhelming triumph and, ultimately,
nomination.

Delayed Keynote Speech

For all the confusion of the Vice-Presidential selection, it was a night of
celebration for the Republican delegates who heard their keynote speaker,
Representative Guy Vander Jagt of Michigan, call for the voters to chart a new
direction and their party chairman, Bill Brock, proclaim confidently that ''this
party is a new party - we are on our way up.''

This was a night that the delegates had been waiting for to release their
pent-up enthusiasm. At almost any excuse, they broke into chanting, cheering
demonstrations.

When Mr. Reagan made the announcement, the convention hall broke into cheers for
Mr. Bush, who had earlier enjoyed a noisy demonstration after his short speech.
But he had left the hall by then and, reached by reporters at his hotel, made no
effort to mask his own surprise.

''Out of a clear blue sky, Governor Reagan called me up and asked if I would be
willing to run with him on the ticket,'' he said. ''I was surprised, of course,
and I was very, very pleased. I feel honored. I did tell him I would do what all
Republicans should do - support the platform. And I told him that I would work,
work, work.''

By choosing Mr. Bush, the former California Governor reached out to the moderate
wing of the party and risked offending some of his most ardent conservative
partisans for the sake of party unity. But he was following the strong advice of
his top campaign aides who had told him that, aside from Mr. Ford, Mr. Bush
brought the greatest political advantage to the ticket as a candidate who had
scored well in Northern and Middle Western primaries.

Drama of Selection

The drama of the Vice-Presidential selection, carried out in the privacy of the
skyscraper hotel suites of the Detroit Renaissance eclipsed the far more public
drama of the televised proceedings of the convention.

But the formalities of the nomination and roll-call and the convention speeches
were far overshadowed by the efforts of Mr.  Reagan to persuade Mr. Ford to take
the unprecedented decision, as a former President, to run for the Vice
Presidency on a ticket led by the man who had challenged his own renomination
just four years ago.

Even Mr. Ford's earlier hesitancy had not slowed the Reagan bandwagon from
rolling through the buoyant roll-call for Mr. Reagan, who was hailed by speakers
as ''a winner,'' ''a true champion of American freedom,'' ''a citizen politician
who, unlike Jimmy Carter, proved he can govern as well as he can govern as well
as he can campaign.''

''What this man has done to bring our party together, he can do to bring our
country together,'' declared Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada, the close friend and
Reagan campaign chairman who formally put Mr.  Reagan's name into nomination.

Speech by Laxalt

''We have been crawling through a four-year tunnel but finally we can see the
light of hope at the end,'' the Senator's remarks asserted. ''Confidence in
country can again become an American birthright. Consistency in diplomacy can
again mark our international actions. America can again become the home of the
free, the brave and the proud.''

Among the 12 persons to make seconding speeches were Lieut. Gov.  William W.
Scranton 3d of Pennsylvania and Richard Rosenbaum of Rochester, former New York
State Republican chairman and long-time associate of the late Gov. Nelson A.
Rockefeller, two representatives of the northern liberal wings of the party that
the Reagan camp has been trying to include in its drive for party unity for the
campaign against President Carter.

The final round of oratory before the nominating roll-call brought to the podium
two of the leading Vice-Presidential contenders in recent days - Mr. Bush, who
won half a dozen primaries against Mr.  Reagan; and Mr. Vander Jagt of Michigan,
the keynote speaker selected by Mr. Reagan for his inspirational style.

Mr. Vander Jagt was to have spoken Tuesday night. When the program became
overcrowded, some Reagan aides thought of having him replace Representative Jack
F. Kemp of Buffalo or former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, but both
were reported to have resisted being put off until last night. In the end, aides
said, Mr. Vander Jagt preferred speaking last night in prime television time to
having to wait Tuesday night until after midnight. But aides said he had asked
for and received assurance that Mr. Reagan would not make a final decision on
the Vice Presidency until after he had spoken.

For both him and Mr. Bush, last night's appearances were a chance for Reagan
strategists to gauge delegate enthusiasm to them as speakers, should Mr. Ford
decline. In that event, others still reported in the running included Donald
Rumsfeld, former Secretary of Defense; Senator Richard Lugar of Indiana; and
Representative Kemp.

Lashing out at the ''irresponsibility'' of the Carter Administration's economic
policies, Mr. Vander Jagt compared the present to the time of the American
Revolution as a period when the people felt overregulated and overburdened.
''Wake up, America!'' he shouted to the delegates' applause. ''This is your
chance for a new beginning. Now, as then, it is time for a new uprising, a new
direction, under new leadership.''

Bush Tribute to Reagan

Mr. Bush, in his address, paid tribute to Mr. Reagan's political prowess,
hailing him as the kind of winner ''to lead our party to victory in the fall.''

''If anyone wants to know why Ronald Reagan is a winner, you can refer him to
me,'' Mr. Bush said in his prepared text. ''I'm an expert on the subject. He's a
winner because he's our leader, because he has traveled this country and
understands its people. His message is clear. His message is understood.''

And for all the paeans to party unity tonight, the major speeches projected the
two competing conservative and moderate strains that have been tugging at each
other for the last 10 days as the party debated its platform and Mr. Reagan went
through the task of picking his running mate.

Like Mr. Bush, Bill Brock, the party chairman, stressed social themes and the
need for the Republican Party to reach out to form a broad coalition if it is to
defeat President Carter in the fall.

Brock Stresses Coalition

''It has to be a coalition that embraces everyone,'' Mr. Brock asserted. ''It
has to be a coalition that unites people and brings them together on the basis
of shared values and shared beliefs - it has to be that or it won't be a winning
coalition at all.''

''It is up to us,'' he said, ''to take to the American people the message that
the dreams of America remain unfulfilled if a child is hungry, if our young
can't read and write, if men and women cannot find a job, if our parents'
lifetime of productive labor is erased by higher prices, if any person is denied
opportunity because of race, creed or sex.''

From the other side, Senator Laxalt of Nevada used his nominating speech to
voice many of the accumulated grievances of the conservatives who have formed
the solid core of Mr. Reagan's support.

With a rhetorical style that invited ''Reagan'' chants from the exhuberant
delegates, he went through a litany of conservative causes - school prayers, the
loss of the Vietnam War, the Panama Canal Treaties, the treatment of Taiwan by
the Carter Administration. He asked:

''Who is this man who says we must ever again send American boys to fight and
die in a war we do not intend to win? Who is this candidate who says children
should not be forbidden to pray in their schools?

''Who is this man who believes America should be militarily strong, not to
advance war but to assure peace? Who is this man who will not make any more weak
ill-advised decisions like the Panama Canal giveaway? Who is this man who will
stand by our allies and not indulge in any more 'Taiwan sellout?' ''

The references to the Panama Canal treaties and the ''Taiwan sellout'' were in
the prepared text of Senator Laxalt remarks, but they were eliminated from the
nominating speech.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Bush and his wife, and a photo of Ronald
Reagan,Jack

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 17, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SUB for DAILY (thursday) letters page

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 275 words


The Foreign Travels Of Ronald Reagan

To the Editor: In a July 6 news story about Representative Anderson's trip
abroad, The Times said: ''One of the major unspoken political reasons for the
Anderson tour is the opportunity to present the candidate as a well-traveled
citizen of the world, compared with Mr. Reagan, as he becomes the Republican
standard-bearer.

''The former California Governor made one trip to Australia as a representative
of President Nixon, but foreign policy and familiarity with world leaders are
not regarded as among his strong points in challenging President Carter for the
White House.''

In checking the record, I find that in fact Governor Reagan made four official
trips abroad at the request of the White House between 1969 and 1973. In
addition to Australia, he visited Great Britain, France, Japan, the Philippines,
Taiwan, Korea, Singapore, Indonesia, Hong Kong, Thailand, South Vietnam, Spain,
Belgium, Denmark, Ireland and Italy.

He met with chiefs of state and heads of government in virtually all the
countries he visited. Based on reports I received from our embassies and my
discussions with him after each trip, I can attest to the fact that he was
well-received and conducted his meetings with major foreign leaders with
intelligence, skill and judgment.  RICHARD NIXON New York, July 14, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NATIONAL GUARD ALERTED AND CURFEW IMPOSED IN MIAMI

BYLINE: By JO THOMAS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, July 17


The National Guard was placed on alert and a 9 P.M. curfew was imposed on a
square mile of Liberty City tonight as the Dade County Public Safety Department
declared a state of emergency in an effort to restore order in the section after
two nights of disturbances.

Just before midnight, the police reported that 11 persons had been arrested for
curfew violations and another for carrying a concealed weapon. Robert Dempsey,
Acting Director of the Department of Public Safety, characterized the night as
''fairly quiet'' and said of the curfew, ''Apparently, it's working.'' Heavy
rain had begun before the curfew hour and continued into the night.

More than 40 people have suffered injuries ranging from gunshot wounds to cuts
from broken glass. No one has died. There have been 25 arrests.

Last night four persons were shot. They included Felipe Ruiz, 45 years old, shot
in the head, whose eye was removed by surgeons today, and a 16-year-old pregnant
woman who was shot in the arm, reportedly when she stopped to ask for
directions. Four other persons were treated for other injuries.

Family Health Center Vandalized

Before dawn today, a family health care center in the James E.  Scott Housing
Project, was vandalized and set afire, and an empty school bus driven by Deborah
Carter, 21, was commandeered by eight men with guns and knives. The police
subsequently disarmed the men.

The disorders began Tuesday afternoon when the police tried to seize robbery
suspects near the housing project, described by the authorities as a ''hot
spot'' in Liberty City, which was the focus of the May racial rioting that left
18 persons dead and property damage estimated at $100 million.

Gov. Bob Graham's office announced that 400 guardsmen were being placed on ready
reserve in Miami-area armories and that 50 riottrained troopers from the Florida
Highway Patrol were being put on alert in the city.

''We're trying to restore order to the street,'' said Mr. Dempsey of the Public
Safety Department. He said the curfew was an attempt to curb the ''group that
takes control of the area at night.''

Under the order, residents in the curfew area must stay in their homes until 6
A.M., although they can ask to be escorted out of the area. The police will
establish check points around the curfew area.

No Guns, Combustibles or Liquor

Dade County Manager Merrett Stierheim and Mr. Dempsey said that they had
declared the emergency after consulting with area residents and the chief
circuit court judge here. The declaration also bans carrying firearms,
combustibles and liquor in public places. The order is to be in effect for three
days.

The Tuesday trouble began after three police officers witnessed the robbery of
people in a car stopped for a red light and chased the robbers into the Scott
Housing Project.

According to one of the officers, Les Blumen, one of the suspects, when ordered
to stop, turned and smiled and said, ''You're on my turf now.''

Officers were unable to subdue the suspects and had to retreat from a crowd that
gathered and began to throw stones and bottles and, according to Officer Blumen,
fire ''a rain of bullets.'' His partner, Sgt. Fred Pelny, was shot in the back.

Crowds of several hundred people gathered and dispersed throughout the evening
in various parts of Liberty City, and police officers and motorists in the area
became targets of gunfire, stones and bottles.Before the first night of the
disturbance was over, five police officers and a fire department lieutenant were
wounded. Twenty-six civilians were treated at hospitals. The most seriously
injured was Anthony Darling, 15, a Scott resident who was shot in the back.

Today Sgt. Hugh Peebles, president of the 3,000-member Dade County Police
Benevolent Association, criticized police officials for not immediately clearing
out the crowds on Tuesday.

''They were called back and forced to relocate,'' he said. ''It's fortified in
the minds of those young hoodlums that they had won.  They had run off The
Man.''

At the news conference at which the curfew was announced, two men who said they
were Liberty City residents denounced the curfew as ''a racist policy that does
not look out for our safety.''

Leo Harris, who said he was a member of the Dade County Coalition for Racial
Justice, said that he preferred armed citizen patrols in the area instead.

At the section of the housing project known to residents as ''Vietnam'' because
there are so many guns there, a middle-aged woman this morning simply shook her
head at both the causes and the solutions of the violence.

''I can't put my hand on the problem,'' she said, asking that her name not be
used. ''But I think in a lot of houses the mother is paying the rent and the
children are running the household.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of police arresting youths in Miami (page A6)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 18, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 840 words


AROUND THE NATION;
Garwood Defense Says It May Call Nixon

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., July 17 (UPI) - Attorneys for Pfc. Robert R.  Garwood of the
Marine Corps said today that former President Richard M. Nixon personally
ordered dropping of charges of collaboration with the enemy for a group of
United States prisoners of war who were returning from Vietnam in 1973.

The lawyers said that Mr. Nixon might be called as a witness in the marine's
pending trial. Pretrial proceedings in the case of the 34-year-old Private
Garwood were recessed today and are to resume Monday.

The defense said contact had been made with Nixon aides who had indicated that
they would set up a meeting or telephone conversation with Mr. Nixon.

A Garwood attorney, Vaughan Taylor, said a former prisoner of war, Lieut. Col.
Theodore Guy, would testify that he was told by Mr. Nixon to stop his efforts to
prosecute a group of American former prisoners known as the Peace Committee.
Colonel Guy was the senior officer in the so-called Plantation Garden camp in
Hanoi where the eight men were held.

Mr. Taylor said Colonel Guy ''was told by President Nixon that these matters
were being dropped because it would not be good for the nation at a time when
the war was winding down and because of Watergate.''

Private Garwood returned from Vietnam in March 1979 and was accused of
collaborating with the Communists in a jungle camp for prisoners.

Shots Fired at Radio Station In Mobile Municipal Strike

MOBILE, Ala., July 17 (AP) - Shots were fired today at National Guardsmen
filling in for police officers at a radio installation, officials said, as a
municipal strike entered its fourth day here.  No injuries were reported.

The guardsmen were assigned to protect equipment at the station during the
strike. Guardsmen are also filling in for firefighters, who struck Monday.

Mayor Robert Doyle said yesterday that dismissals of strikers could begin
tomorrow under regulations calling for penalties against city employees off the
job more than 24 hours without leave. Annual salaries for police officers and
firefighters average $12,800.

U.S. Loses Court Round In Move Against Firestone

WASHINGTON, July 17 (UPI) - A Federal judge today temporarily blocked a decision
by the Labor Department to end Government contracts with the Firestone Tire and
Rubber Company because of job discrimination violations, the concern announced.

On Tuesday, Labor Secretary Ray Marshall terminated all Federal contracts with
the concern and said no new ones would be allowed.  Firestone challenged his
action in Federal District Court in Beaumont, Tex., and a Firestone spokesman
said that today Judge Robert M. Parker orally granted a temporary restraining
order against the Government action.

The Firestone spokesman, Michael Fay, said the judge had set an Aug. 28 hearing
date on the merits of the appeal. Mr. Marshall's action grew out of a complaint
against Firestone's Orange, Tex., plant. He said a review of the case had found
Firestone's affirmativeaction plan at Orange ''deficient in several respects.''

72 Bound for Philadelphia Hurt as Trains Collide

NORTH WALES, Pa., July 17 (UPI) -A Philadelphia-bound morning commuter train,
running late, struck the rear of a train idled by a mechanical problem today,
injuring 72 persons and derailing four cars. Two of the injured were admitted to
hospitals.

A spokesman for Conrail said that the impact shattered the leading car of the
second train, peeling back the roof and shredding the skin of the car.

Patrick Costa, a spokesman for North Penn Hospital here, said 47 persons had
been treated and that a commuter, Michael Donnelly, 28 years old, was admitted
with rib fractures. At Suburban General Hospital in Norristown, 25 persons were
treated, for cuts, neck sprains and back injuries, and a woman was admitted with
bruises and a back strain.

The Conrail spokesman said the 6:49 train from Doylestown was behind schedule
and struck the 7:40 A.M. train from Lansdale to Philadelphia, which was idled
here. The spokesman said the first car on the Lansdale train and the first three
cars on the Doylestown train were derailed.

F.B.I. Spy Denies Admitting To Killing of Viola Liuzzo

MONTGOMERY, Ala., July 17 (UPI) - Gary Thomas Rowe, who spied on the Ku Klux
Klan for the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the 1960's, denied today that he
ever confessed the killing of a white civil rights worker in 1965.

Mr. Rowe insisted that he did not fire the shot that killed Viola Liuzzo and he
attempted to refute the testimony of two Birmingham policemen who said he
admitted to the killing.

Judge Robert Varner, who issued a temporary injunction June 13, took under study
Mr. Rowe's plea that he permanently block the State of Alabama from prosecuting
him for the slaying.

Mr. Rowe, 48 years old, was riding in a car with a group of Klansmen the night
Mrs. Liuzzo was shot and contends that they were responsible for the death.

National news appears on page A6; political news, pages A7-12.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GUILTY PLEA ENTERED IN 'VILLAGE' BOMBING

BYLINE: By PAUL L. MONTGOMERY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 998 words


Cathlyn P. Wilkerson, expressing a wish to begin a new life after 10 years in
the terrorist Weather Underground, pleaded guilty in Manhattan Criminal Court
yesterday to unlawful possession of dynamite in connection with a 1970 explosion
that killed three persons and reduced her father's Greenwich Village town house
to rubble.

The 35-year-old woman, who had been a fugitive from the time she was seen
running from the blast March 6, 1970, until her surrender here on July 8, faces
sentencing on the Class D felony charge on Oct. 24. It carries a minimum
sentence of probation and a maximum sentence of seven years in prison.

Miss Wilkerson remains free on a $10,000 personal recognizance bond pending
sentencing.

Reasons for Guilty Plea

Miss Wilkerson, dressed in white blouse, black slacks and a blue silk fichu,
read a statement after her plea but declined to elaborate. She has refused all
requests for interviews since her surrender.

In her statement, she said she had chosen to plead guilty to the charge rather
than seek a jury trial for a number of reasons.  ''In the first place, I do not
want to discuss my own deep regrets over the deaths of three beloved comrades in
the context of a sensationalized trial,'' Miss Wilkerson asserted, referring to
the three members of the Weatherman movement killed in the 1970 explosion,
apparently when two of them misconnected a wire while making a bomb.

''Secondly,'' Miss Wilkerson went on, ''I dislike the prospect of the daily
publicity that would undoubtedly attend this trial.  Thirdly, my father has
already been threatened with a grand jury subpoena. I don't want to expose
members of my family, my friends and my associates to such personal and
political harassment.

''Finally, I am anxious to begin a new life, having personally experienced
difficulties over the past few years. Rather than putting all of my energies and
those of others into preparing for and enduring what could be a long and arduous
trial, I want to begin above-ground political work around the people and issues
which are my real priorities.''

Miss Wilkerson appeared in State Supreme Court before Justice Harold J. Rothwax.
After an hourlong conference with the chief assistant Manhattan district
attorney, Peter L. Zimroth, and her attorneys in the judge's chambers, she made
her plea of guilty, waiving indictment. She had been charged with criminally
negligent homicide as well as ''possession of dangerous instruments and
appliances, to wit dynamite, with the intent to use it against the property of
another.''

Second Charge Dropped

The homicide charge, a Class E felony carrying a maximum penalty of four years
in prison, was dropped when she pleaded guilty to the other felony.

The lesser charge is often brought in cases involving automobile deaths. Mr.
Zimroth said it had been dropped because a sentence for it would run
concurrently with that for the more serious charge - possession of dynamite.

Miss Wilkerson answered, ''Yes, Your Honor,'' or, ''No, Your Honor,'' quietly to
all the judge's questions. Justice Rothwax stressed in court that no bargain had
been struck regarding her sentence and said it would depend on the presentencing
report prepared by the Probation Department.

Miss Wilkerson's attorneys, Margaret Ratner of the Center for Constitutional
Rights and Elizabeth M. Fink, would say nothing further about their client's
''personal difficulties.'' Asked if Miss Wilkerson had had a baby while she was
a fugitive, as reported in some quarters, Miss Ratner replied, ''I don't know.''

The attorneys said their client was staying with friends in the city. They said
she had been visited by her mother, Audrey Logan of Meriden, N.H., and a sister.
Her father, James P. Wilkerson, former owner of a chain of Middle West radio
stations, lives in England.

Battery Charge Remains

Miss Ratner said she hoped for probation for her client, particularly since many
cases against Weathermen have been dropped because of illegal wiretaps,
mail-openings and burglaries by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the early
1970's.

Miss Wilkerson also faces a charge of aggravated battery in Chicago arising from
an attempt on Oct. 9, 1969, by 70 Weatherwomen in crash helmets to storm the
Armed Forces Induction Center there. Miss Wilkerson was accused of hitting a
policeman with a four-foot club.  She was released in $5,000 bail at the time
and never reappeared for trial. Miss Ratner said she was negotiating a surrender
in that case.

Mark Rudd, a Weatherman who spent seven years underground before surrendering in
1977, faced a similar charge in Chicago. In early 1978 he was fined $2,000 and
given two years' probation.

There are still believed to be about 20 persons in the Weather Underground,
living clandestinely in cells of five or six persons.  The movement, a splinter
of Students for a Democratic Society formed in June 1969 and pledged to
underground terrorist activity in February 1970, has been relatively quiet since
the end of the Vietnam War in 1975. The group took responsibility for at least
20 bombings between 1970 and 1975, with targets including Police Headquarters
here in 1970, the United States Capitol in 1971 and the State Department in
1975.

57 Dynamite Sticks Found

Miss Wilkerson's cell was apparently using the town house at 18 West 11th Street
to construct bombs - a later Weatherman statement said ''antipersonnel bombs'' -
while Mr. Wilkerson was on a Caribbean vacation. Police officers searching the
rubble found timing devices and 57 unexploded sticks of dynamite purchased in
New Hampshire four days before.

Those killed were Diana Oughton, 28, a former member of the Peace Corps and the
daughter of a banker, and Ted Gold, 23, a leader of the 1968 Columbia student
rebellion. The third body was destroyed beyond recognition, but the Weathermen
later said it was Terry Robbins, 21, a former Kenyon College student and one of
the leaders of the Weatherman faction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Cathlyn Wilkerson (page 21)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SELECTIVE SERVICE ACT RULED UNCONSTITUTIONAL ON GROUND THAT DRAFT EXCLUDES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 2240 words


WOMEN

By BEN A. FRANKLIN

PHILADELPHIA, July 18 - A three-judge Federal court ruled here today that the
Selective Service Act was unconstitutional because it excluded women.

The judges issued an injunction against the Carter Administration's plan to
revive the registration of young men for the military draft.  Registration of
18-year-old men had been scheduled to resume on Monday.

Less than an hour after the court's opinion was made public, a Justice
Department request for a stay of the injunction was denied by one member of the
special constitional panel, Chief Judge Joseph S.  Lord 3d of the United States
District Court here.

Direct Appeal to Supreme Court

In Washington, the Justice Department spokesman, Mark T. Sheehan, said the
Government had already filed an appeal of the decision directly to the Supreme
Court
and had asked Justice William Brennan Jr. to delay putting the lower court's
decision into effect pending the appeal before the full Court.

But even if Justice Brennan should grant the stay, the three-judge panel's
nullification of the draft statute means that registration will be without force
of law, because the special court's ruling that the law was unconstitutional
cannot be stayed.

The opinion cited the 150,000 women already in the armed forces as volunteers, a
figure projected to rise to 250,000 by 1985, and declared that ''the die is
already cast for substantial female involvement in the military.''

The registration of women, the judges said, would not necessarily mean that they
would be used in combat. But the panel said that it could not accept the notion
that ''women can contribute to the military only as volunteers and not as
inductees.'' The judges' unanimous ruling, in its explanation why women could
not be excluded from the draft process compared them to other population blocs.

''Congress could not constitutionally require registration under the Military
Selective Service Act of only black citizens or only white citizens, or single
out any political or religious group simply because those groups contain
sufficient persons to fill the needs of the Selective Service system,'' the
ruling said.

Hopes to Go Forward Monday

The Government defended the program, however, and Mr. Sheehan of the Justice
Department said, ''We intend to make every effort to obtain a stay so the
program can go forward as scheduled on Monday.''

In a brief filed with the Supreme Court, the department called registration ''an
important element in the package of our national responses to Soviet
aggression'' and said that its absence would ''leave the country without a means
of conscripting an army and seriously handicapped in the event of a national
emergency.''

A spokesman for the Selective Service System said in Washington that Justice
Brennan would not be asked to rule on the merits of the case, merely to allow
plans for registration to go ahead on a voluntary basis until the full Court
could hear the case, presumably next fall.

Ruling Is Likely Tomorrow

Justice Brennan, who is spending the weekend in Nantucket, will review the
Justice Department's request and the plaintiffs' response, which is due before
noon tomorrow. His ruling will probably come on Sunday in Washington.

The 43-page opinion and order was a unanimous ruling by Judge Max Rosenn of the
United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, District Judge
Edward N. Cahn and Judge Lord.

The court cited the Fifth Amendment's implied guarantee of equal protection
under the law and held that the Government had failed to meet the burden of
proving that the exclusion of women from the draft ''served important government
objectives.'' ''We therefore hold that the complete exclusion of women from the
pool of registrants does not serve 'important governmental objectives' and is
not 'substantially related' to any alleged government interest,'' the opinion
said.  ''Thus, the Military Selective Service Act unconstitutionally
discriminates between males and females.''

Donald L. Weinberg, the plaintiffs' lawyer in the nine-year-old lawsuit,
declared jubilantly, ''We win Round One.'' He undertook the case in 1971, while
the Vietnam War was still going on, as a ''pro bono,'' or without-charge, test
of the exclusion of women from compulsory military service. It was considered
moot when Congress repealed draft registration in 1975. When Congress
reinstituted registration this June, Mr. Weinberg revived the case.

Mr. Weinberg said that with today's decision, registration would be ''entirely
voluntary, because the Government cannot prosecute those who choose not to
register under an unconstitutional law.'' He also said, however, that it was his
guess that ''the Government is so geared up to collect the names'' of four
million young men born in 1960 and 1961 in the next two weeks that registration
might well proceed as planned at 35,000 post offices across the country.

Under today's ruling, Mr. Weinberg said, ''this kind of voluntary registration,
without the compulsion of criminal prosecution, would become, in effect, a
referendum on the draft, and we don't think the results will encourage the
Government.''

When the Admininistration formally asked Congress in February for funds for
registration, President Carter asked for authority to register women also. The
second request never made it through committee, however.

''We set out to establish that the Selective Service Act is unconstitutional,
and that's what we've done,'' Mr. Weinberg said at his office in the firm of
Kohn, Savett, Marion & Graf. The objective, according to the 34-year-old lawyer,
was to ''make the political cost of declaring war much more immediate for a
President and for a Congress, and much more costly.''

Evolution of Doctrine

Today's ruling is closely tied to relatively new interpretations of the Fifth
Amendment, which reads: ''No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or
otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury,
except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or in the militia, when in
actual service in time of war or public danger; nor shall any person be subject
for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived
of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private
property be taken for public use without just compensation.''

The Supreme Court has been gradually developing a doctrine finding various forms
of sex discrimination by the state and Federal governments to be
unconstitutional. The first step came in 1954, when the Court found that the
equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment, which in the past had been
applied only to the states, was also incorporated within the Fifth Amendment
statement that ''no person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property
without due process of law.'' Thus, in a series of cases in recent years the
Court has held various forms of sex discrimination to be unconstitutional under
both the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments.

A key precedent was the case of Craig v. Boren, decided in 1976, in which the
Court held that ''classifications by gender must serve important governmental
objectives and must be substantially related to the achievement of those
objectives.''

New Plaintiffs Added

The plaintifs who contended in the suit that they were harmed by ''gender
classification'' include only one of the four who originally brought the
complaint, in June 1971. He is Robert Goldberg, a 27-yearold physician now
practicing family medicine in Modesto, Calif. Dr. Goldberg was never drafted but
technically could still be called up under the ''doctor draft.''

Others of the original group dropped out of the case after the end of the
Vietnam draft in 1973. The new plaintiffs, added as the other dropped out, are
David Sitman, a 26-year-old graduate student who registered before Selective
Service registration was halted altogether, in 1975, and Owen F. Jones, 19, a
1980 Philadelphia high school graduate who is to be a freshman this fall at
Oberlin College in Ohio and who was due to register Monday.

Through Mr. Weinberg, the plaintiffs argued that the exclusion of women from the
pool of draft registrants removed half the ageeligible population and
effectively doubled the chances of being summoned for induction, an
unconstitutional discrimination against men.

Some 2,000 pages of testimony and exhibits were involved in the suit, now a
major class-action case that is almost certainly headed for a ''first
impression'' hearing before the Supreme Court. The High Court has never ruled on
this issue. The Justice Department had consistently lost motions for dismissal
on various grounds, including the argument that a male-only draft is a political
question and not subject to court rulings.

Political Implications

Lawyers here said tonight that the three-judge court had broken no new ground in
applying the Fifth Amendment in a sex discrimination case, but the political
implications of today's decision were plainly novel.

''The issue before us is the constitutionality of the total exclusion of women
from the Military Selective Service Act, not the extent to which the military
services must utilize women,'' the opinion said.

''Before us is a program which requires the registration of males but completely
excludes females from registration and from possible induction into the armed
services under the Military Selective Service Act.

''The defendants urge us to consider registration independently of induction
because, as they argue, induction is not imminent. If we did what the defendants
requested, this case would be simple.  Registration of a class of citizens with
absolutely no purpose would be unconstitutional under any standard of review.
The imposition of the burden to register upon any class of citizens must be
justified.  The justification here should relate to the governmental need to
raise military forces by conscription. We can consider the registration only in
light of its justification.''

Question of Total Exclusion

Observing that the court had ''combed the record and the legislative history for
purported justifications of the total exclusion of women'' and found them
''unconvincing,'' the opinion added in a footnote that when the Selective
Service Act was revised in 1948, after its use during World War II, ''an aura of
male chauvinism permeated Congressional attitudes toward women in the
military.''

Today's opinion repeatedly stressed that the court here was not considering the
equal induction of women, only the total exclusion of women from registration.
The judges often seemed to be making a plea for understanding of what they
apparently construed as a radical departure from accepted norms.

Explantory Footnotes

''We need not consider the argument that mothers of young children should be
drafted,'' the opinion added in one of countless explanatory footnotes. ''The
policy for deferring or exempting certain women from the Selective Service
System for justifiable grounds may be established by Congress.''

But other footnotes seem to be making a case for active military service by
women.  As for ''arguments that pregnancy and menstruation adversely affect the
military's ability to utilize women,'' another footnote said, ''women in the
military as a group suffer only about half the lost time of men.'' A
representative of the women's movement disputed the view that today's decision
meant that the proposed equal rights amendment to the Constitution was not
needed to assure equal rights for women. Muriel Fox, the president of the
National Organization for Women Legal Defense Fund, said that she had not seen
the opinion, but said, ''Off the cuff, I'd say it's just one of so many
decisions, which have been very unreliable and have been going either way even
in the Supreme Court.

''The court giveth and the court taketh away.'' she said.''E.R.A.  would
guarantee women's rights.''

----

Antidraft Organization Reacts

WHITE PLAINS, N.Y., July 18 - At Wespac, the Westchester People's Action
Coalition, an activist organization that has been counseling young men against
the draft, the reaction to today's Federal Court ruling was ''complete surprise
and joy,'' according to the director, Connie Hogarth.

''We had not anticipated success,'' she said, ''because we were watching two
current suits, a sex discrimination case brought by the American Civil Liberties
Union and a suit by two Manhattan postal workers, a Mennonite and a Quaker, who
objected to signing the registration forms as violating their religious
beliefs.''

Wespac, a seven-year-old organization that has also been active in anti-nuclear
protests, had distributed 45,000 pieces of literature throughout Westchester in
recent weeks, describing the options facing young men facing registration. These
included delaying registration until they had received counseling, not
registering or registering under protest or as conscientious objectors.

''We had planned to have volunteers outside post offices on Monday, outlining
those options,'' a volunteer said. ''Our plan now is to be there anyway, to tell
those who would have registered that it's now been ruled unconstitutional.''
Wespac's counseling staff had grown from 25 to about 100 by last night.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VIEWING THE CONVENTION: A SPECTRUM OF REACTIONS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 835 words


Schantz

ALLENTOWN, Pa., July 17 - The Republican convention was on television, but
Robert Winner was sitting on a bench in a shopping mall, reading a paper and
waiting for his wife. The 31-year-old appliance repairman has little interest in
politics and refused to turn on the convention.

''It's like a lost cause, almost,'' said Mr. Winner, a Vietnam War veteran.
''It's all rhetoric anyhow. Whatever they say, they won't go by it anyhow.''

Like Mr. Winner, William Baker is in his early thirties, but he watched the
convention with great enthusiasm. ''The Republicans seemed more unified,'' said
Mr. Baker, a restaurant manager.

Voters here in the Lehigh Valley of northeastern Pennsylvania, and in half a
dozen other cities across the country, gave the Republican convention decidedly
mixed reviews. George Bush seemed to be a popular choice for Vice President, and
a number of voters said they felt they were watching a strong, united party led
by a reasonable and effective candidate.

'Reagan Is Real Sharp'

''I'll tell you this,'' said Gwenda Campbell, a receptionist in Dayton, Ohio.
''I think Reagan is real, real sharp. He's wrong about abortion, but he's just
playing into what he thinks people want to hear.''

But many others were bored, and dismayed, by what they saw on television from
Detroit.  ''This thing's a farce up there,'' said John Taylor, an art director
in Chicago. ''The richest people in the country are having a good time. Five
miles all around them in Detroit are the poor people.''

Probably the largest group of voters interviewed were so uninterested or cynical
about the convention that they did not watch at all. In Springfield, Mass., a
police officer complained that the convention was blacking out the Red Sox
baseball game.

Vera Sanchez, a housewife in San Francisco, summed up this mood when she said,
''I don't need long speeches by people I don't care about who say nothing.''

An Important Audience

Places like the Lehigh Valley form an important audience for the Republican
convention and its star performer, Mr. Reagan.  Pennsylvania will be a major
battleground in November as the Republicans bid for votes in traditionally
Democratic strongholds of the Northeast and upper Middle West.

Close to 100 interviews here over the last three days indicate that with some
voters, the convention was a big hit. Conservatives were enthusiastic about the
platform but opposed the equal rights amendment, and a number of voters agreed
with Lisa Billowitch, a young mother, when she said, ''I agree with them on
E.R.A. I'm very happy to stay home and have someone support me.''

Moderates were encouraged by the choice of Mr. Bush for Vice President,
particularly since many of them had doubts about former President Gerald R.
Ford. ''I thought Ford was a little too old for the job,'' said John Pappas, the
owner of a toy store. Barbara Ferguson, the wife of an engineer, said, ''There
can only be one Commander in Chief. Having a co-President is not a good idea.''

Mr. Reagan is clearly hoping to counterbalance some of his conservative
positions with a personal image of moderation, and some voters were definitely
impressed.

''He's a little bit more honest and down-to-earth than I thought,'' said Kathy
Dorse, a hairdresser.  But many voters here in the Lehigh Valley expressed sharp
and even angry dissents from these reviews.  Ann Schantz, a market researcher,
said that the party's rejection of the equal rights amendment would make her
more likely to abandon Mr. Reagan.

''I never considered myself a women's libber, but I am - strongly,'' said Mrs.
Schantz, who is 28. ''I was upset about what they did.''

Confusion on Bush Move

And while Mr. Bush was widely praised, many viewers thought that the confusion
surrounding his choice had made Mr. Reagan look foolish.

''The Republicans didn't know what they were doing,'' said Ann Mashack, a
31-year-old teacher. ''I expected at the next moment they would say it was John
Anderson for Vice President.''

Others felt that the political speeches echoing through the convention hall were
too empty or too negative.  To the more cynical voters, the convention seemed to
be a perfect vehicle for Mr. Reagan, the former actor; they saw it as a
Hollywood production with a script.

''It's all staged, packaged and wrapped,'' said Carl Klotz, an engineer. ''What
does it mean? Zero.'' But perhaps the strongest emotions were voiced here by
those who did not watch the convention at all. With Election Day less than four
months away, a mist of alienation hangs over this valley like the smoke from the
steel mills that line the banks of the Lehigh River.

Della Milliman, a housewife, went bowling the other night instead of watching
the convention but wound up talking politics with her friends. ''We all said
that we didn't feel like voting this year,'' Mrs. Milliman said. ''We're in a
very depressing state right now. And I don't think we have any choice that would
pull us out of this mess.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Kathy Dorse, John Pappas, William Baker, Della
Milliman and Ann

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 19, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PHOTO OF MARK J. MEAGHER

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 683 words


Mark J. Meagher, 48-year-old president and chief operating officer of the
Washington Post Company, will resign from the company effective the end of 1980,
according to an announcement late yesterday.

No decision has been made on a successor, according to Katharine Graham,
chairman and chief executive officer of the diversified communications company,
which owns The Washington Post and two other newspapers, four television
stations and Newsweek magazine.

No reason was given for the resignation, beyond Mr. Meagher's announcement that
''I feel that I have reached a point in my life where it is time to move on to a
new challenge.''

Several Options in Mind

In a telephone interview last night, he said: ''That press release is right on -
there's nothing hidden in it.'' He said he had several options in mind ''but
none have jelled yet.''

Nevertheless the announcement, at 5:42 P.M., surprised Wall Street publishing
analysts, one of whom said he had no inkling of the resignation.

''It can be a disguise, like so many such resignations often are, but I'm
inclined to take it at face value,'' said the analyst, who follows the
Washington Post Company closely. ''Still, the company has had four different
presidents since I started following it in the early 1970's. That is a rather
remarkable number of changes - especially since three of those presidents,
including Mark Meagher, seem to have been good ones.''

To Remain a Director

The announcement said that Mr. Meagher would remain on the company's board of
directors.

The analyst said that he knew of no strains in the relationship between Mr.
Meagher and Mrs. Graham, but he added that in the last year or so Mrs. Graham,
who last year relinquished the title of publisher of the Post newspaper to her
son Donald, ''has pretty well indicated that Donald is going to be the next head
of the Post company, and therefore there is no real road up for Mark.''

Financial Position Strong

The Wall Street analyst said that, while the company's financial position was
strong and its stock good, company earnings were likely to be down more this
year than those of perhaps any other big-city communications company, in part
because of the recession but also because of these costs: the start-up of a $65
million satellite printing plant in Fairfax County, Va.; a $14 million facility
for the company's Detroit television station, and the starting in April of two
new magazines, including Inside Sports.

Mrs. Graham, the daughter of the late Eugene Meyer, an investment banker who
bought The Post at a bankruptcy sale in 1933, was publisher for 16 years. During
that time The Post emerged as the capital's dominant paper in circulation and
advertising.

As of Sept. 30, 1979, daily circulation was 581,264 and Sunday circulation at
815,500. Revenues in 1979 were $593.3 million, up 14 percent over the previous
year, while net income of $29.5 million was down 41 percent -largely because of
a change in November 1979 in the method of accounting for magazine subscription
procurement costs and because net income for the previous year included one-time
gains of about $4.3 million from the sale of property.

15 Months as Police Officer

Donald E. Graham, 34 years old, was president of The Harvard Crimson. He joined
The Post in 1971 after serving in Vietnam with the First Air Cavalry and after
spending 15 months as a Washington police officer ''to learn about the city.''
He held a variety of jobs at the paper, from truck driver to salesman, and
subsequently he was named executive vice president and then general manager.

Mr. Meagher, onetime executive vice president of the McGraw-Hill Book Company,
joined The Post as vice president for finance in 1970.  In 1974 he was named
executive vice president and general manager of the newspaper. In that position
he was a principal management spokesman during a pressmen's
three-and-a-half-month strike at the newspaper in 1976. Later that year he was
appointed president of the company's newspaper division, and he was elected to
his current position in November 1977.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHAN REBELS: ZEAL AND COURAGE INTERVENTION IN AFGHANISTAN

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS GAGE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2867 words

DATELINE: PESHAWAR, Pakistan


In a makeshift hospital, one of three maintained in rented houses here by Afghan
insurgents, two wounded guerrillas lie on rope cots in a small room buzzing with
flies.

In one bed is Ahmad Khazamar, 25 years old, whose right foot bears several
gaping shrapnel wounds. He has been in 30 engagements with the Russians in six
months, he said, and as soon as he is able he is going back. ''As long as my
mind functions I will fight,'' he said.

In the next cot is Malek Sawad, 50, one of two survivors of a group of eight
mujahedeen, or Moslem guerrillas. ''We have chosen the way of martyrdom,'' he
said. ''How can we be defeated?''

The words of the two wounded Afghans illustrate why the Soviet military
intervention in their country seven months ago has turned into a standoff
between one of the great powers and groups of mountain tribesmen sustained by 25
centuries of experience in guerrilla warfare and a belief that it is glorious to
die in the name of Islam.

Most Western analysts here believe that the Russians intervened in Afghanistan
in the hope that they could maintain enough security to allow the local
Communist Party to take control of the country's institutions and build up the
army. But they have failed, the analysts say, brought to a stalemate by the
refusal of the Afghans to submit.

'They Can't Win,' Afghan Says

''The Russians are trying to annihilate us,'' said Maulvi Mohammed Yunus Khalis,
leader of one of five insurgent groups in the Islamic Alliance for the
Liberation of Afghanistan. ''They use napalm and gas bombs. There is not a
single day when they do not bomb villages full of civilians. But they still do
not control the countryside and they are not even safe in Kabul. Despite their
overwhelming firepower, they cannot win.''

The standoff, according to most of the analysts, is so frustrating to the
Russians that they are almost certain to pour in additional troops once the
Olympics are over Aug. 3. It is generally felt by the analysts here that if the
new forces do not prove any more effective against the mountain fighters, who
can easily slip back and forth across the 1,300-mile border with Pakistan, the
Russians may try to overcome the situation by moving into northern Pakistan.

''The more they get bogged down in Afghanistan, the more they feel Pakistan is
the root of their problems,'' said an ambassador from a neutral country with
close ties to Moscow. ''If their present mood continues, it is inevitable that
they will strike at northwest Pakistan because it provides a safety valve for
the insurgents.''

At the moment the North-West Frontier Province of Pakistan contains 720,000
refugees, according to Robin McAlpin, representative of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. Every night they come into Pakistan over the
treacherous mountain passes at the rate of 60,000 a month. There are 900,000
Afghan refugees in Pakistan, housed in 80 camps.

Thousands Cross the Borders

Thousands of insurgents move freely back and forth across the border every week,
fighting in Afghanistan, regrouping and bringing their wounded into Pakistan.
Most are from the Pashtun tribe, the largest group in Afghanistan, numbering 7.5
million of the 16 million people.

There are 15 million Pashtunis in all; the others live in northwestern Pakistan,
where they are called Pathans and are eager to help their tribal brothers.

Afghan tribesmen live by the code of ''badal,'' or blood vengeance. ''Every time
a Russian helicopter gunship strafes a village, every man in it will not rest
until he has drawn Russian blood,'' said Haji Mangal Hussain, an Afghan teacher
now with one of the insurgent groups.

The Russians charge that Pakistan is being used as a conduit for aid to the
insurgents in Afghanistan. The Pakistanis are nervously making every effort to
appear blameless; they have carefully maintained the position that they are
providing only humanitarian assistance to the refugees.

Pakistan Describes Its Role

''We are accepting refugees from Afghanistan, but we are not providing any
military assistance, either in the forms of arms or training, and we are not
funneling arms for other countries,'' said Riaz Piracha, the Pakistani Foreign
Minister. ''We are not prepared to be a conduit to the resistance fighters. We
are not prepared to jeopardize our own security.''

The Pakistanis, to avoid any appearance of intervention, even refuse to allow
foreign doctors to treat the refugees. Mr. McAlpin, who coordinates help to the
refugees, said: ''We have 20 mobile dispensaries and have just opened a small
hospital with six Afghan doctors handling 100 to 200 patients a day. We could
bring in many volunteer doctors from Western countries, but Pakistan won't allow
it because it is sensitive to Soviet charges that it is being used as a pipeline
to aid insurgents. Therefore it wants a minimum of Westerners dealing with the
refugees.''

Pakistan Says It Isn't Worried

Publicly the Pakistani Government dismisses the possibility of a Soviet
invasion, saying that while Soviet troops might cross the border in hot pursuit
of insurgents, a prolonged Soviet incursion is improbable. Privately the
Pakistanis express deep fears of a major invasion.

''Militarily, I can see the strong temptation for the Soviets to bring the war
to Pakistan,'' said a retired general now in a high Government post. ''Pakistan
provides sanctuary for villagers who support the insurgents. If they had no
place to go, the insurgents might knuckle under, the way the Russians see it.
They are wrong because the Hazaras in central Afghanistan, the Uzbeks in the
east, even the Tadjiks in the north near the Soviet border, are resisting
successfully without such a sanctuary. But in their frustration Pakistan has to
be a tempting target for the Soviets when they see all the Afghan activity on
the North-West Frontier.''

The insurgents, eager not to make the Pakistanis any more nervous than they are,
dismiss the possibility of a Soviet invasion. ''The Russians cannot risk
invading Pakistan: the cost would be too high,'' said Hassan Gailani, a leader
of one of the groups fighting in the mountains. ''The international reaction
would be even greater that for Afghanistan. The Russians would completely lose
the support of the Moslem world, with which they've had generally good
relations, if they were to invade a second Moslem country. It would be a stupid
and futile move. It would not stop the insurgency in Afghanistan and it would be
foolish because Pakistan is not helping us militarily.''

Rare Unanimity: Sources of Aid

As for the origin of financial and military support, the half-dozen major groups
of insurgents fighting in the northwestern province, who disagree on nearly
every other matter, answer this question with rare unanimity and in almost
identical language.

''We are getting financial help from individuals in many countries but not from
governments,'' said Abdul Rasoul Sayaf, president of the Islamic Alliance for
the Liberation of Afghanistan, which includes five of the insurgent groups.
''Many Moslems send us money, including some American Moslems.''

Nevertheless, some here who are familiar with the aid being supplied to the
Afghan guerrillas say that Saudi Arabia and several of the Persian Gulf states
are giving money directly and that the United States is providing arms on a
limited basis.

''The Americans are trying to maintain a balance between having insurgents armed
well enough to make it too costly for the Russians to want to stay in
Afghanistan while not providing so many weapons that the Soviets will be
provoked to attack Pakistan,'' a European ambassador commented.

Weapons Acquired From Russians

The guerrilla leaders say they steal nearly all the weapons they need from the
Russians. ''As long as the Russians are in Afghanistan we will not have a
shortage of guns,'' said Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, who heads one of the largest and
most active group of insurgents, which he describes as the oldest, the strongest
and the best armed. He refuses to unite with the other factions under the
umbrella of the Islamic Alliance, maintaining that he wants representation in
the alliance to be based on strength of numbers, not equally divided among the
factions.

Mr. Kehmatyar, who was interviewed in his Peshawar headquarters, a former
school, is a magnet for the young religious fighters who are drawn by his
single-minded determination to establish an Islamic state. His father and two
brothers were killed by the previous Communist Governments of Noor Mohammad
Taraki and Hafizullah Amin and he was been imprisoned by King Zafer.

In addition to weapons taken from the Soviet forces or brought by defectors from
the Afghan Army, whose ranks have dwindled to 35,000 from 80,000 in the last
year, the insurgents can buy cheap, meticulously hand-crafted weapons only 25
miles south of here in Durra, which has been a center for arms manufacturing for
hundreds of years.

The Pathans there can copy any machine-made pistol or revolver perfectly, right
down to the factory marks and serial number, and they sell in an open bazaar
such refinements as antitank rocketpropelled grenades, ''fountain pen'' pistols
and ''walking stick'' guns, all at bargain prices.

Insurgent leaders like Mr. Hekmatyar say that the only weapons they cannot
easily obtain are antiaircraft and antitank guns.

Hitting Inaccessible Positions

Tanks can be defeated by retreating into the deep mountain paths or by blowing
them up with gasoline bombs. But the lack of antiaircraft weapons is a constant
problem because helicopter gunships can maneuver through the mountains and
strike otherwise inaccessible positions. ''The helicopters are the only Russian
weapons that can hurt us badly,'' Mr. Khalis said.

While the Russians can pursue the insurgents with gunships, they cannot seem to
stop them.  ''Helicopter gunships can strafe a mountain all day and then a
platoon moves up the mountain at night and it is cut to bits,'' said a European
military attache here who is following the war in Afghanistan. ''That's what's
so frustrating to the Russians. The Americans learned the same lesson in
Vietnam. Superpower technology in a guerrilla war is valuable only for
reprisals, wasting villages.  In the end the Russians may find that the only
alternative to withdrawal is genocide.''

Parallels between the Russians in Afghanistan and the Americans in Vietnam are
unavoidable. The Americans underestimated the Vietnamese Communist soldiers'
superior knowledge of jungle warfare and the Vietnamese tradition of defending
one's land and the graves of one's ancestors. The Afghans are able to hold off
superior numbers of wellarmed Russians at least in part because of their
experience in mountain warfare and their tradition of blood vengeance.

Back to Alexander the Great

''The Afghans have always been the best resistance fighters in the world,'' said
Brig. Mir Abad Hussam, director general of the Pakistani Foreign Ministry.
''Alexander the Great encountered them on his trek east and decided to take a
southern route back. The British never stayed there, although they occupied the
rest of the region.''

The insurgents' strong Islamic faith is another factor the Russians have not
taken into consideration, just as the Americans underestimated the power of
religion as a force for revolution in Iran. The Afghan insurgents believe that
dying in the name of Islam is a glorious death, one that will insure their place
in paradise.

''The Russians have never before fought a people who were fighting for their
faith,'' said Haji Mangal Hussain, a 30-year-old teacher at an Afghan
agricultural college who is a spokesman for an insurgent group.

''The Soviets cannot win because they cannot fight with our commitment,'' said
Mr. Sayaf of the Islamic Alliance. ''To us killing a Russian or dying in battle
represents an equal victory. If a Moslem kills an enemy in battle, he is a
ghazi, an Islamic warrior, and if he is killed, he is a shaheed, a martyr for
Islam, and the rewards are great in paradise.'' He added: ''They are a
superpower and we are among the poorest of peoples, and in the six months we
have been fighting they have grown weaker every day and we have become
stronger.''

Lack of Unity Among Tribes

Although united by religion and by experience as mountain fighters, the
insurgents are hampered by a lack of unity among tribal groups that prevents
them from coordinating their operations and, even more important, from being
able to control a fixed area where they could establish a provisional
government. If such a government existed, other countries might provide more
military assistance without involving Pakistan.

The leaders of the insurgents say they are close to such a goal.  ''If we can
expand the alliance, we could pool our weapons and defend an area where we can
base a government,'' Mr. Sayaf said.

Many Westerners here feel that centuries of feuding will not be easily set
aside. Even within the Islamic Alliance the rivalries are deep. When Sayed Ahmad
Gailani, leader of the most all-inclusive group in the alliance, went to Western
Europe to seek arms for the insurgents, Mr. Sayaf, the president of the
alliance, criticized the effort and issued a statement dissociating the alliance
from it. In a clear criticism of Mr. Gailani, whose group includes Westernized
Afghans, Mr. Sayaf said: ''Gailani went without consulting the rest of us. We
believe Westerners never help true Moslems but only those who accept Western
values.''

European and Asian diplomats here believe that the United States should give
more support to the Afghan rebellion even if it increases the risks of a Soviet
move against Pakistan, basically because they consider such an invasion to be
inevitable.

Three Options for Russians

In the view of these diplomats, the Russians have three options left in
Afghanistan.  The first is to try to crush the rebellion with sheer force
through saturation bombing of villages that support the rebels and by bringing
in more troops trained in anti-insurgency tactics.

The second option is to try to seal the border with Pakistan, which would
require more than double the troops now in Afghanistan, estimated at 85,000. It
would require the troops to maintain static positions, allowing the rebels to
cut them off from supply centers.

If these options fail, the analysts say, the Russians are certain to turn to
their final option, an invasion of northern Pakistan.  The hope of the
Pakistanis and most of their supporters is that before this comes to pass the
Soviet leaders will realize the quagmire they are in and accept a political
solution that would create a neutral Afghanistan.

Former King a Possibility

In diplomatic circles here discussion frequently turns to personalities who
might be suitable to head such a government and gain enough support to make it
work. One of the names mentioned is former King Zafer, now living in Rome. But
his prospects are not considered good because many Afghans blame him for
starting the flirtation with the Soviet Union that led ultimately to the
military intervention. A more acceptable prospect is Sher Ali, a member of the
royal family, also living in Europe, who has a record that would make him more
acceptable to a wider spectrum of Afghan groups as well as to the Soviet Union
and the United States.

Most of the resistance groups here say they will not accept any political
solution short of a fundamentalist Islamic government. They will continue to
fight any other solution, they insist, even if it has the support of both the
third world and the United States.

''We do not want to wind up like Vietnam and drive out one superpower only to
become the puppet of another,'' said Mr.  Hekmatyar, the insurgent leader. Said
Mr. Sayaf, president of the alliance of five groups, ''Our fight is not being
waged to gain anyone's aims but our own.''

Reminded that the Soviet Union had made it clear that it would not agree to an
Islamic government in Kabul, he said: ''Then we will go on fighting. Time does
not concern us. We have been fighting for centuries.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Gulbuddin Hekmatyara photo of guerillas map
detailing Soviet

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW SEALED OFF BY ARMY AND POLICE AT OLYMPIC OPENING

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 19


Leonid I. Brezhnev opened the XXII Olympic Games here today in a ceremony ringed
in by tens of thousands of uniformed soldiers and policemen and marred by the
boycott by the United States, West Germany, Japan and scores of other countries
protesting Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan.

The Soviet capital was sealed off, al-
The Soviet Union's Olympic athletes are the products of a vast selection and

training system. Section 5.
most as in a sudden military occupation, hours before the opening ceremony began
at 4 P.M. All normal traffic was swept off the streets.

A force of policemen in white hats and gloves and soldiers armed with
walkie-talkies formed a wall around Lenin Stadium, controlling the thousands of
athletes and Soviet and foreign spectators who converged on the stadium as
members of the Politburo arrived in black Zil limousines.

American Flag Unfurled in Stands

Mr. Brezhnev, capping five and a half years of intense preparations that
involved nearly every Muscovite and tens of thousands of other Russians, arrived
just after the sun broke out from behind clouds that threatened rain all
afternoon.

After the opening parade of the 81 national teams taking part, the lowest number
since the Melbourne Olympics of 1956, Mr. Brezhnev said, ''I declare open the
1980 Olympic Games, 22d of the modern era.''

Forty-five minutes before Mr. Brezhnev arrived, Dan Patterson of Howard, Ohio,
and Nick Paul of New York City unfurled a six-foot American flag and stretched
it over their heads. The people in the 103,000-seat stadium applauded wildly.
President Carter had forbidden the display of the flag at the Games.

''I wanted to show we are proud of being Americans and that we are sorry the
athletes couldn't come,'' said Mr. Patterson, 21 years old. ''You saw from their
reaction how they liked it.''

''President Carter is wrong,'' said the 88-year-old Mr. Paul, who added that he
had attended every Olympics since the first modern Games at Athens in 1896 with
the exception of those of 1936 in Berlin and 1964 in Tokyo. ''He should not mix
politics with other people's lives,'' Mr. Paul said of Mr. Carter.

Introducing Mr. Brezhnev, Lord Killanin of Ireland, president of the
International Olympic Committee, praised the 5,687 athletes who came despite the
boycott - ''especially those,'' he said, ''who have shown their complete
independence to travel and compete despite the pressures placed on them.''

Sixteen of the teams refused to parade around the stadium with their national
flags, using instead the five-ring Olympic banner or their own national Olympic
committee flags.

Cameras Avoid Protest Gestures

A commentator on Soviet television, whose cameras avoided showing most of these
gestures of protest, described them as ''a reflection of the boycott forced by
the United States.'' Soviet television told its viewers that the boycott was ''a
clumsy plot that has failed, as we all can see.''

The surprise military-security operation was ostensibly designed to prevent
terrorist incidents, but it reinforced the officially encouraged atmosphere of
wariness and suspicion of foreign visitors.  It was as if an army had rolled in
and, as its first act, declared a new national holiday.

The police were wearing their holiday best, even down to the white gloves.
''Congratulations on this great day,'' Soviet officials told even their American
acquaintances.

The programs sold to the Russian spectators in the stadium, who sat at the
opposite end of the huge oval from the foreigners, most of whom appeared to have
come from Eastern Europe, described the opening ceremony as a festival.

Reward for Uzbek Farmers

Two Uzbek farmers from Central Asia, leaving after most of the three-hour
spectacle was over, said they had loved it. How did they get here? ''We are the
best workers on our farm, and this is our reward,'' one said.

Moscow has been out of bounds to most ordinary Russians since last month. The
authorities have also rounded up most of the active dissidents still at large
and persuaded most of the rest that they would be better off leaving Moscow when
the Games got under way and their foreign friends began arriving.

To create an impression of well-being for the tourists, supplies of oranges,
bananas and cheese have been trucked into stores in the central part of the city
in the past few weeks. The main streets are decked with multicolored banners and
slogans, most of them carefully unpolitical statements of welcome to athletes
and officials.

But the promise of the city's mayor, Vladimir I. Promyslov, in October 1974 when
Moscow was awarded the Games was shattered by the military intervention in
Afghanistan.

''Politics was always supposed not to be in the Olympics,'' Mayor Promyslov said
then. ''We will try to hold peaceful, happy Games.''

Protests Lost in Vast Stadium

Politics, however, seemed to be the reason why Afghanistan's team got a big
round of applause today but Britain, whose team did not march or display its
flag, did not. Britain's decision, Soviet television said, was ''a break with
protocol.''

The reason for some teams' gestures of protest, to show displeasure with Soviet
policies despite their participation in the Games, seemed to get lost in the
vastness of the stadium, the roar of the crowd, the blare of martial music.

NBC, which had the rights to live transmission of the Games, bowed out because
of the boycott and had only a score of representatives here instead of the 750
it had planned on. Coca-Cola, which was going to supply its soft drinks and had
equipped Soviet vendors with red company uniforms, was also absent.

The Secretary General of the United Nations, Kurt Waldheim, who was invited, did
not attend.  Mr. Brezhnev sat in the dignitaries' section with officials of the
International Olympic Committee and most of his colleagues from the Soviet
Communist Party Politburo. The leaders of Bulgaria, Vietnam, Mongolia and
Czechoslovakia also attended, as did the French and Portuguese Communist Party
leaders.

It is not known how much the Games cost the Russians to stage. But merely
producing them - busing spectators, athletes and officials around, feeding them
and so on - is expected to cost about $350 million. The Olympic village, built
for the 12,700 athletes who were expected before the boycott and now housing
only half that many, cost more than $150 million, according to Soviet officials.

Most of the facilities will revert to normal use after the Games are over on
Aug. 3. But the disruptions to normal life over a period of years - it has been
impossible for Russians here to get new apartments since 1975, for instance -
have their cost, as well.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of opening ceremony photo of Leonid I. Brezhnev

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SMALL GIFTS TO ALLOW G.O.P. TO OUTSPEND FOES IN FALL

BYLINE: By E.J. DIONNE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1546 words


Democrats, who have traditionally regarded themselves as the partisans of the
ordinary citizen, will be vastly outspent this fall because of the Republican
Party's success in gathering small contributions from tens of thousands of
Americans.

While Democrats have continued to rely on larger contributions to build a
national committee campaign chest of more than $6 million, according to the
latest Federal Election Commission figures, the Republicans gathered $38.5
million. Eighty percent of that came in thousands of checks averaging $25 in
response to direct-mail appeals.

The Republicans' success parallels that of ideological conservatives, who have
pioneered the new technology of fund raising and will enjoy multimillion-dollar
advantages over their liberal adversaries. And many liberals believe it will be
years before they can match the conservatives, either technologically or
financially.

Also troubling liberal Democrats is a growing tendency on the part of political
action committees affiliated with business to contribute to Republicans.

A First Expected in 1980

These committees, known as PAC's, were set up by corporate and trade groups to
raise money from their officers, stockholders and members. The 1980 elections
are expected to mark the first time in which corporate groups will outspend
labor union political committees, and those in organized labor say it will be
extremely difficult to catch up.

Four years ago these business committees gave the largest share of their money
to incumbent Democratic Representatives and Senators, on the theory that this
would increase their influence in a Congress controlled by Democrats.

Now the corporate committees are increasing their contributions to Republicans
in an effort to defeat Democrats regarded as antagonistic to business.

At the same time, a number of conservative groups, many of which refer to
themselves as ''the New Right,'' have organized highly sophisticated
fund-raising drives unconnected with the corporate committees.

They have linked these drives with efforts to recruit conservative activists,
organize lobbying efforts for legislation and craft independent publicity
campaigns aimed at defeating liberal incumbents. Legal efforts to limit these
committees' contributions to Ronald Reagan's Presidential campaign would not
affect their activities in state and local races.

The election commission's raw numbers on contributions give many liberals
sleepless nights and conservatives cause for celebration.

'Not Polite Conversation'

The disparity between funds raised since January 1979 by the Republican and
Democratic National Committees - $38.5 million and $6 million, respectively - is
paralleled by fund-raising leads enjoyed by the Republican Senate and
Congressional Campaign Committees over their Democratic counterparts.

The Republican Senate committee, for instance, has garnered $11.3 million to the
Democrats' $841,000. Similarly, the National Conservative Political Action
Committee, just one of a number of conservative groups attracting a multitude of
small $10 and $20 contributions, had collected $3.4 million. The leading liberal
group, the National Committee for an Effective Congress, had gathered $700,000.

''There aren't many Democrats who talk about it,'' said Robert J.  Keefe, a
long-time Democratic consultant and activist. ''It's not polite conversation.
And I don't think people are fully aware of the problem.''

Lee Webb, executive director of the left-leaning Conference on Alternative State
and Local Public Policy, said, ''In the whole question of political technology,
the right is way ahead of the progressives.''

Viguerie Is Central Figure

A central figure in the conservatives' success is Richard Viguerie, a
Virginia-based direct-mail expert who has raised tens of millions of dollars for
conservatives and made millions himself in the process. An affable man who plays
poker with liberal friends - ''they want to take away Richard Viguerie's
money,'' he said with a laugh - Mr. Viguerie is dead serious about politics, and
laces his conversation with assertions that his goal is ''to change the course
of history.''

Mr. Viguerie argues that conservatives were spurred into taking a technological
lead in fund raising because the right had lost so many political battles and
because its causes got poor exposure on television and in newspapers.

''We have the incentive because we've been getting our rear ends kicked for
years,'' he said in an interview in his Falls Church, Va., office recently. ''We
had to develop the technology because we didn't have access to Walter
Cronkite.''

Mr. Viguerie said the New Right borrowed directly from liberals its focus on
''single-issue'' politics, uniting opponents of abortion, the proposed Federal
equal rights amendment, gun control and sexual permissiveness.

''The New Right - all we are, are very good Japanese - we make copies,'' he
said. ''We didn't invent single issue groups. The liberals did. Ralph Nader is
nothing if not a collection of single issue organizations. And liberals had the
environment, antinuke, Vietnam.''

As he spoke, Mr. Viguerie's computers, four floors down from his office, were
churning out mailings for several conservative groups.  Mr. Viguerie said he
employed 35 computer programmers.

Individually Addressed Letters

On one computer stood a box of mailings for ''Conservatives for Reagan.'' On
another was a mailing advocating prayer in schools. Each letter was individually
addressed and typed, and included a petition to the addressee's representative
and two senators.

Unlike many direct-mail experts, Mr. Viguerie specializes not only in raising
money but also in mobilizing activists. ''I want action tomorrow,'' he said.
''We're building a movement.''

Many liberals who respect and fear the New Right's efforts argue that Mr.
Viguerie and his allies may not be as powerful as they appear but that the very
appearance of power has expanded their ability to influence politicians.

''I'm not sure they're ahead, or are they just better at hyping what they're
doing?'' asked Victor S. Kamber, a consultant to labor unions.

New Arrivals in Field

The corporations are new arrivals at the political action committee table where
labor unions have been for four decades. What has changed is the campaign
finance law, which since 1972 has permitted corporate political committees.

Initially, corporate response was sluggish. In 1976, 450 corporations had
political action committees and contributed $4.3 million to Congressional
candidates.

Once the modest success of the pioneer business committees became clear, other
corporations entered the field. They were spurred, he said, by the growing
''burden of government intrusion in business through the bureaucracy.''

At last count by the Federal Election Commission, there were 1,127 corporate
committees. By contrast, the number of labor committees has fallen, from 303 in
1976 to 276 now.

And Mr. Fanelli noted happily, ''This year, for the first time in memory, the
amount of money from industry will exceed the total amount of money labor PAC's
put in.'' According to the Federal Election Commission, corporate committees had
raised $19.2 million by late spring, as against $15.6 million raised by labor.

Room for Growth for Business

Central to labor's difficulties is the fact that, while hundreds of corporations
that could establish political committees have not yet done so, most labor
unions already have them.

''The reason for the gap - and it's going to grow - is that the corporation and
trade association PAC's have an almost unlimited field to grow in,'' said Ben
Albert, director of public relations for the Committee on Political Education,
the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s political action arm.

Other labor allies, however, believe that a more aggressive effort by the
unions, such as direct-mail fund raising or voluntary deductions from members'
paychecks, could close the gap.

Some liberals believe it will be possible to catch up, if only they develop the
proper technology. Roger Craver, whose direct-mail concern is raising money for
several liberal senators and for Representative John B. Anderson's independent
Presidential campaign, argues that liberals have already given considerable sums
to causes like Planned Parenthood and Common Cause, and that affluent liberals
have more money to give.

Mr. Craver said that ''there's a constituency of about four million people on
the left and four million people on the right who feel strongly about these
issues,'' referring to the questions of abortion, the equal rights amendment and
gun control.

''He's probably right,'' said Mr. Viguerie. ''But Roger doesn't have 'em all on
a computer. How many mailings does it take to get four million names? I've
already got them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TENSE MIAMI AREA FEARS THE ANGER OF ITS YOUNG

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL SHEPPARD Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1276 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, July 19


For years the residents of the public housing projects in the Liberty City
section of Miami have been held hostage by poverty and high unemployment. Now
they are being held hostage by their children.

''They got us afraid to walk the streets at night and sometimes even in broad
daylight,'' an elderly woman who lives in one of the projects said, peering from
behind a door she was afraid to open all the way.

''You never know when they are going to start shooting or chunking rocks at cars
and setting stuff on fire,'' she said. ''I never seen so many guns and knives in
all the days of my life. I just don't go out now unless I have to.''

The woman's fear, in varying degrees, is shared by many adults in Liberty City,
a predominantly black community of about 100,000 people on Miami's northwest
side.

Many Mill the Streets

By day people of all ages mill about Liberty City's streets, trying to pick up
the pieces of their lives and recover from the ravages of the riots in May that
left 18 persons dead and reduced most of their business community to rubble.

But by night the scene changes dramatically. The adults disappear behind locked
doors and the youths roam the area, frustrated and angry.

In the new wave of violence that broke out Tuesday, at least 41 persons have
been injured, some by sniper fire. More than 40 persons have been arrested on
charges including carrying concealed weapons and violating the 9 P.M. to 6 A.M.
curfew imposed Wednesday.

Today, police patrols kept a tight lid on the violence and in one instance
officers were applauded by blacks when they served an arrest warrant on a
suspect believed to have been involved in recent disturbances.

Few Are Wage Earners

The latest violence has been centered in two public housing projects, the James
E. Scott and the Carver Homes. Scott Homes is more than seven times larger than
the Carver complex, with 3,100 people living in 762 apartments. Of the 762
families, only 213 earn wages and 501 receive welfare benefits. About 432 have
incomes of less than $4,000 a year. They are desperate and angry people.

Fewer than 20 percent of the apartments have air conditioning, in a city where
air conditioning is as important year round as heat is in Northern cities in
winter.

The mood in and around the public housing complexes is tense. Many residents are
afraid to talk and others say the time for talk is past. ''It's like, hey, we
are tired of talking,'' one young woman said. ''Talk ain't got us nowhere. Right
now we just want to express our frustration and don't want to talk to anybody.''

A young man in his early 20's, a pistol stuffed in the top of his pants and
showing through his shirt, said the community was ''at war.''

'You Better Stay Out'

''If you don't live here you better stay out,'' he said. ''That goes for the
police, the press and especially for crackers.'' Other youths who had begun to
gather and listen said they had plenty of weapons that they would use ''every
time the police come in and start some mess.''

Asked what kind of pistol he had and if he knew how to use it, the youth said,
''That's all right what kind it is.'' Removing it from his waistband he said,
''You just point it and shoot.''

''This is different from the last time,'' said a 45-year-old man who lives in a
modest, well-kept house not far from the housing project. ''We were all mad last
time because they let those policemen off after they murdered McDuffie.''

He was referring to Arthur McDuffie, a black Miami businessman who was beaten to
death by policemen after they chased the motorcycle on which he was riding. The
May riots were sparked when a jury in Tampa acquitted four policemen who had
been charged with using excessive force in their efforts to subdue Mr. McDuffie.
Three other policemen did not face trial.

Area Youths Are Angry

''We were all out to voice our anger then,'' the man said, ''but now it's just
the kids. They are so angry. They are striking out against anybody that might
have something they don't. I'm afraid the police will use this as an excuse to
come in here and murder us all.''

In the May riots, businesses owned by whites were singled out for destruction,
but this week no color line was drawn.  One of the businesses burned in the
renewed violence on Tuesday was Rambeau's Service Center. The owner, Jack R.
Rambeau, had worked nine years to save enough money to buy the old service
station at Northwest 75th Street and 22d Avenue, across from the Scott housing
project.

In addition to the station he lost a tow truck, a tool truck, a car that had
been in the parking lot and another car inside the station.  Supplies were
stolen and equipment was ruined. Mr. Rambeau had been in business nine months
and had no insurance.

'They'd Kill McDuffie'

''It's that housing project,'' he said. ''They ought to tear it down. The kids
just run wild. They steal and they hide in the projects where the police are
afraid to go.

''The McDuffie thing was just an excuse,'' he added. ''They don't give a damn
about McDuffie. They'd kill McDuffie if he came up here.''

The authorities have said that much of the damage that resulted in the May riots
appear to have been the work of persons trained in guerrilla warfare. They also
said that many attacks on the police and National Guard appear to have been the
work of trained snipers.

One community activist said that the authorities were correct. A small group of
Vietnam veterans, angered over the erosion of veterans' services and the plight
of the community, was responsible for much of the arson and sniper fire in May,
the activist said, but that the veterans had nothing to do with the current wave
of violence.

''They consider this childish and without purpose,'' the activist said. ''They
have decided to wait until the end of August to see if the city makes good on
any of its promises for improvement, then they will decide whether to become
active again. Right now it's just a bunch of kids who think it is fun to shoot a
cop that is responsible for the trouble. The residents of the project are like
prisoners, afraid to venture out at night.''

Mayor Believes Reports

Mayor Maurice Ferre said he believes ''there is truth to the report'' of trained
snipers. ''The sniping, the attack and retreat, the use of fear and the pattern
of arson suggested that many of the acts were the work of well-trained and
organized people,'' he said.  ''We know there are a lot of well-trained veterans
in the area.

''In May it was grownups, a legitimate expression of frustration by a total
community,'' he said. ''But now it is a bunch of teens, throwing rocks and using
weapons stolen from gun shops and accumulated over the years.

''The May 17 riot was an explosion that had been building up.  There is no
question that poverty, lack of jobs, rats, people sleeping 10 to an apartment
and child abuse were underlying reasons.''

The breaking point in May, the Mayor said, was the ''obvious travesty'' of the
acquittals in the McDuffie case, when the policemen ''got off scot-free.''

''The whites here get upset when I say it, but how can I not say that there's
racism here?'' he added. ''My God, until we cross that first bridge how can we
expect to solve the problem that is before us? We must repent before we can be
saved.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Roy Innis speaking with Liberty City residents

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RIGHTS PROPOSAL DEBATE GOES ON

BYLINE: By DAVID A. ANDELMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 29, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 646 words


None of the pressures for or against the proposed equal rights amendment appear
to have been eased by the Federal court decision Friday that an all-male
military draft unconstitutionally discriminates against women.

In separate interviews, Iris Mitgang, chairman of the National Women's Political
Caucus, and Phyllis Schlafly, head of Stop E.R.A., said that the court's
decision had only reinforced their views on the amendment: Mrs. Mitgang thinks
it is necessary and Mrs. Schlafly thinks it is superfluous.

The Selective Service Act restricts draft registration to 18-yearold men. The
plaintiffs in the nine-year-old suit decided Friday contended that by removing
women from the draft pool, the chance of any individual man being drafted was
effectively doubled, thus discriminating against men.

Although the law has been ruled unconstitutional, an injunction barring
registration, scheduled to begin tomorrow, was stayed yesterday by Associate
Justice William J. Brennan Jr. of the United States Supreme Court.

E.R.A. Needed, Mrs. Mitgang Says

''We predicted that the courts would find under current law that registration
would have to include women,'' Mrs. Mitgang said. ''Even though Congress was
perhaps not ready to include women as equals in the military, the judiciary
apparently is, at least at District Court levels.''

Mrs. Mitgang said, however, that she felt an equal rights amendment was needed
to allow women to challenge a broader range of Federal and state activities that
discriminate against women.

''E.R.A. is essential unless we are going to have to litigate statute by statute
or regulation by regulation,'' she said. ''There is no predicting what any
individual court will do on any issue. We are looking at a panoply of laws.''

She cited current regulations that restrict the number of women in the armed
forces to 12 percent of the total and other regulations that bar women from most
combat positions.

Phyllis Segal, legal director of the National Organization for Women's Legal
Defense and Education Fund, said that the Fifth Amendment of the Constitution,
providing equal protection under the law for all citizens, had ''never given the
courts a secure handle in dealing with gender-based classification cases.''

''Furthermore, E.R.A. would give the instruction to Federal and state
governments to clean their own house and rid codes and regulations of gender
bias,'' she said. ''A recent Federal study showed 800 provisions of the Federal
codes that contain gender-based distinctions.''

Schlafly Defends Gender Bias

For Mrs. Schlafly, who also heads the Coalition Against Drafting Women,
gender-based distinctions are a persuasive reason for continuing her fight
against the equal rights amendment.

''Even if the Supreme Court should uphold the ruling that women should be
treated equally in the draft, it becomes that much more important to defeat
E.R.A to keep women out of combat,'' she said.  ''We must protect sex
discriminatory statutes with respect to combat.''

Mrs. Schlafly charged that the Justice Department ''threw the Philadelphia case
by not defending the statute adequately.'' ''They used the argument that it was
not necessary to draft women,'' Mrs. Schlafly said. ''That was not an adequate
defense. The Government was not really defending it. The President, the
Secretary of Defense, the head of Selective Service were all for drafting women.
The girls' arguments have never been presented to court.''

She said that a more powerful argument against drafting women would be the fact
that it ''would tear this country up more than the Vietnam War.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cynthia S. Faville Fiancee of R. Dowell Tye

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 39, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 300 words


Announcement has been made by Mr. and Mrs. Richard William Faville of
Middleburg, Va., of the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Susan Faville, to
R. Dowell Tye, son of Mrs. Horace Smart Beattie of Lexington, Ky., and Captiva
Island, Fla., and the late Col. Hiram S.  Tye, U.S.A.

The wedding is planned for Sept. 20.  Miss Faville, an account executive for the
infants and toddlers division of Izod Inc., graduated from the Foxcroft School
and Vassar College, having studied at the University of Paris her junior year.
She was a member of the Junior Assembly in 1972, the year of her debut, and
belongs to the Junior League of New York. Her father, a former Foreign Service
Officer, is executive vice president of Matte & Company, management consultant
in New York.

The prospective bride is a granddaughter of Mrs. Robert F. Sims of Newport
Beach, Calif.; the late Mr. Sims, a Crocker Bank vice president; Mrs. Richard W.
Faville of Portland, Ore., and the late Mr. Faville, president and principal
stockholder of the Pacific Paper Products Corporation.

Mr. Tye, a senior financial analyst in the technical-products and
industrial-chemical part of W.R. Grace & Company, graduated from the Sayre
School in Lexington and the University of Kentucky. He received an M.B.A. from
the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania and was an Army lieutenant
in Vietnam.

The future bridegroom is a grandson of the late Reno Renfrew of Lexington, an
investment banker and horse breeder, and of the late Walter Tye, president of
the Tye & Wells Construction Company of Louisville, Ky. His stepfather is a
retired senior vice president of the International Business Machines
Corporation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Cynthia Faville

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW ROBERT DUVALL-'HE MAY BE THE BEST WE HAVE'

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1618 words


The opening of Lewis John Carlino's ''The Great Santini,'' with its remarkable
performances by Blythe Danner, Michael O'Keefe and, especially, Robert Duvall,
is a reassuring reminder that although this is scarcely a Golden Era for
American movies (even if it were a Golden Era, we probably would@n't recognize
it), it is a time of frequently splendid performances by (in the locution of the
Oscar people) actors in a leading role. Perhaps never before in the history of
American movies have there been so many first-rate leading actors doing so many
different kinds of roles. (It's not as rich a time for American actresses - but
that's another story.) I'm thinking specifically of Dustin Hoffman, Al Pacino,
Robert Redford, Jack Nicholson, Clint Eastwood, Roy Scheider, Jon Voight and,
the most consistently surprising and rewarding of the lot, Robert Duvall.

In saying this I don't mean to compare the actors of today with those of the
30's and 40's. Movies were made differently then and the actors who were their
stars served different purposes. It doesn't take away from the very real talents
of a Clark Gable or a Cary Grant to acknowledge that each was, in his own
manner, called upon to play a continuing role in a succession of movies that had
the effect of being a single series.

Actors today have a tougher time of it. There is no M@-G@-M of the sort run by
Louis B. Mayer, one company committed to the production of two, maybe three,
Gable pictures a year. Clint Eastwood and Robert Redford, of today's leading
actors, come closest to the oldtime stars, for which reason they are sometimes
underrated, but even these two actors are betraying an increasing restlessness
with conventional roles in conventional movies.

In the legitimate theater it's said that when playwrights decline, the stage
becomes the medium of its directors and actors. Translated into films, this
would mean, I suppose, that performers must become dominant at a time when
directors lose their authority or when they have no special talents about which
to be authoritative. There are today a number of competent American directors
but only a very few who possess the singular abilities of possible greatness.
This fact, combined with an audience no longer committed to a star system, has
produced a generation of leading actors as diversely talented as their films are
unpredictable in terms of both quality and box office appeal.

Of the actors mentioned above, only one, Dustin Hoffman, has recently made a
film of consistent, unequivocal quality, Robert Benton's Oscar-winning ''Kramer
vs. Kramer,'' for which Mr. Hoffman also received an Oscar.

Although it's far easier to recognize a good performance in a mediocre
production in the theater than in a film (too many technical things come between
a performer and the audience in a movie), it is clear, I think, that there are
today more interesting performances by leading actors in films - good, bad and
indifferent - than at any time in the recent past. I emphasize that the word
''interesting'' is not the same thing as ''successful.''

''...And Justice for All'' is a loony-bin of a movie and it is sitthroughable
only because of the dynamic performance of Al Pacino.  ''Brubaker'' seems to me
to be a singularly uninteresting movie, and Mr. Redford's performance in it far
from his best; yet without Mr.  Redford's informed, self-assured restraint, the
movie would cease to exist entirely. The most brilliant thing about ''All That
Jazz'' was Bob Fosse's decision to cast Roy Scheider as the Fosse surrogate
figure. Roy Scheider, the hard-nosed, laconic, ever-seething star of such films
as ''Jaws'' and ''Sorcerer,'' playing a charming, driven, womanizing Broadway
choreographer? The initial word seemed, at best, eccentric, a stopgap
announcement until the right romantic actor could be brought into line.

Yet the leap that Mr. Scheider's casting required of our imaginations, as well
as of Mr. Scheider's talents, paid off in one of the year's most provocative and
rewarding performances, one that illuminated the psychic chaos within the
character without calling redundant attention to the decor of his razzle-dazzle
existence.

Now it's about time to recognize Robert Duvall as one of the most resourceful,
most technically proficient, most remarkable actors in America today. When I say
''one of ...'' I don't mean to weasel out of anything. At this moment, having
just seen Mr. Duvall in ''The Great Santini,'' I think he may well be the best
we have, the American Olivier, but I also agree with the remarks made by Dustin
Hoffman when he received his Oscar last spring:

Actors really aren't comparable, certainly not when each is playing a different
role. I'm not even sure they are comparable when they can be seen playing the
same role, a Hamlet or a Willy Loman or an Estragon. Each actor shapes a role to
his own image, consciously, by the range of his talent, and, unconsciously, by
what he brings to the role physically. Show dogs are comparable. Actors aren't.

''The Great Santini'' is not a great film. It has lapses of tone and style that
have wrecked better films. Yet it contains three beautifully realized characters
and it risks unintentional laughter by probing these three characters to a depth
not dared by most films. Mr. Carlino's screenplay, based on the novel by Pat
Conroy, is about Col. Bull Meechum, a loud, hard-drinking, patriotic,
servicededicated Marine Corps pilot; about his wife, Lillian, a Southern
gentlewoman who loves her husband, is still sexually turned on by him and is
often infuriated by him, and about their four children, principally Ben, the
oldest, who turns 18 in the course of the film.

The time of the film is 1962, before Vietnam had become an issue, and the
setting is Beaufort, S.C., where Bull is stationed at the Marine air base. Bull
Meechum is given to terrible practical jokes, to getting his own way with
everyone except his superior officers, whose insults he accepts with humility.
He runs his household as if it were a barracks, is an embarrassing participant
in his children's private lives, and he has no doubt whatsoever that, when the
time comes, Ben will become a Marine Corps pilot too.

Because the members of the family, which is Roman Catholic (an important point
that the movie never overstresses), seem actually to be well adjusted to
themselves and one another, the Oedipal conflict, when it comes, is all the more
terrifying, inevitably erupting during those happy moments when fury is least
expected.

Blythe Danner, who ought to be offered some of the roles that go to Jill
Clayburgh, is wise and funny and most touching as the mother, and Michael
O'Keefe, an actor new to films, is equally fine as Ben.  If Mr. Duvall rivets
our attention as old Bull it's partially because the role is such a flamboyant
one, really a blood brother to the manic, surf-crazy colonel he plays in
''Apocalypse Now,'' and because it's always fascinating to see what a supremely
gifted, original actor will do with such a complex, larger-than-life role.

The performance is a double-decker experience for the people in the audience,
who respond to the character within the narrative as well as to the skills of
the actor in the role, which, in movies, is rare indeed.

Even though versatility is often overrated, one of the things that increases
one's pleasure with such a performance is one's memory of what the same actor
has done in earlier roles. Although I had great reservations about the film
itself, I'll never forget the Duvall performance as the nearly catatonic
Southern sharecropper in ''Tomorrow,'' an adaptation of the William Faulkner
story, nor his old-time Communist in ''The Revolutionary,'' nor his shark-like
TV executive in ''Network.''

Perhaps the most extraordinary Duvall performance of all was his steadfast,
self-effacing Dr. Watson in Herbert Ross's beautiful screen version of Nicholas
Meyer's ''The Seven-Per-Cent Solution.''

While watching Mr. Duvall in ''The Great Santini,'' I was once again struck by
the mystery of acting, particularly screen acting, to those of us who aren't
actors. Because there are so many things that can go into a performance over
which the actor has no control (camera angles, lighting, cutting, dialogue,
etc.), I sometimes wonder how critics can judge a performance other than to
attempt to describe a performance's effect.

Though there are obvious, clearly defined contrasts between the Duvall
performances in ''The Seven-Per-Cent Solution'' and ''The Great Santini,'' there
is also a continuity that has to do with more than a recognizable physical
presence. It has to do, I think, with our awareness of the power within the
actor, which one comes to know only over a period of time, so that we finally
understand how the actor is using that power in any given role, whether he's
playing the one outsider inside the Mafia, in ''The Godfather'' movies, or a
Detroit automotive tycoon in ''The Betsy.''

It isn't necessary to have perfect recall of every role Mr. Duvall has ever
played to appreciate what he does in ''The Great Santini,'' but it is one of the
ways in which movie-going is enriched by moviegoing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MOTOWN SHUFFLE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1575 words


Ronald Reagan, the late-blooming Republican who has parlayed tenacity, a
matchless speaking style and the conviction of a convert into a solid shot at
the White House, didn't get the running mate he wanted last week. But almost
everything else broke his way.

Except for Mr. Reagan's extraordinary effort to persuade former President Gerald
R. Ford that he should want to be Vice President again before selecting George
Bush, the moderate Easterner who was the last of Mr. Reagan's primary opponents
to give up, as his running mate, the Republican National Convention was
carefully controlled. Planners for the former California Governor, and now
certified Republican Presidential nominee, wanted to reassure independents,
Democrats and doubting Republicans watching the show that their candidate
wasn't, as his critics claim, a shallow, irresponsible hip-shooter. The
stratagem's success may not be clear until Election Day, but there was an
unprecedented (for Republicans) outbreak of tolerance and accommodation
alongside the Detroit River.

More than once, the G.O.P's 32nd gathering-together had a decidedly Democratic
sound to it. After (the few) black delegates said Mr.  Reagan should do more to
further minority rights - and threatened to walk out to demonstrate their
unhappiness - Benjamin L. Hooks, executive director of the National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People, was invited to the podium. Several
thousand marchers demonstrated outside Detroit's Joe Louis Arena in support of
the Equal Rights Amendment, no longer endorsed in the party platform. At the
very start of his acceptance speech, Mr. Reagan declared he would make
eliminating ''discrimination against women'' a high priority.

Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, unpopular with many delegates for
his advocacy of normalized relations with China, among innumerable other things,
was treated with courtesy. A conservative stalwart and Mr. Reagan's campaign
chairman, Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada, placed the candidate's name in
nomination, but two emissaries from what's left of the once dominant Eastern
wing of the party made seconding speeches. (Ironically, Senator Laxalt was one
of the few Republicans to go away mad. Apparently miffed because he was told,
not asked, about taking Mr. Bush as soon as the Ford deal fell through, he
wasn't around for Thursday night's acceptance speeches.  ''I just went to
dinner,'' he said.)

Mr. Reagan, twice before an unsuccessful candidate for his party's nomination
and last week well ahead of Mr. Carter in the latest Gallup Poll, has never been
shy about doing what he thought had to be done to win. Four years ago, when he
tried and failed to take the Presidential nomination away from Mr. Ford, he
offended many a conservative when he picked a Senator from Pennsylvania, Richard
S.  Schweiker, for a running mate in a last-ditch drive for delegates.

And second choice or no, Mr. Bush could help. A former Congressman, chief
delegate to the United Nations and director of Central Intelligence, he
presumably knows his away around Washington.  Additionally, his presence on the
ticket may make Mr. Reagan more palatable in the Northeast and Middle West,
where Mr. Bush often did well even after the Big Mo had deserted him. In the
breathless fashion of Vice Presidential candidates, Mr. Bush promised to ''work,
work, work'' and, at a news conference with Mr. Reagan, minimized their
differences on social issues.

Not by accident, a biographical film that preceded Mr. Reagan's acceptance
speech stressed his long-ago labor union ties. The speech itself was notably
lacking in rhetorical excesses that could have puzzled and frightened. For the
most part, Mr. Reagan gave primetime viewers an assortment of golden oldies from
campaigns past: the importance of work and family, attacks on Big Government and
red tape, pledges to beef up the military and to hang tougher in dealings with
the Soviet Union. Mr. Reagan didn't overlook those who might doubt his stamina.
At one point, he asserted that he didn't find the campaign grind exhausting,
figuratively flexing his 69-yearold muscles.

However reassuring his message, Mr. Reagan's unsuccessful attempt to sign up
former President Ford - and his reported willingness to consider bargaining away
or sharing some of the President's considerable prerogatives - may have left a
residue of doubts about his decisiveness and his appreciation of the realities
of running Government from the Oval Office.(Television and the dream ticket,
page 2). At the very least, the episode provided the Democrats with ammunition.
''A double backflipping foulup,'' was the assessment of national chairman John
C. White.

In Washington meanwhile, Administration officials, still ever on the alert - as
they were during President Carter's primary battles with Senator Edward M.
Kennedy - for things political opponents do or say that they can call blunders,
pounced immediately. On a Reagan promise of a freeze on Federal hiring, Alan K.
Campbell, director of the Office of Personnel Management, warned that imposing
limits on, say, air traffic controllers or civil servants who issue Social
Security checks ''would be disastrous.'' Mr. Reagan, he said, ''apparently is
not aware we are currently in a hiring freeze, the third since President Carter
took office.''

For his part, Mr. Carter called the Reagan-Bush ticket ''formidable'' and,
getting in a lick of his own, suggested that Mr.  Reagan would be quick to
involve American forces in combat. Mr.  Carter also said he wanted to debate Mr.
Reagan; Mr. Reagan accepted. As for Representative John B. Anderson, once a
Republican hopeful and now an independent candidate, his role in Presidential
debates is still to be sorted out. The accommodating Mr. Reagan said he should
be included too.

The Games Begin On the Downbeat

In the Soviet version of the Olympic Games, which opened yesterday in Moscow,
athletes are competing behind layers of security: tens of thousands of military
and police forces, a wire fence 15 feet high, and censorship that began by
rejecting a West German television account of Soviet Olympic politicking.

When Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, declared the games open, 16
countries showed disapproval of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan by refusing
to display their national flags in the ceremonial march. Russian television
cameras looked the other way.  Moscow welcomed 6,600 competitors fielded by 81
countries, the smallest number represented since the Melbourne games in 1956.
Responding to the Washington-led boycott, more than 60 countries - notably West
Germany, China, Japan, Canada and Kenya -stayed away.

Ambassadors of 13 countries chose to leave on vacation during the fortnight-long
games. So did most Soviet dissidents who had escaped detention in a pre-Olympic
crackdown. Automobiles not registered in Moscow were banned, and police grounded
many Muscovite private cars on technicalities. Even the city's children were
encouraged to leave town. Only 3,000 of the 30,000 Americans alloted tickets
decided to ignore the boycott and attend. To fill vacancies left by absent
foreigners, reduced-price tickets were offered to Moscow residents.

Criticizing the boycott, Lord Killanin, retiring president of the International
Olympic Committee, accused President Carter and his advisers of having had
''virtually no knowledge of anything (in sports) but U.S. baseball and
football.'' Despite Washington's protests, the committee insisted that the
American flag be flown at Lenin Stadium in Aug. 3 closing ceremonies, a symbol
of the 1984 games to be held in Los Angeles.(Russians get by, noncompetitively,
page 4.)

Draft Sign-Up Go-Ahead

In ruling late Friday that a selective service system that excludes women is
simply too selective, a three-judge Federal Court in Philadephia momentarily
stopped the clock for four million young men required to sign up at Post Office
windows starting tomorrow morning for possible conscription.

While critics of President Carter's post-Afganistan request to Congress to get
the draft out of the deep freeze crowed, Justice Department lawyers asked
Supreme Court Justice William Brennan Jr., vacationing on Nantucket for a stay
of the lower court order. They got it, and that means registration, as planned,
for men born in 1960 and 1961. But it does not settle the constitutional
question: whether not requiring women to register along with men amounts to a
denial of a Fifth Amendment guarantee of equal protection under the law.

The Pennsylvania panel thought so after hearing arguments in one of several
antidraft suits now working their way up; this one was first brought during the
Vietnam War, in 1971, and dusted off this year. If the High Court agrees,
Congress would have to pass a new registration law, including, as Mr. Carter
proposed, women.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF REAGAN FORD AND BUSH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BURMA TRIES TO STAY BALANCED IN A REGION TILTING LEFT

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1041 words

DATELINE: RANGOON, Burma


Burmese politics are authoritarian and opaque, and aside from rare and ritual
restatements of Burma's absolute neutrality and dedication to what President Ne
Win calls the Burmese Way to Socialism, the reclusive leader and his confidants
give few clues to the dynamics that move a nation and cause it continuously to
adjust its course.

But from the faint signals that emanate from the one-party Government, one
message is being clearly read: Burma has added deepening concern over the Soviet
Union and its Southeast Asian surrogate, Vietnam, to the fear of China that has
obsessed it since the Communist victory there in 1949. The sole overt and
official move came last year, when Burma - which in the days of former Prime
Minister U Nu had been a founder of the nonaligned movement - took the
extraordinary step for this singularly undemonstrative country of announcing its
disaffiliation. The growing alignment with the Soviet Union of the bulk of the
countries that call themselves nonaligned, as demonstrated at last year's
meeting in Havana, caused Rangoon to take its first international initiative in
years.

Diplomats here had been aware of Burma's unease with Moscow and its allies at
least since 1977. A sweeping purge of the apparatus of the Socialist Program
Party, modeled on Soviet lines of organization, removed all Politburo members
suspected of pro-Moscow leanings. The Soviet Embassy showed signs of serious
discomfiture and all East European diplomatic missions were placed under heavy
surveillance.

Subtle Straws in the Wind

East Germany, whose Communist Party had a special relationship with the Burmese
party, phased out its important aid projects and all aid from pro-Moscow
countries was seriously curtailed. Their projects had continued, despite Burma's
overtures since 1975 to capitalist countries -Japan and West Germany - and the
World Bank and Asian Development Bank. The overtures, which have taken on
growing importance in Burma's downtrodden economy, diverged sharply from a
foreign policy dominated by avoidance of any initiative that might offend China.
Going beyond economic actions, Burma has recently warmed up to Thailand and the
anti-Vietnamese, anti-Soviet Association of Southeast Asian Nations, and has
privately expressed its approval of ASEAN's stand. This week, the Thai Prime
Minister, Prem Tinsulanonda, was paying a state visit, following last month's
visit of Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila.

Another unannounced straw in the wind was last year's closing of India's
consulate in Mandalay under Government pressure.  Burmese-Indian relations have
always been sensitive; in the colonial past, when Britain governed Burma as part
of East India, Indian minor officials, followed by many traders, played an
important role in running Burma. After India became independent in 1947, and
Burma in 1948, India's friendship with the Soviet Union and hostility to China
exacerbated the strains. Significantly, when the United States last month closed
its Mandalay consulate for budgetary reasons, the Burmese Foreign Ministry tried
gently to persuade the United States not to do so. The consulate was the envy of
other powers who would dearly like to expand their knowledge, limited by the
difficulties of internal communications and travel and Government secretiveness.
Closing the consulate, the only foreign diplomatic outpost, is generally
adjudged to have been a shortsighted move.

In the slow and inconspicuous Burmese way, relations with the United States have
been on an upturn since the Communist victories in Indochina. The openings
toward the international lending institutions, where the United States is the
key contributor, were the first sign. Through the U Nu period, which ended with
his ouster and imprisonment by Gen. Ne Win in 1962, the United States had been a
main source of economic and military assistance.

Cooperation has focused on combatting the opium trade, where Burmese and
American interests coincide. The United States has so far furnished 25
helicopters and 4 short-range transport planes to the Burmese Army. Officially
described as anti-narcotics tools, they are a boon to Burma's war against border
insurgencies, whose only sources of funds and supplies are China and opium.

Burmese hopes that the advent of Deputy Prime Minister Deng Xiaoping would
lessen China's support for the Burmese Communist Party, the most important rebel
group, have been dashed. While governmental relations are excellent, and Chinese
aid projects are under way, Peking insists that party-to-party relations are
unaffected, and the Chinese Communists owe ''brotherly assistance'' to their
Burmese friends. The result is continuing insurgency in the northeast, openly
fueled by China, which ties down most of the Burmese army, inflicts heavy
casualties and diverts about one-third of Burma's current-expenditure budget
-and the bulk of its precious foreign exchange - to defense. While worry over
Hanoi and Moscow is rising and Peking's own reconciliation with Washington has
opened opportunities for Rangoon's rapprochement with the West, China thus
maintains a continued means of pressure. It can heat up or cool down the
insurgency as it pleases. For the time being, despite bold Government campaigns
against the rebels, they are said to be at least holding their own.

In the light of Burma's sense of being threatened by both of the Communist
superpowers and its rupture with the nonaligned movement, the surprising
invitation from President Ne Win to his archrival, U Nu, to return after 11
years of exile, currently in India, may have a special significance. With Nehru,
Sukarno, Nasser and now Tito dead, U Nu is the last of the founding fathers of
the nonaligned. Burmese observers and diplomats are struck with the possibility
that Burma may use U Nu, when he returns this month, to give impetus to a
realignment of the nonaligned away from Soviet domination.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF U NU

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A DEMOCRATIC SOCIETY IN NEEDOF A MILITARY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 428 words


DRAFT To the Editor:

There are some issues concerning the reinstatement of the military draft which
have not been adequately discussed. As I understand it, the Nixon
Administration's decision to abolish the draft was a political move designed to
defuse antiwar protests among young people. In this it succeeded very well, but
I believe it was the most dangerous policy perpetrated in the Nixon era. {}
rofessional, volunteer armies are anathema to democratic societies. The danger
lies in a corps of upwardly mobile commissioned and noncommissioned officers,
with narrow, careeroriented perspectives. Where are the checks on potential
abuses of power in the institution that controls our arsenal of weapons? It is
unlikely that whistle-blowers will come forward in such a climate.

I cautioned students in the late 1960's and early 1970's against banning the
R.O.T.C. from college campuses. The military needs a constant turnover of junior
officers, broadly educated at civilian colleges and universities, rather than an
officer corps composed almost exclusively of those trained at military
academies, or inhouse, who look to military careers.

I remember overhearing a cadet at an Army football game talking about the early
stages of the Vietnam War: ''It is not much of a war, but it's all that we've
got.'' With a hot war, his career would move along briskly.

No one disputes that in a technologically advanced military we need a core of
well-trained, well-paid professionals. But we also need draftees representing
all strata of our society (including, perhaps, various age groups) and a ready
reserve.

I think that we need to re-establish a duty to serve the nation by instituting a
required national service, including military service.  While it may be unfair
to impose this responsibility on young people exclusively, it is to them that we
must turn principally for a variety of reasons. The exploitive dangers of
reinstituting some form of draft have been somewhat mitigated by lowering the
voting age to 18. If young Americans exercise their right to vote to a greater
degree than they have in the past, they can be a force in preventing military
adventurism by middle-aged policy makers.  STEPHEN A. DECTER Princeton, N.J.,
July 8, 1980

*

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUR READY DEFENDERS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 187 words


To the Editor:

There's one major point that seems to have been left out of the argument over
draft registration, which has been fought out on the editorial pages of
newspapers across the country in recent weeks.

As Patrick Lacefield stated in his letter to The Times published July 8,
''Patriotism ... involves caring enough about one's country to argue and agitate
for another course of action, to raise one's voice when a mistake has been
made....''

What Mr. Lacefield and others have failed to mention in their defensive
reproaches to draft registration advocates is the degree to which the vast
majority of American youths love and care about the future of their country.

If there ever was a real threat to this nation's security, the apparent
resistance to the draft would cease to exist, and enlistment in our armed forces
would soar to heights never before thought possible in a free country.

Could the negative reaction to registration be merely a result of the
Administration's adding insult to injury in its treatment of a post-Vietnam
American youth?
PATRICIA L. EISLER, Larchmont, N.Y., July 11, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MUSKIE AND BRZEZINSKI

BYLINE: By Leslie Gelb; Leslie Gelb, a senior associate at the Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace, was formerly director of the State
Department's Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs. This article was adapted from
one to appear in The Washington Quarterly, published by Georgetown University's
Center for Strategic and International Studies.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5698 words


When Edward Muskie began moving into his new job as Secretary of State this
spring, President Carter, according to his aides, believed that the former
Senator would try to persuade him to bar Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national
security adviser, from making public speeches. So Mr. Carter pre-empted Mr.
Muskie, told him that Mr.  Brzezinski's public profile would, indeed, be
lowered, but added that the national security adviser would continue to play a
public role.

At a subsequent meeting, the issue was raised again. White House aides, in
confirming the story, quote the President as saying: ''I need Zbig to speak out
publicly. He can go after my enemies. He can protect my flanks.''

The conclusion seems inescapable that, during the Muskie reign at the State
Department, there will continue to be confusion over whose voice is the
authoritative one in matters of foreign policy - Mr.  Muskie's or Mr.
Brzezinski's; the same confusion that existed between Mr. Brzezinski and Mr.
Muskie's predecessor, Cyrus R. Vance; the same confusion that has, in recent
years, hampered the successful conduct of the foreign policy of the United
States.

It would be a mistake to think that either the initial maneuvering on the part
of Mr. Muskie or the previous pulling and tugging of Mr.  Brzezinski and Mr.
Vance was simply a matter of personalities vying for power or influence. At a
deeper level, these struggles are part of a continuing story of two
institutions: the White House, in the form of the national security adviser,
along with his National Security Council staff; and the Secretary of State,
along with his department. The story is, really, a replay of the historical
conflict between palace guard and king's ministers, between any personal staff
and the line officers. But, at a deeper level still, it is a story about
Presidents: their wants, their needs as they perceive them and their ability to
resolve or cope with inevitable conflict.

Every newly elected American President over the last 20 years has expressed the
belief that he must vest the authority for making the nation's foreign policy
clearly and firmly in the Department of State. In this sense, the Presidents
have echoed the recommendations of most public commissions, organizational
experts and foreign-policy commentators who have addressed the problem of how to
organize the foreign-policy apparatus of the executive branch. But none of these
Presidents, from Kennedy to Carter, has ever followed through. Why?  Is the
State Department incapable of playing such a leading policy role? If it is
incapable of making policy so as to satisfy the White House, should the
President simply ignore the high-minded advice of the foreign-policy experts and
give the power to his national security adviser, who may be more attuned to
White House politics?  Or is there another alternative?

With the appointment of Mr. Muskie, all of these issues are alive again, and the
question is not only: ''Will Mr. Muskie now win out over Mr. Brzezinski where
Mr. Vance could not or did not?'' But also: ''Should he win out?''

Although President Carter did not agree to silence ''Zbig'' as Mr.  Muskie
requested, the imposing 6-foot-4 man from Maine did win some interesting initial
skirmishes. He obtained permission from the President, for example, to review
the minutes of the White House meetings for which he will serve as chairman,
rather than having the minutes seen and approved by Mr. Brzezinski alone before
being given to the President. The wonder, of course, is that neither the
previous Secretary of State nor Defense Secretary Harold Brown had that right in
the first place.

This was a very touchy subject with Mr. Brzezinski. When it was raised by one of
Mr. Muskie's aides at a Camp David meeting with the President, the outspoken
adviser shot back at the aide: ''Are you questioning my integrity or the
integrity of my staff?'' The aide merely repeated his suggestion.

And Mr. Muskie took some hard shots at Mr. Brzezinski's deputy, David Aaron,
including getting the national security adviser to curtail Mr. Aaron's
longstanding and prominent role in certain continuing negotiations with the
Western Europeans. This was a reaction to past embarrassments that these two
gentlemen had tendered to State Department officials, such as pointedly
excluding ambassadors from meetings with leaders of countries to which they were
accredited. In Washington parlance, if one can do these kinds of things and get
away with them, that is power.

Mr. Muskie and his close political associates acted from the start like men with
power, and they showed signs of looking for a showdown, wanting to prove their
point while almost everyone was saying good things about the new Secretary and
few were propping up the national security adviser. Mr. Brzezinski, on the other
hand, put out the word that if Mr. Muskie had problems, it must not be with him
but with the President's policies. He also warned, through the press, that Mr.
Muskie should avoid falling into the clutches of ''the Vance clique'' at the
State Department, lest he be led astray and into senseless struggles. Meanwhile,
the veteran of more than three years of maneuvering against Cyrus Vance dodged
direct confrontations with his successor.

In recent weeks, however, the Muskie and Brzezinski camps have been leaking
conflicting stories to the press. While Mr. Brzezinski and his associates on the
N.S.C. have insisted that relations with the State Department have never been
better, Mr. Muskie's people have been complaining that ''Zbig'' is still trying
to steal the limelight from their boss, and that President Carter has assisted
him by making Mr. Brzezinski the Administration's foreign-policy spokesman to
the Democratic Party Platform Committee and by giving him a prominent public
role at the recent Venice summit meeting. Mr.  Brzezinski has responded to these
complaints by telling the press that Mr. Muskie cannot play a primary role in
formulating foreign policy because he is too new to his job to have mastered the
subject. Indeed, it is true that Mr. Muskie, who lacks a firm background in
foreign affairs, is not putting in the long hours to prepare himself for
foreign-policy debates within the Administration that Mr. Vance used to and Mr.
Brzezinski still does.  Mr. Muskie's own description, according to his aides, of
how he intended to deal with the power struggle was as follows: ''The way to
establish yourself around this town is not to worry about turf, but to fill
space.'' Mr. Muskie has tried to be seen and heard regularly, unlike Mr. Vance,
who generally felt uncomfortable in a public role.  For example, Mr. Muskie has
reinstated the old tradition of holding, whenever possible, a ''background''
briefing for regular State Department reporters late on Friday afternoon.
Reporters sprawl comfortably around the Secretary's spacious front office, and
Mr.  Muskie answers their questions, over drinks, on a not-for-attribution
basis.

There has been no open clash, as yet, with Mr. Brzezinski over specific
policies. No one wants to jeopardize the President's reelection by creating the
impression that the White House is divided. But the new Secretary's views are
quite close to the old Secretary's. Both Mr. Muskie and Mr. Vance are lawyers by
training, both are pragmatic Democratic Party liberals by outlook, and both are
inclined to try to see the other side's point of view and work out differences
by negotiation. When it comes to dealing with the Soviet Union, for example, Mr.
Muskie, like Mr. Vance, is inclined to maintain diplomatic contacts, to keep
talking and looking for openings to settle disputes. One of Secretary Muskie's
first acts was to press for a meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A.
Gromyko, a meeting Mr. Brzezinski opposed until very late in the deliberations.
President Carter finally agreed to the session, which was held in Vienna in May.
In Mr. Brzezinski's initial judgment, no matter how tough Mr. Muskie was with
Mr. Gromyko, the very fact of agreeing to the meeting would be read in Moscow
and around the world as a sign of weakening American resolve to get Soviet
troops out of Afghanistan.

But Mr. Muskie is more political than Mr. Vance in the way he goes about making
the case for maintaining diplomatic contacts. More than his predecessor, the new
Secretary goes out of his way to show that he is aware of the Soviet menace, and
he talks of the need for tough bargaining. Having served as chairman of the
previously untried and untested Senate Budget Committee, in which capacity he
brought liberals and conservatives to yearly agreement, he is experienced at
making himself a difficult target.

Mr. Muskie is said by aides to be well aware of the shortcomings of the State
Department when it comes to politics. He brought over Leon Billings, his top
political adviser in the Senate, to apply some corrective. Mr. Billings's office
is right behind his boss's, and part of his job is to see to it that Mr. Muskie
does not look as if he has become the captive of Foreign Service officers. Old
hands at the State Department are said to be trying to weigh him down with
mounds of paper, but Mr. Billings has confounded them and complains about not
getting enough paper. When Mr. Muskie and Mr. Billings need help, they look to
Berl Bernhard, a respected Washington attorney who managed Mr. Muskie's 1972
Presidential bid. Mr. Bernhard has not left his law practice, but on most days
he spends a few hours over at the State Department.

These men talk the same language as President Carter's political aides,
discussing - with colorful four-letter words - who gets what and what do we get
in return. While Mr. Muskie himself has kept clear of the hassling with the
N.S.C. staff, Mr. Billings and Mr. Bernhard make calls to the President's key
aides, such as Jody Powell and Jack Watson, and to Mr. Brzezinski and Mr. Aaron
to insure that their boss's views and prerogatives are clearly understood. Mr.
Muskie and his associates arem, in their bones, political, and they are trying
to limit Mr. Brzezinski's authority, especially as it is perceived publicly.
Mr. Brzezinski can by no means be counted out, however, because, as Henry
Kissinger wrote in his memoirs, ''every President since Kennedy seems to have
trusted his White House aides more than his Cabinet.'' The reasons have to do
with domestic and bureaucratic politics. This is not to say that Presidents
always make foreign policy for political advantage. Contrary to endemic
Washington cynicism about such matters, my own experience, working in the United
States Senate and the Pentagon as well as in the State Department, has been that
Presidents are usually quite high-minded about the national interest and are
often quite prepared to take political lumps for doing what they believe is
right. But what is right has to win support, and Presidents often find that the
State Department, with occasional exceptions, does a poor job of framing its
proposals in terms that will elicit domestic support, and of thinking about
potential political costs to the President.

For example, the State Department would be hesitant to justify United States aid
to the new leftist junta in Nicaragua strictly in terms of stopping Communism,
because that would not be well-received in Nicaragua. The National Security
Council staff would be much less hesitant, since the anti-Communist rationale
would protect the President's political flanks in Congress.

It is, of course, possible that Foreign Service officers, and certainly the
political appointees to the State Department, could learn to think more
politically, but the irrepressible ethos of the department seems to require that
it look outside the United States, not inward. I have generally found that
staffers from the Department of State or Defense or from the Central
Intelligence Agency behave very differently if they are moved to the White
House. They become far more conscious of Presidential stakes and interests when
in residence on Pennsylvania Avenue. It is not a question of learning politics
but, rather, a matter of being at the White House and knowing specifically what
politicians there are thinking about at a particular time.

A good example of this is the divergence between the views of the White House
and N.S.C. staff, on the one hand, and those of the State Department, on the
other, about how to handle the situation of the American hostages in Iran. In
the first few months, key participants from all agencies accepted the need for a
period of private exchanges with the Iranian leaders without increasing the
levels of sanctions or public rhetoric. But, as the months wore on and
Presidential candidates began to exclaim against ''Carter's do-nothing policy,''
the perspectives of the two buildings began to affect policy in conflicting
ways. The State Department tried to define the issue from a long-term
perspective, arguing that if we did not alienate the new regime, there would be
a reasonable chance that the hostages would be released eventually and that Iran
would gravitate back toward the United States' orbit. Its advice was not to back
Iranian authorities into a corner with further sanctions or tougher rhetoric.
The White House and N.S.C. people, however, began to define the problem in terms
of America's impotence before a third-rate state and argued that unless the
President took firm action, such as declaring a naval blockade, American
credibility in the world would suffer -as would the President's electoral
chances. In order simply to retain some influence with the President, and to
limit the damage, the State Department felt it had to go along with much of what
the White House staff was proposing.

The different approaches became irreconcilable when Secretary Vance stood alone
against Mr. Brzezinski (and all of the President's other top advisers, to be
sure) in opposing the commando mission to rescue the hostages. On one level, the
Vance resignation was simply a rejection of the idea that the hostages could be
freed without making new hostages of the other Americans in Teheran and possibly
of captured commandos. On another, Mr. Vance was making a statement that force
was not the way to solve a problem created and sustained by a national nervous
breakdown in Iran, and that the threat or use of force would lead to Iranian
calls for Soviet help. On yet a third level, it seems to me that Mr. Vance was
implicitly calling attention to the apparent ascendancy of domestic political
concerns - that is, the President's need in an election year to show that he is
tough and decisive - over the nation's diplomatic and long-term interests.
American Presidents typically discover that the advice of their State
Departments stresses bilateral and long-term relationships with other nations
and regions. Many regional experts in the department, for instance, opposed
President Carter's highly visible human-rights policies as likely to aggravate
mutual relations without improving people's rights. Whereas the department
usually called for quiet diplomacy, the White House and N.S.C. staff often
argued that quiet diplomacy might not be heard at all, and that more public
measures were called for. From the White House perspective, accommodating the
concerns of other countries often comes at the expense of American interests and
values, and anyone who does not appreciate these is regarded as not being tough
enough - or sensitive enough. Presidents usually do not have much patience with
this kind of advice, find they cannot change the State Department's penchant for
it, and soon stop listening.

Another reason Presidents find they cannot look to the State Department and its
Secretary for the formulation of policy is that the department simply is not
sufficiently informed or well-situated to make the trade-offs of international
economic policy. As many organizational experts have observed, foreign policy is
increasingly concerned with international economic - and therefore domestic
political -considerations. Neither the Treasury nor the Commerce Department, for
example, will take direction from the State Department on issues it deems vital.
Beyond that, no Administration is going to let the Secretary of State decide
which domestic constituency is going to gain in international trade negotiations
or commodity arrangements. Nor will the Pentagon take orders from the State
Department on military or arms-control issues. All of these matters can be
adjudicated only through the interagency system headed by the N.S.C. staff.

Furthermore, new Presidents and their staffs soon start to search for
opportunities for leadership, areas in which to demonstrate that the President
is on top of things and making policy. When this game is played, the loser is
almost invariably the State Department and not, for example, the Pentagon. It is
difficult for the President and his N.S.C and Office of Management and Budget to
get on top of the defense budget. It is made up of thousands of detailed
programs put together by thousands of staffers, and it is boring. To do more
than scratch the surface of a few front-page military issues would require a
much larger White House staff than any President would want to contemplate.
Foreign policy, on the other hand, is largely a matter of words, and the
President and his staffers can step in at any time and put the words together
themselves.  The temptation for the President and his staff to short-circuit the
process and make policy themselves - and to make it quickly - is often
irresistible. This is particularly so when the White House realizes that the
State Department is not very good at making policy. Despite the well-deserved
reputation of Foreign Service officers as people of exceptional ability, few
have the ability or are trained to formulate policy - or are even interested in
doing so. The ethos of maintaining flexibility is exceptionally strong in the
diplomatic profession, and the more flexibility one seeks, the more vacuous the
policy. Policy is purposeful behavior - something specific is to be achieved by
making certain maneuvers and sacrifices. Flexibility, when sought almost as an
end in itself, means to ride the waves and make the best of whatever happens.
While most politicians also stress flexibility, Presidents are not most
politicians. They are seeking accomplishments in their terms of office. Behind
the last five Presidents I have observed, there have been N.S.C. and White House
staffs continually arguing that the State Department does not really help much
in policy making.

It is probable that, in their first year of office, recent Presidents have
concluded that they cannot rely on anyone in the State Department below the
Secretary - and perhaps one or two others as well. Presidents Carter, Gerald R.
Ford and Richard M. Nixon very rarely had meetings to discuss policy with
Assistant Secretaries of State, the people who are responsible for making the
connections between policy and action in the machinery. This puts the Secretary
in a horrendous position. Either he can dissociate himself from his own
department in order to preserve his standing with the President, thereby letting
his institution flounder, or he can become an advocate for his department and
end up being suspect himself. John Foster Dulles, Dean Rusk and Henry Kissinger
came close to doing the former, and William Rogers pretty much did the latter.
Cyrus Vance fell between the two stools. In none of these instances was it a
happy situation.  Purists in the State Department and elsewhere maintain that
the President can come close to re-creating by fiat the conditions of the 1940's
and 1950's, when Secretaries of State were dominant, by enhancing the power of
the Secretary and specifically by limiting the activities of the national
security adviser. The list of limitations would include: no acting as chairman
of interagency meetings, very restricted accessibility to the press, no foreign
travel, no N.S.C.  channels to foreign counterparts or ambassadors in
Washington, and strictly limited contacts with Congress. Such restrictions, it
is argued, would not constrain the national security adviser's input on policy
matters, given his close personal relationship with the President, nor would
they hamper his role as coordinator of policy; but if they were put into effect,
the Secretary of State would enjoy greater public stature, which could reinforce
his standing with the President as well.

What President, however, would be prepared to foreclose a chief adviser from
these activities? It is too easy to think of exigencies where the President
would want his national security adviser to deal specifically with the press,
Congress and foreign diplomats, and too difficult to list these circumstances in
a contract. It is also easy to recite a whole host of issues where departmental
interests overlap and there is little alternative to the national security
adviser's serving as chairman of interagency meetings.

It is reasonable to expect, however, that this adviser should not be allowed to
make public speeches, to be interviewed on radio and television broadcasts, or
perhaps even to be quoted by name. To permit such public statements and exposure
is to invite comparisons to the Secretary of State.

It also stands to reason that the Secretary should be able to set his own terms
for including and excluding the national security adviser's staff from meetings
with foreign leaders. To make this point, Mr. Muskie went out of his way to
exclude his own aides from the recent meeting in Vienna with Soviet Foreign
Minister Gromyko in order also to exclude Mr. Brzezinski's deputies. Unlike Mr.
Vance, Mr. Muskie was not going to tolerate a situation in which one of Mr.
Brzezinski's aides could sit in on a meeting and report on it to the President
before the Secretary himself could report. Mr. Vance had allowed this practice
to develop in the spirit of harmony with Mr.  Brzezinski. But, after some
Vance-Gromyko meetings, Mr. Vance would return to Washington amid rumors that
the President was unhappy about his performance, and suspicions would be raised
that this had something to do with Mr. Brzezinski's prior account to the
President of what had transpired.

The N.S.C. staff's responsibility to ''cover'' memoranda from Cabinet officers
in order to provide other points of view, missing facts, etc., is extremely
influential - even on an alert President.  This power to prejudice the Prince
has always inhered in the household staff, and it gives the national security
adviser an unmatchable advantage. He can spread gossip to the news media and
Congress, and most people will presume that he is speaking for the President or
simply repeating what the President said.

There is nothing to be gained, however, by trying to reduce the national
security adviser to the good, old high-priced clerk he used to be in the 1950's.
Presidents probably will not and certainly should not deny themselves a
top-flight, policy-oriented national security adviser in order to protect a weak
Secretary of State.

On the other hand, there are serious problems with expanding or formalizing the
role of the national security adviser. Unlike the State Department, the N.S.C.
staff provides breadth but little depth. The adviser has a staff of about 35
professionals, compared with several thousand in the State Department. It is
dangerous to make policy from an inadequate basis of knowledge. Moreover, it is
difficult enough, as matters now stand, for the State Department to make the
case for long-term United States interests; it would be impossible if State's
role were reduced further. Also, to give the adviser formal policy-making
authority would necessitate his being available to Congress on at least the same
terms as the Secretary of State. That would not only raise problems regarding
the confidentiality of his working relationship with the President, but it would
consume a substantial amount of time, leaving less time for de facto policy
making and reducing his advantage over the Secretary of State. Finally and most
important, it would destroy any semblance of order.  Certain elementary notions
of organization can be disregarded only at great peril. To anoint the national
security adviser as Secretary of State for Policy would make it impossible for
the Secretary to run the State Department; he would not be regarded as
authoritative by his own people. It would also have a deadening effect on all
diplomatic contacts.  Whether it is good, right or effective, real power
gravitates to the person whose policy views and style prevail with the
President, and recommendations on organization should never stray far from this
reality. The tone of any administration, its bureaucratic rivalries and the
public perception of its policies will flow in large measure from relations of
the top three aides (the Secretaries of State and Defense, and the national
security adviser) to each other and to the President. No matter how close they
are at the outset, personally and politically, institutional pulls will generate
friction among them. The differences are manageable - and even desirable -as
long as the President can keep them under control and knows what he wants.  If,
however, the differences between two key advisers become deep and fundamental,
it is quite difficult for any President to stay in control without removing one
of the contenders.

President-elect Jimmy Carter stressed that his top three nationalsecurity
positions would be filled by men who were compatible with him and each other.
Judged in terms of what Mr. Vance, Mr.  Brzezinski and Harold Brown had been
saying for two or three years before the Carter Administration, Mr. Carter had
every reason to believe that all of their views were quite similar. It soon
became apparent, however, that all three were, to varying degrees, to the right
of Mr. Carter on most matters.

The gap between the President and his senior advisers was visible to many who
attended Cabinet-level meetings in the White House during the first year of the
Administration. For example, all of the President's Cabinet-level appointees and
almost all of the appointees on the second and third tiers were (1) opposed to
Mr. Carter's decision to withdraw United States troops from South Korea, but
were barred by him from even raising the issue; (2) in favor of increasing
defense spending by 3 percent in real terms, as opposed to Mr.  Carter's desire
to make cuts, and pursued this point for two years before the President fully
relented, and (3) were stunned by Mr.  Carter's announcement at an early press
conference that he would seek demilitarization of the Indian Ocean, and worked
to get the President to backpedal on this by making demilitarization an ultimate
objective and a freeze on Soviet and American forces the proximate goal. Even on
the issue of human rights, Mr. Vance felt compelled, some months into the
Administration, to give a speech defining that policy in very practical and
limited terms, as distinguished from the President's more absolutist rhetoric.

At first, the situation was containable because the positions Mr.  Brzezinski
was taking on many other issues were still close to President Carter's,
particularly in the areas of arms sales, human rights and nuclear
nonproliferation. For more than two years prior to the Carter Administration,
Mr. Brzezinski had been writing articles and making speeches attacking Henry
Kissinger for making indiscriminate arms sales, for not being more vocal in
pressing for human rights in other nations, for not being tough enough on our
allies in preventing the spread of nuclear weapons and for being preoccupied
with American-Soviet relations at the expense of other issues. These were the
policies that Mr. Brzezinski argued for strenuously in the early months of the
Carter Administration, policies that the President also favored. But they were
the policies Mr. Brzezinski was later to disown, telling reporters and
legislators that they had been the work of the State Department.

The first noticeable conflict was our response to Soviet logistical support for
Cuban and Ethiopian troops fighting against Somali guerrillas in the Ogaden
region of Ethiopia. Mr. Brzezinski argued for dispatching a carrier task force
to the area to intimidate the Soviets, and for taking further actions as
necessary. Mr. Vance and Mr. Brown argued against this because, among other
reasons, the United States was not in a good political position to use force to
protect the Somalis, who were the aggressors. While Mr. Vance did everything he
could to play down the dispute, Mr. Brzezinski and some of Mr. Vance's aides
began squaring off. President Carter proved unable either to make a choice
between the two positions or to blend them into one coherent approach. From then
on, there was a tension between the State Department and the N.S.C. that
transcended organizational questions.

By the end of his first year in office, suspicions began to spread that Mr.
Carter was not in control, despite all the denials of a Vance-Brzezinski clash.
It was at this point that Mr. Carter should have decided either to keep both men
and restructure his organizational setup - i.e., accommodate conflicting
viewpoints -or to fire one or both of them. But the President chose to do
nothing, and his Administration fell into obvious disarray.

Mr. Vance was always prepared to go into a meeting and slug it out, but
afterward there would be handshakes and courtesies. His message to the State
Department never varied: ''Don't believe it if you hear that someone in the
White House is saying bad things about you. Even if they are, don't respond. It
will only make matters worse. Damp down those stories about differences with
'Zbig.' We're all in this together and it's difficult enough.'' Whenever Mr.
Vance heard of an anti-White House leak by someone in the State Department, the
culprit would be summoned to the Secretary's small inner office for a
tonguelashing.

Mr. Brzezinski and some of his closest aides, or so we in the State Department
were told by many journalists and Congressmen, were saying that Mr. Vance and
his inner circle had been mesmerized by Vietnam, that they were afraid to use
force, that they did not understand power, and that they favored making
concessions to the Soviet Union because they wanted to keep the peace at any
price.

There was an occasion, more than a year ago, when Mr. Brzezinski convinced
President Carter that a series of leaks critical of his policy on Iran and other
areas was coming from the State Department.  The President summoned about 25
officials, myself included, from the upper levels of the department, repeated
the accusations without allowing us the opportunity to say that our information
was that most of the leaks were springing closer to his own office, and
concluded, in effect: ''If there are any more leaks in any more of your areas, I
will fire you, whether or not you are innocent.'' The well had been poisoned.

President Carter faces the same problem now with Mr. Muskie as he did with Mr.
Vance. If he wants his Secretary of State to be the clearly paramount
foreign-policy figure under him, he must go out of his way, as no President
since Eisenhower has chosen to, to help the Secretary sustain such a role. If,
however, the President is leaning toward his national security adviser as his
primary policy formulator, he must go out of his way to put himself forward as
the man in charge, as Presidents Kennedy and, until Watergate, Nixon did. For,
if the adviser plays too public a role, it becomes increasingly difficult to
conduct orderly business and to understand whose policy is authoritative. The
President has to provide a cover by being more active himself.

By failing to do either during Mr. Vance's tenure, President Carter invited
total disarray - a disarray that still lingers, although in more muted form, now
that Mr. Muskie is Secretary of State.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of Edmund S. Muskie and Zbigniew Brzezinski

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NONFICTION IN BRIEF;
by Eve Auchincloss

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1602 words


A TALENT TO DECEIVE An Appreciation of Agatha Christie.  By Robert Barnard.  213
pp. New York: Dodd, Mead & Co. $10.

One thing Agatha Christie couldn't bear to write about in her reticent
''Autobiography'' was her famous disappearance in 1926; whether it was a
publicity stunt, revenge on a faithless husband, amnesia or a more complex
psychological flight from unbearable losses is uncertain. Whatever the cause,
says Robert Barnard in his elegantly perceptive appreciation of the author most
read after the Bible and Shakespeare, she was determined to reveal little of
herself.

The obsessive privacy that made her hide her own attitudes and remain apart from
her characters was one of the strengths of her writing. A recent guide to
fiction that rates Mrs. Christie low on characterization and even lower on
literary merit misses the point, Mr. Barnard would say; for the classic English
detective story can't be judged as a novel. It's a puzzle in fictional form,
like the jigsaws that were all the rage between the wars, to which the reader
must pay strict attention. The characters should be just interesting enough to
engage us, not a bit more - rather like the homely brushwork of Magritte,
another puzzle maker who paints just ''well'' enough to sustain illusion.

Besides, Dame Christie is a superb plotter who never fails to distract attention
from the clues that would give the game away, because she put in months of
''broody'' brainwork before setting down her puzzle on paper. ''One is a
tradesman,'' she said, ''in a good, honest trade.'' She was without vainglory,
snobbery or showy specialization; if things aren't so cozy as they look, they
are always rooted in ordinary life. She keeps her readers' confidence because
she plays fair, appealing not to a relish for violence but to the faculty of
reason. Edmund Wilson sneered, in a famous essay, ''Who cares who killed Roger
Ackroyd?'' Some don't; but for many others, there is an emotional satisfaction
in Agatha Christie's fictions something like that found in music - her second
love - with its building tensions and resolutions.
'FASTNET, FORCE 10' By John Rousmaniere.  Illustrated. 287 pp. New York: W.W.
Norton & Co. $12.95.

The Fastnet Race is sailed between Cowes and Fastnet Rock at Ireland's southern
tip. Last August, 303 yachts started the 600-mile course on a fine Saturday
morning. A remnant finished it. Late Monday, as they scudded across the Western
Approaches, a deepening atmospheric depression sped toward them from the
southwest. It had left the Great Plains four days earlier, killing a woman in
Central Park as it passed. When it crossed the path of the racing yachts it was
packing Force 10 winds - 50 knots or better -and building a sea of very steep
40-foot breaking waves. After midnight it swerved northwest, creating a second
army of waves, 45 degrees off the first.

Where these monstrous seas sawed against each other in the dark more than 100
boats were knocked down flat, 77 rolled over like toys. Masts and rudders
snapped off, skulls cracked, tons of water roared aboard. Men in the cockpit,
fragilely secured by safety harnesses, were flung overboard. ''What a silly way
to die,'' one thought, hanging upside down over the side in his harness while
the sea bashed him. The stunned crews of 24 broken yachts launched life rafts
-frying pan to fire. Yet 136 men who would have perished in the wild waters were
saved by heroic life boats, helicopters, ships and fellow yachts.

The 15 who died may have reflected that it was a silly death, certainly
unexpected, but they needn't have blamed themselves as others eagerly did,
claiming the race should have been canceled, that modern yachts sacrifice
stability for speed, that panicky green crews abandoned seaworthy vessels. John
Rousmaniere, who was there on a fortunate boat that finished the race, has
written a gripping book of hair-raising, sometimes heart-breaking anecdote and
cool analysis that dismantles these smug charges. Those who survived were more
lucky than clever; the sea is still ungovernable.
THE HAND BOOK By Linda Lee and James Charlton.  Illustrated. 320 pp. New York:
Prentice-Hall. $9.95.

The Bruning and Kaeppel test for left- or right-handedness has you twirl both
hands in the same direction. Pretty soon the subordinate hand will falter and
reverse. ''The Hand Book'' suffers from the same division. One of the two hands
that wrote it discusses how language and right-handedness evolved hand-in-hand;
the value of touch in healing; changing views of masturbation, clapping,
tickling, graphology, thumb-sucking, divination, forks, greetings and farewells.
The other hand is sweatily facetious. It loves tiresome lists: things not to do
in public, types of waves, power props, power gestures. The sober stuff redeems
this silliness.

Early man was ambidextrous, but as he became homo faber he began to favor his
right hand and use language and graphics, all controlled by the brain's left
lobe. The left-handed minority endures lively prejudice against what is
sinister, gauche, left. The language of gesture, scarcely spoken in the north,
is not universal. When a Frenchman lifts his little finger to signify a
homosexual, it's a visual pun: ''p.d.'' (petit doigt) sounds like ''pede''
(pederast); a Brazilian more grossly layers his hands, palms down, thumbs
flying; an Italian pulls an earlobe. In counting, the thumb is 1 to some
nations, 5 to others, for whom either forefinger or little finger is 1,
depending.

A touch test worked out by the authors and administered to an unscientific
sampling of 70 people confirmed what students of social behavior had already
remarked: that Jews touch most, Wasps least; that children are no longer touched
when they stop being cute; that, once broken, the touch bond can't be
re-established. In our culture, which distrusts the healing hand, chiropractors
and such proponents of touching as Wilhelm Reich are dismissed as quacks. But a
young nurse who says it makes her feel good to brush some sick soul's teeth or
put Vaseline on his lips might not be surprised to learn that when you stroke a
pet its pulse and respiration are slowed, and so are yours.
DUNKIRK The Patriotic Myth.  By Nicholas Harman.  Illustrated. 271 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $12.95.

Hundreds of elderly Englishmen made their 40th annual expedition to France last
May to commemorate not a victory -even Churchill's oratory didn't make it that -
but a deliverance. During 9 sunny days in 1940, 340,000 beaten soldiers on the
run were plucked off the beaches and piers of Dunkirk and taken home to fight
another day. The ''Dunkirk spirit,'' a powerful instant myth, gave Britain
courage to face the punishing war years ahead; it could never have survived the
sort of press coverage devoted to Vietnam. There was gallantry and pluck, to be
sure, but humanly mixed with cowardice, selfishness and a high-level treachery
that explains why the French may not welcome their old visitors with open arms.
Nicholas Harman's level-headed book, based on reminiscence, memoir and official
history, sorts out what really happened.

The stuporous phony war ended on May 10, 1940, when the Germans plunged into the
Low Countries. The Allies, who had declared war without adequate equipment or
strategic objectives, collapsed before a brilliantly organized army and airforce
that had plenty of both.  Total failure of communication between the British and
French and their governments compounded a chaotic muddle. The failure was in
part deliberate; for while the French fought a delaying action, the British
decided to skedaddle. It took the French, holding the Germans off outside
Dunkirk, a week to find out what their allies were up to: The deception was
systematic and from the top.

The Royal Navy's more admirable part in the rout was a piece of inspired
improvisation that succeeded in the teeth of dive bombing, mines and torpedoes.
Fine weather helped; the outclassed RAF did not, much; the famous fleet of small
boats manned by civilians is mostly one of those myths, or falsehoods, that
helped win World War II.

They do history no good. It is salutary to discover the honorable part played by
the maligned Leopold of Belgium, who as head of his army remained with it to
surrender as a prisoner of war, and what Churchill was really up to while he
vowed, in his ghastly French, that the Allies would always march arm in arm.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND OPINION THE INITIATIVE PROCESS: NO SUBSTITUTE FOR GOOD

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 14, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words


GOVERNMENT

By WILLARD L. HOGEBOOM

TWO years ago in Suffolk County, voters passed an initiative law to permit
citizens to initiate legislation - that is, to circulate petitions among the
public to have proposed laws, in this case changes in the County Charter,
presented to the voters to pass or reject. The proposal itself was hastily
approved to put on the ballot by the County Legislature in a late-night session
later judged by the State Supreme Court ''to render the legislative process
farcical and to invite public disrespect.''

In doing this, the Legislature was acting under pressure from groups that
apparently misunderstood the nature of the proposal and thought it would reduce
taxes like California's Proposition 13, which had gained national notoriety and
envy a few months before.

The first use of this law may come this fall. The Supervisors of the 10 Suffolk
County towns are seeking to put a proposal on the ballot to abolish the Suffolk
County Legislature so that they can run the county themselves. Also, the move is
under way to establish initiative laws in Nassau County and at the state level.

Suffolk County rushed into the initiative two years ago. Now all politicians and
voters should carefully examine the initiative before jumping on the bandwagon.

The initiative originated in the Western states in the late 1800's, and today
three-fourths of the states that have it are in the West.  When those states
were new, they had weak party systems and their state governments were easy prey
to powerful monied interests and to corruption. The initiative, therefore, was a
necessary device to counter those influences by the voters.

Yet it too was often abused. It is reported that the 1910 South Dakota ballot
had six feet of initiative proposals to be voted on.  Even today in California,
for the last two decades, the average number of propositions on each ballot has
exceeded 20 each year.

The initiative is designed to short-cut the legislative process, and that is one
of the things wrong with it. When a proposed bill goes through a legislature, it
is subjected to a variety of checks and balances, of compromises in its wording,
of public hearings and legislative debates. A legislative body is made up of
representatives from different areas with differing conflicting interests. In
order to get enough support to pass, a proposed law is revised many times to
appeal to a wide variety of those interests.

This is not the case with initiative laws. Compromise is not a feature of this
approach because such proposals usually represent the demands of some special
interest group that rejects the concept of compromise inherent in the
legislative process. Unlike the legislative laws, which tend to be lengthy,
initiative proposals must be presented to the voters in as few words as possible
on a yes-no, allor-nothing basis.

Once the issue gets before the public, there is seldom any real debate because
its supporters and their opponents generally oversimplify their positions and
try to appeal to voters' emotions.  This is what happened with such recent
initiative proposals as women's equal rights in Florida, busing in
Massachusetts, homosexual rights in Miami, capital punishment in Oregon and
restrictions on nuclear power plants in California.

In addition, victory usually goes to the side with the most money.  In a recent
California proposal to ban smoking in public places, the tobacco industry spent
over $5 million to successfully defeat it.

Another problem involved with the initiative process is the declining percentage
of voters who actually vote each year. According to the Board of Elections in
Suffolk County, where the initiative is likely to be used this fall, more than
two-fifths of the registered voters did not vote in the last two elections.
Nationally, fewer than half the eligible voters have been going to the polls in
recent years. This is not the time to be putting important decisions to the
voters through the initiative process.

Declining participation by voters and the use of the initiative are both
symptoms of the fact that many people feel alienated from and distrustful toward
government. It is generally during periods when people believe that government
is unresponsive to them that they seek short cuts to the legislative process.

The ''will of the people'' expressed under such conditions is often no more than
a moment's majority. The 1960's protest movements mistakenly believed ''power to
the people'' was pure democracy when, in fact, democracy involves reason,
tolerance and self-restraint, while ''power to the people'' movements were
generally irrational, intolerant and self-centered.

The current dissatisfaction with the legislative process is a result of having
gone too far in the 1960's in challenging the institutions of authority in
society, tearing them down, laying bare their faults, however trivial. As a
result, it is a nearly impossible task for society to be governed today.

The initiative process is a short-term solution that treats the symptoms but not
the basic problems. The post-Vietnam, post-Watergate distrust of politics and
intense scrutiny of politicians have handicapped the functioning of government
in this country, and government must function because there is no real
alternative.

Over the last several years, laws have been enacted at all governmental levels
to try to guarantee near-saintliness in government leaders, but people must
realize that there can be no such guarantee. All that has been accomplished is
that many good people have left government in frustration.

The obvious answer is that the public must begin to show some trust in its
leaders and leave them some room to govern. In the meantime, such legislative
short cuts as initiative laws may appease public dissatisfaction with
government, but they are no substitute for good government itself.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Willard L. Hogeboom is a teacher at Babylon High School.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION A STRATEGY FOR HUMAN RELATIONS

BYLINE: By ALFRED W. VAN SINDEREN

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 16, Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2331 words


WHY have we not accomplished more? Why did the civil rights movement stall in
the 1970's? Part of the answer is that the minority agenda has changed, and now
some white people perceive that agenda as a direct threat to their economic
security.

The concerns of minority people and their needs regarding legal and social
justice have been given prominence secondary to the recognition that without
economic parity there can be no real progress.

There are profound implications for whites in that shifting of priorities
-different demands are being made on white people. Demands that are more
personal and, significantly, that directly affect the pocketbook.

The right to vote freely, being allowed to sit anywhere on the bus, winning the
legal tools to fight for fair housing and a good education do not carry the kind
of cost that affirmative action does.

The job a minority person deserves, for a variety of reasons, may be the same
job some white person wants, or wants for his or her children. The perceived
threat to personal goals can easily shake one's philosophical commitment to
social justice.

There is a terrible irony in the timing of this change of agenda.  Just as
minorities begin aggressively to seek their rightful position in the
marketplace, it seems that the national pie is shrinking. It is not just racism
that makes people fear affirmative action; it is not simply that there are more
people going after the same jobs or the same scholarships, or seeking admission
to the same medical or law schools.

There is also the feeling that there just is not as much to go around as there
once was.  So if we are going to convince white people that they must make the
greater sacrifice, to assume a higher personal cost, then we have to explain the
need better than we ever have - it will require a level of interracial and
bicultural understanding and appreciation never before achieved in this country.

I am suggesting that in all the fear, the insecurity, the failure, lies the germ
of a new perspective, a new strategy - founded on that most basic of human
skills: communications.

The new strategy involves a rededication to the concept of individual and
corporate social responsibility. It also requires that we learn about each other
- as real people rather than as statistics, as individuals with dreams and fears
rather than as representatives of our respective races.

Without that, our plans will be made in a vacuum, and success, if it comes at
all, will be accidental.  We are faced with a moral imperative: One cannot be a
just person in an unjust world.  To those for whom morality has scant weight,
let me add a practical imperative: If we continue to fail, if we cannot bend the
will of this great nation to commit its resources to ending racism and poverty,
if we fail to truly understand one another as a foundation for social change,
then I fear for the survival of our society.

There is a phenomenon abroad in the business world called ''corporate social
responsibility.'' For some corporations it is quite old; for others,
nonexistent.

Among those who profess a commitment to responsible corporate action, there are
some, unfortunately, for whom it is simply lip service to quiet the militants.

For others it is the very real understanding of the need to remedy past business
failures, and take an active role in the community.  I want to talk about what
we at Southern New England Telephone are doing because I know the situation
well, and also because we are representative of both the potential and the
limitations inherent in action business may take.

Affirmative action as a corporate priority goes back a long way at Southern New
England Telephone. The initial thrust was to increase the number of blacks
working at the company. There has been solid progress, and we have met our
goals.

But we have discovered we need to do more than that. We have discovered we also
need to create an environment in which blacks can succeed and can advance in
their careers through the management ranks.

Recently we brought in outside consultants to assist us. Based on their work, we
have drawn a number of conclusions that I believe are applicable to any large
institution.

First of all, since there are race-relations problems everywhere in the world,
it comes as no surprise that there are problems at the telephone company.

Because of different needs, experiences and priorities, blacks and whites tend
to think differently about the work experience.  There are some employment
issues, such as one's position at the company, the way one thinks about managers
of the opposite race, one's career path, that blacks and whites think about in
different ways.

There are others, such as hiring and firing, that the two groups think about in
similar ways.  Specifically, and cautiously, I might add, the consultants found
that black managers tend to think more in terms of systems, while white managers
tend to view those systems in individual terms.

For example, discussions about race relations among blacks generally focus on
both white and black issues, how the white organization impacts on race
relations, how decisions are made at the company. White managers tend to view
race relations in terms of specific people they know, and too often see race
relations not as a company issue, but as a black issue.

Black managers may express concerns about the promotional structures, or about
how information is shared formally and informally, while whites talk about their
jobs, their careers, what they as individuals need from other individuals,
rather than how the ''system'' affects them.

It is important to emphasize that neither way of looking at the company is right
or wrong; they are simply different. Both are useful and necessary; neither is
exclusive.

We have also discovered the obvious: Whites tend to have fewer contacts with
minorities than vice versa. There is a tendency on the part of whites to seek
out their own kind, and a corresponding failure to perceive the need to better
understand minorities.

That lack of contact creates a self-sealing experience for whites.  It is too
easy to make positive or negative judgments about minority individuals
unsupported by evidence. Minority people do not have that option, or, if you
wish, luxury.

In some ways I was very fortunate that during World War II, in Hawaii, I served
on a base with 25 white officers, 25 black officers, and 4,000 enlisted black
people. Their basic suspicions about me, and mine about them, just could not
hold up against prolonged and extended contact. In time we began to see each
other as individuals.  To a large extent, the informal social contacts on the
base helped break down an inbred guardedness.

We became friends, and I learned a valuable lesson I have never forgotten: black
people are more distrustful and uneasy about me than I am about them. To break
down suspicions, I must make the first move. Having done so, I find blacks just
as different from each other as whites - there is no stereotype.

In the workplace, however, those suspicions and the lack of informal contact
translate into stereotyped thinking: Blacks somehow make less competent
managers, or women are too soft to be good business people, or Hispanic people
are too emotional to handle pressure.

One reason that blacks, women and Hispanics face more difficulties than white
males in the corporate world can be found in numerous studies about the impact
of being a ''token'' - the only different member of a large group. People who
are ''tokens'' perform their job under public and symbolic conditions different
from those who are dominant.

One well-observed phenomenon is that the dominants tend to draw together to keep
the token slightly outside, which means that crucial information usually shared
informally is often withheld; there is the well-remarked tendency to create
stereotypes - images that the tokens may find easier to live up to than fight.
These conditions result in a higher rate of failure and turnover, a sense of
loneliness on the part of the outsider, and often a feeling of selfestrangement.

The bottom line is: Great care must be taken when setting performance
expectations for any so-called ''token'' individuals, or when designing programs
to help them.

But business cannot do it all. Even as we demand more from business and pray for
as much from government, so must we also demand more from ourselves. Individuals
have the same obligation.

One inevitable result of big government is the loss of personal initiative and
personal responsibility. However, the reality in the 1980's is that the burden
will fall more heavily on individuals.

Let me quote your executive director, William Brown, in the 1978 Urban League
annual report: ''Somehow, we must find ways to build the support of small
sectors and coalitions across communities where there are common issues. The
Urban League must and can be the catalyst to bring together these small groups
and unify them with their common interests.''

The building of coalitions requires individual members of those groups agreeing
to what can be called an individual action plan. So first let us admit that we
don't know each other very well. Even among people of good will, there are too
many assumptions and too little knowledge.

White people see the inner city all the time. We watch it on television, or we
drive through it with our doors locked, our windows shut tight, and our eyes
flicking cautiously from side to side. But there is a saturation point, and like
a doctor examining his or her 500th patient, there is a self-protective shield
against the pain.

Minorities, on the other hand, perhaps pay too little attention to basic white
economic insecurity. Living through the Depression, World War II, Vietnam, and
suffering regular doses of rampant inflation has had the same impact on whites
as on minorities. Many white people today are quite simply afraid for their
economic well-being.

On the other hand, too many white people, not knowing or seeing - or caring -
how the enslavement of a mind can destroy the spirit, complain that minorities
don't take advantage of the opportunities that do exist.

But too many minorities continue to approach the white power structure with the
idea of gaining concessions through assigning guilt. Even if that is morally
acceptable, it has little practical value. The only ones who will listen to that
argument are allies anyway; the others will react defensively - will refuse to
listen, to communicate, to get to know you.

The second thing we need is the will. There is no one but us, and if our wills
are not strong enough to bear the constant frustration, and to continue the work
before us, then we have abandoned many people to lives of despair.

Third, we need to redefine our personal commitments and carefully monitor and
evaluate our own activities, and we need as individuals to assist in the
redefinition of corporate and organizational commitments.

For example:

- Am I, as a white, reaching out to minority people as people, not just as a
distressed segment of the population?

- Are minorities reaching out to whites as people?

- Are blacks, women, and Hispanics targeted, consciously or not, into specific
departments in American corporations, such as public relations, personnel or
law? Do they tend to seek out specific departments?

- Is the Urban League, with its admittedly scarce resources, properly setting
priorities for money and programs?  As always, there are no easy answers. Given
how much has not happened, I find myself questioning the questions.  But we
cannot turn our backs.  Thomas Jefferson once said: ''I have sworn upon the
altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of
man.'' That inscription surrounds the rotunda of the Jefferson Memorial. I have
taken that oath myself.

Poverty is a form of tyranny, and I cannot accept poverty as a necessity of
American life.  Racism is tyrannical, and I will not accept racism as a
fundamental element in this society - and it is a racist society, just as it is
anti-Semitic, anti-Italian, anti-Polish, anti-Hispanic, anti-feminist.

We are becoming a nation of strangers, pulling apart from each other.  It is
time for a change.  We must become a nation of friends. We must draw together as
the Urban League tries hard to have us do. And we must communicate with others
as people; not blacks or whites, males or females, but as people, each alike,
endowed with the spark of human dignity and the spirit of God. To put it simply,
we must love one another, for only love can overcome tyranny.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Alfred W. Van Sinderen is president of the Southern New England Telephone
Company. This was adapted from a recent speech to the Urban League of Greater
Hartford.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DRAFT REGISTRATION IS BEGINNING AMID CONTROVERSY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1362 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 20


About four million young men are scheduled to begin registering tomorrow morning
for a possible military draft amid signs of widespread active and passive
resistance that may cause the Government problems of enforcement.

The major question surrounding the first draft registration in five years is
whether it is constitutional. A Federal court in Philadelphia ruled Friday that
it was unconstitutional because it excluded women.

Associate Justice William F. Brennan Jr. of the Supreme Court decided yesterday
that the Selective Service System could go ahead with registration pending a
decision by the full Supreme Court on an appeal that seeks to reverse the lower
court's ruling. That decision was expected later this year.

Difficulties Enforcing Law

Registration is legally mandatory, according to the Justice Department, which is
responsible for enforcing the draft registration law. But several legal
specialists and antidraft organizations questioned whether it would be practical
to identify, arrest and prosecute alleged violators before the Supreme Court
decided the constitutional issue.

Despite the uncertainty, a vast majority of the men around the nation born in
1960 and 1961 were expected to go to their local post offices to fill out a
brief form. Those born in 1960 have been asked to go this week, while those born
in 1961 have been asked to register next week.

In a survey by correspondents of The New York Times, some young men expressed a
willingness to register because they thought it to be their duty or that it
would be good for the country.

But large numbers of men were unenthusiastic and said that they would register
only because they wanted to avoid prosecution and penalties of up to five years
in prison and a $10,000 fine.

Still others openly said that they would not register and were active in trying
to persuade others not to register. Several nationwide organizations have
planned demonstrations and other tactics to hamper the registration at post
offices.

Finally, a sampling by The New York Times's correspondents suggested that an
unknown number of young men would quietly skip the registration and hope not to
be caught. If they are caught later, they said they would assert that they knew
nothing about it and thus hoped to escape prosecution.

Spokesmen for the Selective Service System have said that they expect at least
98 percent of those affected to comply with the registration law. However, even
that would produce 80,000 potential violators. In the draft for the war in
Vietnam, an estimated 250,000 men failed to register and were not discovered.
Antidraft organizations have predicted that up to 500,000 men might fail to
register this summer.

Therefore, the Selective Service System and Department of Justice may well be
confronted with the problem of identifying thousands of violators, finding them
and prosecuting them. Officials of the Carter Administration have said that no
special plans have been made to enforce the registration law.

Factors Hampering Registration

The registration will begin in a political climate that would appear to
discourage full compliance, with these factors possibly hampering the process:

- The Selective Service System appeared to have had modest success at best in
publicizing the obligation of young men to register.  - The survey by
correspondents of The Times around the country indicated that many of the 34,500
post offices were not adequately prepared to handle the registration, although
the process itself will be simple for each individual.

- Antidraft organizations contended that they had been getting increased
support, after initial indifference, to their campaign against registration.
They also asserted that more black and workingclass people were supporting their
activity, in contrast to the largely white and middle-class activists who
opposed the draft in the Vietnam War.

- Anti-registration groups said that they were heartened by Ronald Reagan's
opposition to registration and the draft, which he expressed again in accepting
the Republican Presidential nomination Thursday night.

In addition, a group of 36 religious leaders of various faiths issued a
statement today condemning draft registration and urging young men to ''consider
seriously the moral implications.'' The group included seven bishops and 10
denominations' heads. Among the signers were Auxiliary Bishop Thomas J.
Gumbleton of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Detroit, Bishop Paul Moore of the
Episcopal Diocese of New York and Sister Theresa Kane, president of the
Leadership Conference of Women Religious.

Protests against draft registration were planned for tomorrow in various parts
of the country, with a major rally to be held in New York City at 6 P.M. at 72d
and Broadway. The protests began with small and scattered demonstrations over
the weekend.

The Selective Service System has had a relatively small budget, $400,000 to
prepare advertisements and radio and television announcements of draft
registration.

Coverage by the news media has also been spotty. The New York Public Interest
Research Group found that of 33 radio and television stations queried in New
York State, only 18 had received information about registration from the
Government. In addition, eight radio stations in New York City that generally
appeal to the youth market said that they had not broadcast information about
registration as of late last week.

In the post offices around the nation, employees have been instructed to avoid
answering any questions about the draft but to refer questioners to a brochure
published by the Selective Service.  Although the brochure listed the rights of
a registrant, it did not inform him of the penalties for failing to register.

Post office employees have also been instructed to be courteous and to avoid
confrontations.

No Plans to Add Employees

But many correspondents said that post offices had no plans for adding extra
employees to handle the crowds, nor had officials been informed about how many
young men to expect. Several postal officials said that they had received no
indications of possible demonstrations against registration, even though groups
opposing registration have announced plans for protests.

In Boston, for example, opponents of draft registration said that they would
stand in line to buy one-cent stamps, then go to the backs of the lines to
repeat the process. Others would be asked ''to register early and often'' with
fake names or the names of politicians.

But Robert Upton, the Selective Service coordinator in Boston, said that he had
not been given an estimate by Washington of how many registrants to expect. Nor
did he know how many forms he had received to be filled out.

Variety of Views Are Expressed

The sampling of young men around the country showed mixed feelings. Ken Grasso
of Queens, a student at St. John's University who is a member of the
conservative Young Americans for Freedom, said that he would register ''because
it's the law.''

Ben Meskin, a student at Hampshire College in Massachusetts, is a member of a
group called Mobilization Against the Draft but he said that he would register
so that he would not have to ''go underground'' in his struggle to head off the
draft itself.

But Chris Fitzgerald, a student at Columbia University, said that he would not
sign up because registration was not needed.  In Boston, Gino Napoleone, said:
''I'll wait for them to come get me. Why should I fight for Carter's mistakes?''
In Nashville, Jonathan C. Stanley said he would go to the post office ''because
it's the law.'' He said that he did not want to spend five years in jail. But a
Quaker named Craig, who declined to give his family name, said in Seattle that
he would not register and that ''I am willing to go to jail if need be.''

In Boise, Idaho, Steve Carper planned to register, saying: ''This is a good
country and I may as well fight for it. I'll defend my country, but not someone
else's. I don't want any of that Vietnam stuff.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of oppposers to the draft

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HANS J. MORGANTHAU, AUTHOR AND REACHEWR,DEAD AT 76

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words


Hans Joachim Morgenthau, the author, teacher and political scientist who gained
national attention in the 1960's as a leading critic of the United States
involvement in Vietnam, died Saturday night in Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan
after a short illness. He was 76 years old.

A German Jewish exile from Nazi Germany, Dr. Morgenthau became one of the
country's most respected foreign policy analysts in the 1960's and 1970's.
Though best known for his oppostion to the Vietnam War, he also was an outspoken
critic of the Soviet treatment of Jews and a staunch advocate of nuclear arms
control and of detente with the Soviet Union.

He was University Professor of Political Science at the New School for Social
Research in New York City from 1974 until recently.  Earlier, he had taught
political science at City College and at the University of Chicago, where he
began teaching in 1943 and served as the director of the Center for the Study of
American Foreign and Military Policy for 17 years.

Stressed National Interests

Dr. Morgenthau's views had been known and respected in academic and government
circles since before World War II. His writings on American foreign policy
generally argued for what he called a realistic approach to foreign affairs, in
which American national interests, rather than concern for world opinion, would
be the chief guide in policy making.

''Never allow a weak ally to make policy decisions for you,'' Dr.  Morgenthau
declared in one of his rules for effective diplomacy.  Though he was well-known
for years among the practitioners and theorists of political science, the public
at large did not come to know Dr. Morgenthau until he began to oppose openly
what he regarded as a disastrous and morally bankrupt American policy in Vietnam
in the late 1960's. He contended that the risks of American participation in the
war greatly outweighed any possible benefits.

Though his opposition to American involvement in Vietnam was tough and in accord
with his long-held foreign policy beliefs, he was careful not to become involved
in the bitter personality clashes that characterized much of the national debate
on the war.

He demonstrated this in a letter to The New York Times in 1976, when he said
that while he disagreed with the Vietnam policy of Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger during the Nixon Administration, he nevertheless considered Dr.
Kissinger ''gifted'' and ''one of the few outstanding Secretaries of State who
have served the United States.''

A Strong Critic of C.I.A.

In addition to opposing the United States involvement in Vietnam, Dr. Morgenthau
became a strong critic of the Central Intelligence Agency and the kind of covert
American intervention that toppled the leftist regime of Dr. Salvador Allende
Gossens in Chile, and he spoke eloquently against American intervention in other
nations' affairs.

''The moral storm that has broken over our intervention in Chile,'' he wrote in
1974, ''has obscured what seems to me to be the crucial issue transcending this
particular intervention.''

He added: ''With unfailing consistency, we have since the end of the Second
World War intervened on behalf of conservative and fascist repression against
revolution and radical reform. In an age when societies are in a revolutionary
or prerevolutionary stage, we have become the foremost counterrevolutionary
status quo power on earth.  Such a policy can only lead to moral and political
disaster.''

As chairman of the Academic Committee on Soviet Jewry, Dr.  Morthenthau had
campaigned extensively in recent years on behalf of Anatoly Shcharansky and
other Soviet dissidents and in opposition to alleged Soviet violations of the
1976 Helsinki accords on human rights.

Opposed Role for P.L.O.

He also spoke out against terrorist activities of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and in opposition to any role for the P.L.O.  in a Palestinian
state in the Israeli-occupied West Bank territory.

Dr. Morgenthau was born in Coburg, Germany, on Feb. 17, 1904, the son of Dr.
Ludwig Morgenthau, a physician, and Frieda Bachmann Morgenthau. He took his
early degrees at the Universities of Munich and Frankfurt.

Admitted to the bar in Germany in 1927, he practiced law until 1930 and later
served as president of the Labor Law Court in Frankfurt. He went to teach in
Geneva in 1932, and, when Hitler came to power in Germany the following year he
decided not to return.

He later became a professor of international law at the Institute of
International and Economics Studies in Madrid, then moved to the United States
in 1937 and became a naturalized citizen in 1943.

Author of Several Books

Dr. Morgenthau, who was fluent in English, French, German and Spanish, held many
teaching posts - at the University of Kansas, the University of California at
Berkeley, Yale, Princeton, Harvard, Columbia and Northwestern Universities, as
well as at the University of Chicago and the New School for Social Research. He
was also the author of several books and numerous articles.

He was a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Council on
Foreign Relations and the Foreign Policy Association. In the 1960's, he served
as a consultant to both the State and Defense Departments.

His books included ''Scientific Man vs. Power Politics'' (1946), ''Politics
Among Nations'' (1948), ''The Crossroad Papers: A Look Into the American
Future'' (1965), ''Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace''
(1967), and ''A New Foreign Policy for the United States'' (1969). All were
generally well-received by critics.

Dr. Morgenthau, who married the former Irma Thormann in 1935, is survived by a
son, Matthew, and a daughter, Susanna.  Services will be held tomorrow at 10
A.M. at the Riverside Memorial Chapel, 180 West 76th Street, at Amsterdam
Avenue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
MONDAY, JULY 21, 1980

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


International
The Iranian Parliament took over legislative power from the Revolutionary
Council and elected a conservative Islamic clergyman as speaker, completing
seven weeks of organizational work. The parliamentary leader is Ayatollah
Hashemi Rafsanjani, who had represented Teheran on the Council. Members of
Ayatollah Rafsanjani's organization, the hard-line Islamic Republican Party,
have said they favor putting the American hostages on trial for spying. The
party is the largest in Parliament. (Page A1:6.)
Fighting in Bolivia broke out between troops of the new military junta, which
last week took over the government, and workers of the zinc mining district of
Santa Ana, about 400 miles southwest of La Paz, the capital, according to
broadcasts by an antijunta group, which reported ''many casualties.'' The
Democratic Solidarity Radio Network formed by five union-controlled radio
stations after Thursday's coup said the workers had ''resisted the advance'' of
the troops. (A1:5.)
An alleged Soviet spy in China was sentenced to seven years in prison, and a
Chinese who confessed to being a Soviet agent was ordered executed, according to
the official New China News Agency.  Another Chinese who also confessed spying
received a suspended death sentence and was instead ''given the chance to reform
himself through labor,'' the press agency said. The agency identified the Soviet
national as Nikolai Petrovich Zhang, 36 years old. It said that he had been
arrested in 1974 but did not explain why his trial had been delayed so long.
(A1:1-3-4.)
Lebanon named a new Prime Minister, hoping to ease increasing tensions among
armed political factions. President Elias Sarkis announced the appointment of
Takieddin Solh, a long-time but not especially influential politician, to
succeed Selim al-Hoss, whose month-old resignation was finally accepted by
President Sarkis on Wednesday. (A6:3-5.)
National
More than 1,100 people have died in the Southwest's heat wave, including 23
yesterday in Kansas City alone. Many of the dead are the poor and elderly, those
who cannot afford air conditioning. In Houston, the difference between those who
have air conditioning and those who have not is stark. On the West Side is
middle-class comfort. On the East, poverty and misery. (A1:2.)
Draft registration begins today amid questions about the law's constitutionality
and signs of widespread resistance that could hamper the Government's
enforcement efforts. Federal officials moved ahead with plans to register about
four million young men after Associate Justice William F. Brennan Jr. of the
Supreme Court stayed an order by a Federal court that barred the Government from
carrying out registration on the ground that it was unconstitutional because it
excluded women. The stay was issued pending a decision by the full Supreme
Court. Despite the uncertainty, most of the men born in 1960 and 1961 were
expected to register. (A1:4-6.)
Detroit's production of small cars is regarded as the key to the American auto
industry's survival. Its big cars appear to be headed for oblivion.
Manufacturers are preparing plans for fuel-efficient cars that will be half the
weight of their models of the 1970's, stressing technical sophistication rather
than size and weight. Many of the new cars will have front-wheel drive and
four-cylinder engines. (A1:2-3.)
Alien smuggling is replacing drugs as the contraband of choice as refuge in the
United States is being eagerly sought by Mexicans and Central and South
Americans. Official figures indicate that in recent years traffic in smuggled
aliens has more than tripled, and it is now so lucrative that it rivals the
smuggling of narcotics in profitability. The largest alien smuggling rings
reportedly make $1 million or more a month. (A1:1)
Cleveland's public schools are open in midsummer because of the 15-week
teachers' strike that ended early in January. The system's 92,000 students will
not be released until Wednesday. The school year was extended past its usual
June 13 closing date to make up for lost time. An expected drastic drop in
attendance did not not occur, but the truancy rate increased. (A8:-2.)
Hans J. Morgenthau died at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan. He was 76 years
old. Author, teacher, political scientist and foreignpolicy analyst, Mr.
Morgenthau was a leading critic in the 1960's of the United States involvement
in Vietnam. He was until recently University Professor of Political Science at
the New School for Social Research in New York. (A14:1-3.)
Metropolitan
A record temperature of 101 degrees for July 20 was set in the New York
metropolitan region, breaking the previous record of 99 degrees in 1923. There
was no power shortage, and none is expected today, but water pressure declined
mainly because of open hydrants. The Fire Department said insufficient water
pressure was serious in Brooklyn, and New York City's Department of Evironmental
Protection issued a water alert. (A1:1.)
Bicycle registration in New York City is planned by the Koch administration amid
a mounting toll of bicycle accidents, including three in which pedestrians were
killed recently. A City Hall spokesman said that it would probably require City
Council approval and that key aspects of the plan, such as fees, and possible
use of license plates, remained to be worked out. Officials were said to want to
carry out the plan as soon as possible. A formal announcement of the
registration requirement might be made tomorrow. (B1:3-5.)

Business Digest, Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

INSIDE VILLAGE, LOOK IS BRIGHT

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 893 words


MOSCOW THE metal fence around the Olympic Village here looks as impenetrable as
the Berlin Wall, but many of the 6,000 athletes being guarded inside think the
arrangements could not be better.

There seems to be no danger of a terrorist raid like the one that ended in the
deaths of Israeli athletes in the 1972 Munich Games. The Israeli team is
boycotting the Moscow Games, and Yasir Arafat, the Palestine Liberation
Organization leader, is an honored guest.

But about the village, ''We have no complaints at all,'' said Brigitte Dumont, a
former Olympic fencing champion who is deputy chief of the French delegation.

''The housing is very good,'' she said, ''the food is all right, the
transportation system works and the weather is no more miserable than it's been
in Paris all summer.''

The Frenchmen brought their own wine, Moet & Chandon champagne, and Vittell
mineral water, as well as a supply of Gruyere and other cheeses. The French
warned their athletes that the food in the village cafeteria carries some hidden
booby traps, such as the dollops of thick, cheesy sour cream the cooks will put
into diet soup unless they are asked not to.

Even the French team's decision not to parade in last Saturday's opening
ceremony in Central Lenin Stadium or to use the French tricolor as its standard
has met with understanding from the Soviet hosts, Mrs. Dumont said. ''They know
that the French Olympic Committee was the first one in Europe to let it be known
that it would participate in these Olympics,'' she said, ''and that influenced
all the rest, except for West Germany, to also decide to come.''

Britain, whose Olympic association actually voted before the French did to defy
the American call to stay away from Moscow because of the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan, also did not march with the Union Jack on Saturday.

But yesterday, it was plastered in a balcony window where some of the British
women rowers apparently live, past the inner police checkpoint in the
18-building complex where the athletes are housed.

Other teams - from Sweden, Vietnam, Australia, New Zealand and some African and
Asian countries - have also hung their national flags from the balconies, giving
the ''village'' - it is more like a compound - a lived-in, spontaneous and very
un-Soviet look.  Dissidents have been imprisoned in Moscow for hanging signs
with slogans off their balconies, but then, no dissidents are here for these
Games.

The only French team member who has said he would protest at the Moscow Games
against the Soviet record on human rights and its intervention in Afghanistan is
the 800-meter runner, Jose Marajo, and he has not arrived yet because his race
is not until Thursday.

''Marajo will not have anything to say until after he has competed,'' Mrs.
Dumont said. ''He wants to be left alone.''

The focus of the Olympic compound is a so-called ''international zone'' where
the athletes and some of the thousands of police who surround the place can find
two things officially sponsored only here: private enterprise and religious
services. There are chapels for Christians, Jews, Muslims and Buddhists, with
clergy officially brought in to officiate for the duration of the Games, and
there is a sports equipment store with the best of Adidas, Puma and other
Western brand names in it, but there is a difference, too.

The store appears to be run by the West German chain, ''Intersport,'' but it
isn't.  ''We sold all the goods in the store to the Soviets, wholesale,'' said a
European staffer, a clerk who asked not to be identified by name. ''They
wouldn't let us sell them ourselves. It's a Soviet store, and all the goods can
only be bought with hard foreign currency -no rubles - but the profit goes to
the Soviet Government.''

A sweatsuit goes for $100 in the shop, and Adidas track shoes cost $55 a pair.
''When we arrived and saw how they'd jacked up the prices, we couldn't believe
it,'' the clerk said, ''because the original idea was for this place to save the
athletes money. But we've already sold out a lot of the stock anyway.''

Lord Killanin, president of the International Olympic Committee, and about 30
other people attended a Catholic mass yesterday morning in the village's
Christian chapel, down a second-floor corridor from the popular discotheque (it
closes at 11 P.M. to keep athletes from breaking training).

The celebrants were the Rev. Friedrich Pechtl, a chaplain from Vienna, and the
Rev. Paul Kucinskas, a bearded, sad-eyed priest from Vilnius, in Soviet
Lithuania, where the church survives under difficult circumstances.

A little later, Father Kucinskas and a Lutheran colleague from Soviet Estonia
sat in the wood-panelled room, looking at the stainedglass windows and the
altars, each of which bore a Russian icon.

''The State Committee for Religious Affairs is paying for our hotel rooms,''
Father Kucinskas said. ''They're down the road, about a 15-minute walk from
here. But we have to pay for our own food while we're here, just like everybody
else.''

''The style, of course, is rather Russian Orthodox,'' the priest observed, ''but
one good thing about being here is that the spirit is ecumenical.''

Did any athletes attend Sunday mass, he was asked. ''Oh yes,'' he said, ''there
were many, from Ireland and from Poland, especially.  The Poles are still a
faithful people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RESULTS OF THE FIRST DAY OF COMPETITION AT THE OLYMPIC GAMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 2235 words


uf4

Summer Olympics Results
BASKETBALL

MEN Preliminary Round
Brazil 72Czechoslovakia 70 Italy 92Sweden 77

WOMEN Semifinal Round
Bulgaria 102Italy 65 Hungary 76Cuba 66 U.S.S.R. 97Yugoslavia 62
FIELD
HOCKEY

MEN
Poland 7Cuba 1 India 18Tanzania 0 Spain 2U.S.S.R. 1
MODERN
PENTATHLON

RIDING Team Standing
1. Poland, (Marek Bajan, Janusz Pyciak-Peciak, Jan Olesinski), 3208 points; 2.
U.S.S.R., (Evgeny Lipeev, Anatoly Starostin, Pavel Lednev), 3194; 3.
Czechoslovakia, (Bohumil Starnovsky, Milan Kadlec, Jan Barto); 4. Spain, (Manuel
Montesinos, Jose Serrano, Federico Galera), 3094; 5. Hungary, (Tamas
Szombathelyi, Laszlo Horvath, Tibor Maracsko), 3088; 6. France, (Alani Cortes,
Paul Four, Joel Bouzou), 3070; 7. Rumania, (Dumitru Spirlea, Cezar-Mihai
Raducanu, Gyula-Laszlo Gallovits), 3064; 8. Sweden, (Lennart Pettersson, George
Horvath, Svante Rasmuson), 3022; 9. Bulgaria, (Simeon Monev, Nikolai Nikolov,
Borislav Batikov), 2992; 10. Britain, (Peter Whiteside, Nigel Clark, Robert
Nightinggale), 2946.
ROWING

MEN Four with coxswain First Heat
1. East Germany, (Dieter Wendisch, Ullrich Diessner, Walter Diessner, Gottfried
Dohn, Andreas Gregor), 6 minutes, 44.49 seconds; 2. Poland, 6:47.61; 3.
U.S.S.R., 6:50.29; 4. Bulgaria, 6:53.37; 5.  Brazil, 6:59.98; 6. Czechoslovakia,
7:06.38.

Second Heat
1. Spain, (Manuel Bermudez, Isidro Martin, Salvador Verges, Luis Maria
Lasurtegui, Javier Sabria), 6:43.35; 2. Britain, 6:52.57; 3.  Switzerland,
6:53.66; 4. Ireland, 7:00.28; 5. Yugoslavia, 7:00.58; 6. Cuba, 7:11.11.

Pairs without Coxswain First Heat
1. East Germany, (Bernd Landvoigt, Jorg Landvoigt), 7:19.05; 2.  Rumania,
7:30.90; 3. Austria, 7:39.48; 4. Denmark, 7:43.04; 5.  Greece, 7:58.37.

Second Heat
1. U.S.S.R., (Yury Pimenov, Nikolay Pimenov), 7:25.09; 2. Britain, 7:30.57; 3.
Czechoslovakia, 7:34.83; 4. Spain, 7:46.00; 5. Australia, 7:50.05.

Third Heat
1. Italy, (Franco Valtorta, Antonio Baldacci), 7:28.77; 2. France, 7:33.20; 3.
Ireland, 7:35.10; 4. Sweden, 7:44.16; 5. Guatemala, 8:06.53.

Pairs with Coxswain First Heat
1. Rumania, (Petre Ceapura, Gabriel Bularda, Ladislau Lovrenski), 7:50.12; 2.
Bulgaria, (Tzvetan Petkov, Roumen Khristov, Todor Kichev), 7:58.31; 3. Italy,
(Antonio Dell'aquila, Giuseppe Abbagnale, Giuseppe Di Capua), 7:59.39; 4.
France, (Serge Fornara, Herve Bourqvel, Jean-Pierre Huguet-Balenx), 8:09.11; 5.
Ireland, (Denis Rice, Christopher O'brien, Liam Williams), 8:13.16; 6. Cuba,
(Danilo Mora, Alfredo Valladares, Silvio Rosabal), 8:28.82.

Men's Coxed Pair

Second Heat
1. East Germany, (Harald Jahrling, Friedrich-Wilhelm Ulrich, Georg Spohr),
7:32.89; 2. U.S.S.R., (Viktor Pereverzev, Gennady Kryuchkin, Aleksandr
Lukyanov), 7:38.49; 3. Yugoslavia, (Dusko Mrduljas, Zlatko Celent, Josip Reic),
7:39.39; 4. Britain, (James Macleod, Neil Christie, David Webb), 7:42.39; 5.
Czechoslovakia, (Josef Plaminek, Milan Skopek, Oldrich Hejdusek), 7:47.71.

Fours without Coxswain First Heat
1. U.S.S.R., (Aleksei Kamkin, Valery Dolinin, Aleksandr Kulagin, Vitaly
Yeliseyev), 6:31.71; 2. Czechoslovakia, (Vojtech Caska, Jiri Prudil, Josef
Nesticky, Lubomir Zapletal), 6:43.30; 3. Bulgaria, (Gheorghi Gheorghiev,
Latchezar Boitchev, Kiril Kirtchev, Valentin Stoev), 6:47.21; 4. France,
(Jean-Pierre Bremer, Nicolas Lourdaux, Bernard Bruand, Dominique Basset),
6:50.18; 5. Poland, (Miroslaw Jarzembowski, Mariusz Trzcinski, Henryk Trzcinski,
Marek Niedzialkowski), 6:55.28; 6. Cuba, (Wenceslao Borroto, Ismael Same, Jorge
Alvarez, Hermenegildo Palacio), 7:02.83.

Second Heat
1. East Germany, (Jurgen Thiele, Andreas Decker, Stefan Semmler, Siegfried
Brietzke), 6:19.93; 2. Romania, (Daniel Voiculescu, Carolica Ilies, Petru Iosub,
Nicolae Simion), 6:32.16; 3.  Switzerland, (Juerg Weitnauer, Bruno Saile,
Hans-Konrad Truempler, Stefan Netzle), 6:32.74; 4. Britain, (John Beattie, Ian
Mcnuff, David Townsend, Martin Cross), 6:42.73; 5. Sweden, (Kent Larsson, Par
Hurtig, Jan Nicklasson, Goran Johansson), 6:49.78.

Single sculls First Heat
1. Hugh Matheson, Britain, 7:53.22; 2. Konstantinos Kontomanolis, Greece,
7:55.61; 3. Paulo Cesar Dvorakowski, Brazil, 8:01.38; 4.  Didier Gallet, France,
8:04.41; 5. Arturo Salfran, Cuba, 8:25.09.

Second Heat
1. Pertti Karppinen, Finland, 7:43.80; 2. Peter Kersten, East Germany, 7:49.01;
3. Vladek Lacina, Czechoslovakia, 7:53.24; 4.  Bernard Destraz, Switzerland,
7:59.81; 5. Chavdar Radev, Bulgaria, 8:04.96.

Third Heat
1. Vasily Yakusha, U.S.S.R., 7:47.15; 2. Hans Svensson, Sweden, 7:57.33; 3.
Raimund Schmidt, Austria, 8:07.02; 4. Lajos Odor, Hungary, 8:14.24.

Double Sculls First Heat
1. East Germany, (Joachim Dreifke, Klaus Kroppelien), 6:54.69; 2.  Yugoslavia,
7:04.57; 3. U.S.S.R., 7:07.12; 4. France, 7:14.43; 5.  Bulgaria, 7:21.83.

Second Heat
1. Britain, (Tim Clark, Chris Baillieu), 6:59.67; 2. Poland, 7:01.79; 3. Spain,
7:11.05; 4. Czechoslovakia, 7:16.02.

Quadruple Sculls First Heat
1. Yugoslavia, (Milan Arezina, Darko Zibar, Dragan Obradovic, Nikola
Stefanovic), 6:13.96; 2. Spain, (Juan Solano, Jesus Gonzalez, Manuel Vera, Julio
Oliver), 6:18.61; 3. Denmark, (Jan Reiner Modest, Per H.S. Rasmussen, Morten
Gert Espersen, Ole Peter Bloch Jensen), 6:19.28; 4. Austria, (Siegfried Sageder,
Bruno Flecker, Rainer Holzhaider, Michael Sageder), 6:22.63; 5. Brazil, (Jose
Claudio Lazzarotto, Ronaldo Esteves Carvalho, Ricardo Esteves Carvalho, Waldemar
Ant. Trombetta), 6:25.84. 6. Poland, (Andrzej Skowronski, Zbigniew
Andruszkiewicz, Ryszard Burak, Stanislaw Wierzbicki), 6:27.24.

Second Heat
1. East Germany, (Frank Dundr, Karsten Bunk, Uwe Heppner, Martin Winter),
6:01.68; 2. Bulgaria, (Mintcho Nikolov, Lubomir Petrov, Ivo Roussev, Bogdan
Dobrev), 6:09.36; 3. France, (Christian Marqvis, Jean Raymond Peltier, Charles
Imbert, Roland Weill), 6:11.33; 4. U.S.S.R., (Yuri Shapochka, Yevgeny Barbakov,
Valery Kleshnev, Nikolai Dovgan), 6:14.67; 5. Netherlands, (Victor Schheffers,
Jeroen Vervoorrt, Rob Robbers, Ronald Vervoort), 6:28.25; 6. Cuba, (Roberto
Quintero, Cesar Herrera, Nelson Simon, Horacio Cabrera), 6:39.28.

EIGHTS First Heat
1. U.S.S.R., (Viktor Kokoshin, Andrey Tishchenko, Aleksandr Tkachenko, Ionas
Pintskus, Ionas Normantas, Andrei Lugin, Aleksandr Mantsevich, Igor Maistrenko,
Grigory Dmitrienko), 5:50.76; 2.  Britain, Duncan McDougall, Allan Whitwell,
Henry Clay, Chris Mahoney, Andrew Justice, John Pritchard, Malkolm Mcgowan,
Richard Stanhope, Colin Moynihan), 5:53.38; 3. Poland, (Pawel Borkowski, Wieslaw
Kujda, Grzegorz Stellak, Adam Tomasiak, Grzegorz Nowak, Ryszard Stadniuk,
Miroslaw Kowalewski, Wladyslaw Beszterda, Ryszard Kubiak), 6:00.43; 4. Bulgaria,
(Dimitar Yanakiev, Teodor Mrankov, Bojidar Roghelov, Ivan Botev, Yani Ignatov,
Mikhail Petrov, Petar Patzev, Vesselin Chterev, Ventzislav Kantchev), 6:03.99;
5. Hungary, (Ferenc Kiss, Peter Tovari, Robert Sass, Attila Strochmayer, Andras
Kormos, Zoltan Sztarcsevics, Kalman Toronyi, Laszlo Kiss, Miklos Balint),
6:04.32.

Second Heat
1. East Germany, (Bernd Krauss, Hans-Peter Koppe, Ulrich Kons, Jorg Friedrich,
Jens Doberschutz, Ulrich Karnatz, Uwe Duhring, Bernd Hoing, Klaus-Dieter
Ludwig), 5:55.89; 2. Czechoslovakia, (Pavel Pevny, Lubomir Janko, Ctirad
Jungmann, Karel Neffe, Karel Mejta, Dusan Vicik, Milan Dolecek, Milan Kysely,
Jiri Ptak), 6:01.68; 3.  Australia, (Islay Lee, Stephen Handley, William
Denkbaar, Andrew Withers, Timothy Willoughby, Henry Lowe, Timothy Young, Brian
Richardson, David England), 6:05.12; 4. Cuba, (Wenceslao Borroto, Ismael Same,
Juan Alfonso, Juan Bueno, Francisco Mora, Hermenegildo Palacio, Jorge Alvarez,
Antonio Riano, Enrique Carrillo), 6:26.53;
SHOOTING

Free Pistol
1. Aleksandr Melentev, U.S.S.R., 581, (new world and Olympic record); 2. Harald
Vollmar, East Germany, 568; 3. Lubtcho Diakov, Bulgaria, 565; 4. Gil San Soh,
North Korea, 565; 5, Seppo Saarenpaa, Finland, 565.

Trap Shooting (First 75 Targets)
1. Jorg Damme, East Germany, 75; 2. Silvano Basagni, Italy, 74; 3, Luciano
Giovannetti, Italy, 74; 4. Josef Hojny, Czechoslovakia, 74; 5. Laszlo Ludmann,
Hungary, 73; 6. Istvan Putz, Hungary, 73; 7.  Pentcho Vitchev, Bulgaria, 72; 8.
Rustam Yambulatov, U.S.S.R., 72; 9. Ricardo Sancho, Spain, 72; 10. Karni Singh,
India, 71.
SOCCER

Group A

U.S.S.R. 4Venezeula 0 Cuba 1Zambia 0

Group B East Germany 1Spain 1 Algeria 3Syria 0
SWIMMING

MEN 200-meter butterfly Final
1. Sergei Fesenko, U.S.S.R., 1 minute 59.76 seconds; 2. Philip Hubble, Britain,
2:01.20; 3. Roger Pyttel, East Germany, 2:01.39; 4.  Peter Morris, Britain,
2:02.27; 5. Mikhail Gorelik, U.S.S.R., 2:02.44.

100-meter backstroke First Heat
1. Vladimir Dolgov, U.S.S.R., 57.87 seconds; 2. Dietmar Gohring, East Germany,
58.02; 3. Miloslav Rolko, Czechoslovakia, 58.15; 4.  Branimir Popov, Bulgaria,
1:00.06; 5. Nenad Milos, Yugoslavia, 1:00.41; 6. Robert Rudolf, Hungary,
1:00.85; 7. Daniel Ayora, Peru, 1:03.93.

Second Heat
1, Mark Tonelli, Australia, 58.66. 2, Gary Abraham, Britain, 58.79.  3, Jorg
Stingl, East Germany, 58.98. 4, Frederic Delcourt, France, 59.16. 5, Herwig
Bayer, Austria, 1:00.04. 6, Ricardo Prado, Brazil, 1:01.03. 7, Laris Phylactou,
Cyprus, 1:08.92.

Third Heat
1. Michael Soderlund, Sweden, 57.75; 2. Romulo Duncan Arantes Jr., Brazil,
57.90; 3. Fred Eefting, Netherlands, 58.59; 4. Douglas Campbell, Britain, 58.75;
5. Rui Pinto Abreu, Portugal, 1:00.62; 6.  Pedro Cruz, Mozabique, 1:15.25; 7.
David Cummins, Ireland.

Fourth Heat
1. Glen Patching, Australia, 58.30; 2. Paul Marshall, Britain, 58.35; 3. Viktor
Kuznetsov, U.S.S.R., 58.47; 4. Vladimir Shemetov, U.S.S.R., 59.01; 5. Franky De
Groote, Belgium, 1:00.35; 6. Jorge Lima, Angola, 1:14.33; 7. Alberto Eugenio
Mestre, Venezuela.

Fifth Heat
1. Zoltan Verraszto, Hungary, 57.92; 2. Sandor Wladar, Hungary, 58.07; 3. Mark
Kerry, Australia, 58.08; 4. Bengt Baron, Sweden, 58.46; 5. Mihai Mandache,
Rumania, 1:00.26; 6. Moises Gosalvez, Spain, 1:00.90; 7. Van Hoanh Lam, Vietnam,
1:07.29.

First Semifinal
1. Viktor Kuznetsov, U.S.S.R., 56.75; 2. Bengt Baron, Sweden, 57.51; 3. Mark
Tonelli, Australia, 57.89; 4. Gary Abraham, Britain, 57.90; 5. Fred Eefting,
Netherlands, 57.91; 6. Miloslav Rolko, Czechoslovakia; 7. Vladimir Dolgov,
U.S.S.R., 58.04; 8. Sandor Wlador, Hungary, 58.05.

WOMEN 400-meter medley relay Final
1. East Germany, (Rica Reinisch, Ute Geweniger, Andrea Pollack, Sarina
Hulsenbeck), 4:06.67 (New world record; old record 4:07.95 by East Germany); 2.
Britain, 4:16.29. 3. U.S.S.R., 4:16.46; 4. Sweden, 4:19.94; 5. Italy, 4:21.69.

100-meter freestyle First Heat 1. Natalya Strunnikova, U.S.S.R., 57.43; 2. Olga
Klevakina, U.S.S.R., 57.62; 3. Jacquelene Willmott, Great Britain, 58.78; 4.
Carine Verbauwen, Belgium, 59.08; 5. Celeste Garcia, Peru, 1:02.44; 6.  Michele
Pessoa, Angola, 1:09.10.

Second Heat
1. Ines Diers, East Germany, 56.83; 2. Guylaine Berger, France, 57.80; 3. Isabel
Reuss, Mexico, 58.36; 4. Larisa Tsaryova, U.S.S.R., 59.12; 5. Rosemary Brown,
Australia, 59.35; 6. Mariam Paris, Costa Rica, 1:01.08; 7. Lynne Tasker,
Zimbabwe, 1:03.36; 8. Nadia Fezzani, Libya, 1:09.28.

Third Heat
1. Barbara Krause, East Germany, 54.98 (new world record; old record 55.41 by
Krause); 2. June Croft, Britain, 57.88; 3. Carina Ljungdahl, Sweden, 58.05; 4.
Michelle Pearson, Australia, 58.90; 5.  Heidi Koch, Austria, 59.73.

Fourth Heat
1. Caren Metschuck, East Germany, 55.44; 2. Conny Van Bentum, Netherlands,
57.51; 3. Agneta Eriksson, Sweden, 57.67; 4. Monica Vallarin, Italy, 59.43; 5.
Natalia Mas, Spain, 59.53; 6. Bako Ratsifa, Madagascar, 1:07.21; 7. Thi Thanh
Lan Chung, Vietnam, 1:12.27.
DIVING

WOMEN Women's Springboard Preliminary (first 8 to the final)
1. Irina Kalinina, U.S.S.R., 478.86;. 2. Zhanna Tsirulnikova, U.S.S.R., 454.35;
3. Martina Proeber, East Germany, 450.99; 4. Karin Guthke, East Germany, 435.21;
5. Irina Sidorova, U.S.S.R., 432.57; 6. Martina Jaschke, East Germany, 427.47;
7. Valerie McFarlane, Australia, 413.97; 8. Lourdes Gonzalez, Cuba, 409.65; 9.
Guadalupe Canseco, Mexico, 407.52; 10. Antonette Wilken, Zimbabwe, 402.21; 11.
Susanne Vetteskog, Sweden, 399.06; 12. Ildiko Kelemen, Hungary, 391.68; 13.
Heidemarie Grecka, Czechoslovakia, 390.39; 14. Deborah Hill, Zimbabwe, 390.27;
15. Ruxanda Hociota, Rumania, 389.10; 16.  Elsa Tenorio, Mexico, 389.01; 17.
Karmen-Belen Nunez, Spain, 388.32; 18. Jenny Donnet, Australia, 376.77; 19.
Sonia Fernandez, Spain, 370.95; 20. Alison Drake, Britain, 368.01; 21. Annie
Liljeberg, Sweden, 365.25; 22. Deborah Jay, Britain, 362.73; 23. Felicia Liliana
Cirstea, Rumania, 354.33; 24. Isabelle Arene, France, 345.06.
TEAM HANDBALL

MEN Preliminary Round Group A

Poland 20Hungary 20

Group B Yugoslavia 22Algeria 18 Rumania 32Kuwait 12
VOLLEYBALL

GROUP A Cuba 3Italy 0

GROUP B Rumania 3Libya 0 Poland 3Yugoslavia 1
WATER
POLO

GROUP A Hungary 6Rumania 6 Netherlands 8Greece 7

GROUP B Spain 7Sweden 3 U.S.S.R. 8Italy 6

GROUP C Cuba 6Yugoslavia 6 Australia 9Bulgaria 5
WEIGHT
LIFTING

FLYWEIGHT 114 Pounds Final
1. Kanybek Osmonalieu, U.S.S.R, 539 kilograms (new Olympic record); 2. Ho Bong,
North Korea, 539; 3. Han Gyong Si, North Korea, 539; 4.  Bela Olah, Hungary,
539; 5. Ferenc Hornyak, Hungary, 524; 6.  Francisco Casamayor, Cuba, 512.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 22, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 343 words


AROUD THE WPRLD;
China Urges World Pressure On Moscow and Hanoi

PEKING, July 21 (Reuters) - Prime Minister Hua Guofeng of China said tonight
that all peace-loving countries should put political, economic and other
pressures on the Soviet Union and Vietnam to force them to withdraw troops from
Afghanistan and Cambodia.

Mr. Hua was speaking at a banquet in honor of President Ziaur Rahman of
Bangladesh, who arrived in Peking earlier in the day for a four-day visit.

The Chinese leader said the Soviet Union was ''stepping up its suppression of
the Afghan people's resistance in an attempt to strengthen its bridgehead for
further advances to the south.''

He said Vietnam recently ''flagrantly invaded the territory of Thailand.''

Six People Die in Explosion During Israeli Weapons Test

TEL AVIV, July 21 (UPI) - An accidental explosion during a weapons test at a
secret defense installation killed six people and seriously injured a seventh, a
Defense Ministry spokesman said today.

All the casualties were civilian employees of Rafael, the industrial arm of the
Defense Ministry and manufacturer of advanced technology systems for missiles
and warplanes.

The explosion occurred yesterday during an experiment at a firing range in
central Israel, according to the spokesman said.  Officials refused to disclose
the nature of the test or the location of the range. But the spokesman said the
blast was accidental and sabotage was ruled out.

Afghanistan's Leader Strips His Rivals of Power

NEW DELHI, July 21 (AP) - President Babrak Karmal, with the evident approval of
Moscow, has stripped his rivals of power in the Afghan Government and
concentrated major police and administrative authority within his own ruling
group, according to reports from Afghanistan.

Broadcasts by Radio Afghanistan from Kabul reported a shuffle of administrative
posts that Afghan exile sources and diplomats in India said amounted to a purge
of the Khalq faction, the rival of President Karmal's group in Afghanistan's
ruling Marxist party and Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 22, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

RISING JOBLESSNESS DRIVING MANY AUTO WORKERS INTO REAGAN CAMP

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 950 words

DATELINE: LINDEN, N.J., July 19


The shifts were changing at the huge General Motors assembly plant down the
road, and the bar in the basement of the union hall was filling up. After a few
cold beers the talk grew heated, and if Jimmy Carter had been listening, the
words of these auto workers might have chilled him.

''The current Administration has done nothing for the working man,'' asserted
Ralph Banks, a wiry Vietnam veteran. ''I don't say Reagan is any better than
Carter, but at least he's new. I'd like to give him a chance to see what he can
do.''

''The men are saying that now,'' chimed in Thomas Brown, a black union leader.
''But once they find out what Reagan is all about, I think they'll change their
minds.''

''The Republicans might be for the rich man,'' retorted Henry Anderson, a spot
welder with a thick beard. ''But when they're in there, they provide jobs. When
Nixon and Ford were in, how many people were laid off?''

''You certainly don't blame Carter for that, do you?'' Mr. Brown asked. ''Who
else can you blame?'' Mr. Anderson shouted.

Target of Candidates

The blue-collar worker, particularly in key states like New Jersey, is rapidly
becoming the favorite target of this year's election campaign, the most
sought-after ally by the Presidential campaigners. And no one is courted more
ardently than the auto workers, who are not only highly visible and highly paid
but badly hurt by the recession. Unemployment is running 25 percent among auto
workers around the country, and in Local 595 in Linden, about 4,300 members are
working, down from 5,800 several years ago.

At the Republican National Convention in Detroit last week, Ronald Reagan met
with unemployed workers and had lunch with Douglas A.  Fraser, president of the
United Auto Workers, who supports Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts for
the Democratic nomination. A week earlier in Detroit, President Carter announced
a package of proposals to aid the hard-pressed industry. Mr. Fraser told the
President that increasing unemployment was driving workers into the Reagan camp,
and dozens of interviews here in Linden, a few miles south of Newark, clearly
supported that assertion.

Union leaders such as Mr. Brown may retain their traditional loyalty to the
Democratic Party, but the rank and file is a different story.

Anger Real and Deep

''I don't know how to get them to support Carter; I don't know what handle to
grab hold of,'' Edward F. Gray, regional director for the auto union, conceded.
''Their anger is very real and very deep. Most of the members who are concerned
with politics feel they have been betrayed by Jimmy Carter, and that's a
terribly difficult thing to deal with.''

Without a doubt, Mr. Carter will get plenty of votes from the auto workers. The
members are angry now, but many of the older ones, in particular, concede that
it would be hard to break the patterns of a lifetime and vote Republican. Earl
Sammond is retired and tends bar at the union hall. He is livid about rising
taxes and fuel bills, and thinks this election presents him with ''an awful
choice.'' But then he adds: ''I'd have to vote Carter very reluctantly. I don't
go along with the Republican philosophy; they associate more with big
business.''

And as some workers take a closer look at Mr. Reagan and the Republican
platform, they do not like what they see. ''The whole Republican view on the
equal rights amendment is unbelievable,'' said Colleen Downey, one of 600 women
working at the G.M. plant.

But the key to the campaign will be economics, and some leaders feel that
long-range trends are running in favor of the Republicans.  The average worker
in the Linden plant makes $20,000 a year, not counting overtime or a spouse's
income, and fits squarely into the middle class.

Things Are Good Now

''I think a lot of these guys have forgotten where they came from,'' said Joe
Gentile, president of the union local. ''Years ago, if you hired in here, you
didn't have much going for you, and you stuck with the Democrats. Now they have
things pretty good - nice homes, two cars, their kids are in college, their
wives are working.  And it's changed their way of thinking. I have close friends
who wouldn't consider the Republicans 15 or 20 years ago, and now they can't say
a bad word about them.''

As incomes rise, the old union solidarity born of struggle and sacrifice begins
to wane. Matthew McKenna, the local's treasurer, puts it this way: ''Look at our
benefits - they're fantastic. What else can we ask for? We try to remind the
younger people what we went through to get them, but they don't want to hear it.
That's yesterday - what are you going to do tomorrow?''

Today, members of Local 595 see their middle-class status threatened by economic
conditions that deteriorated under a Democratic President, and that only
aggravates their feelings against the party.

''I voted for Carter last time but I never will again,'' sputtered Frank
McKenna, a 41-year-old repairman with 19 years in the plant.  ''Anybody who
takes food out of my children's mouths won't get a second chance.'' Bob
Klepacki, a union official whose son was recently laid off, added, ''There is
fear throughout the plant.  People are afraid they're going to lose their homes
and cars.''

This fear, and frustration, spurts out in other ways. Many workers resent
President Carter's decision to accept Cuban and Haitian refugees, and some agree
with Deborah Koeopke, a young worker in blue jeans, when she says, ''We should
put them back on their boats and sink them.''

''In the end, Carter will get the endorsement of the key unions,'' said Mr.
Gray, the regional director. ''But that doesn't mean he'll get the union vote.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo insets of workers

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 22, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 786 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
CONSPIRACY. By Anthony Summers. 640 pages. Illustrated. McGraw-Hill. $17.95.

THERE have been so many books written about the assassination of President
Kennedy - and among them so many of dubious merit and provenance - that the mind
tends to freeze over at the prospect of yet another one. So what exactly is it
about Anthony Summers's ''Conspiracy'' - an exhaustive review of what the author
calls ''the crime -and the controversy - of the century,'' by a British
investigative reporter with many years of experience working with the British
Broadcasting Corporation - that makes it seem so relatively fresh and important?

Most obviously, it's the changed atmosphere of American life in which it is
published. We have come so far down the road of disillusionment since 1963 -what
with Vietnam, Watergate and other political murders - that fantasies of
conspiracy we scoffed at 15 years ago no longer seem nearly so implausible. So
it is now with almost a shrug that we arrive at Mr. Summers's conclusion that
while Lee Harvey Oswald had something to do with President Kennedy's
assassination (he may even have fired three shots from the sixth floor of the
Texas School Book Depository), he was somehow part of a conspiracy involving
anti-Castro Cuban exiles, members of the Mafia and what Mr. Summers calls ''a
renegade element in U.S.  intelligence'' services.

A New Sense Evoked

Almost as obvious an explanation for the distinctiveness of ''Conspiracy'' is
the fact that it is the first major book to appear since the House Select
Committee on Assassinations delivered its final report in 1979. Also, it's the
first book to take cognizance of the committee's astonishing conclusions, based
on an acoustics expert's analysis of a tape recording made at the scene of the
assassination, that four bullets, not three, were fired during the 8.31 seconds
that gunshots were heard in Dealey Plaza in Dallas that day; therefore there had
to be more than one gunman involved; and therefore President Kennedy ''was
probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy.''

Then there is the sense of summary that Mr. Summers's book inspires -the feeling
it arouses that if over the years we've been lulled to sleep by the
obsessiveness and obscureness of certain conspiracy theorists, here is the
perfect opportunity to wake up and be refreshed. For not only is ''Conspiracy''
an exhaustive assessment of every cranky supposition and mystifying piece of
evidence from the ''two-Oswald theory'' to the so-called ''magic bullet,'' it
also represents a wealth of fresh investigation, including interviews by Mr.
Summers with witnesses who have never been formally talked to before.

Finally, this book seems worthwhile simply because it is skillfully and
compellingly written. Indeed, it is so dramatically constructed that not even
the author's attraction to blind alleys serves to put us off. Even where Mr.
Summers pauses to introduce speculations he can't satisfactorily resolve -such
as the possibility that Oswald fired no shots at all, or that he was seen in the
company of a United States Intelligence case officer only weeks before the
assassination - we rush on through his narrative as if we were reading an artful
thriller.

'Coincidences' Cited

Of course ''Conspiracy'' offers no firm conclusions. It doesn't begin to attempt
an explanation of the technique of ''expert'' acoustics analysis; it expresses
instead an almost ritual obeisance to the authority of the word ''scientific.''
It doesn't suggest the identity of any other figure who might have pulled a
trigger on Nov.  22, 1963. And in the process of chasing down the many obscure
but disturbing coincidences that have surrounded this case, it falls down a hole
leading to the most elaborate set of coincidences of all. But once you accept
the notion that Oswald was ''set up,'' you have to explain how his manipulators
happened to pick ''a patsy'' who happened to get a job in a building past which
the President's motorcade happened to proceed at a time that happened to be
ideal.  And this Mr. Summers has not even begun to do.

Still, ''Conspiracy'' serves to dramatize, as no previous book has done, the
superficiality of the Warren Commission's investigation and report. It reveals
the appalling degree to which the Central Intelligence Agency, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation and the various branches of Military Intelligence have
failed to cooperate with the official investigations. And if it discourages any
expectation that the complete truth behind the assassination in Dallas will some
day be known, it gives us reason to hope that eventually we will know a little
more than we understand today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF ANTHONY SUMMERS

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 23, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PROMISED AID PLANS,LARGE AND SMALL,ARE SLOW TO AFFECT LIBERTY CITY RIOT

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1508 words


AREA

By JO THOMAS

MIAMI, July 22 - He was black and middle-aged, a serious man of some girth with
a three-piece suit brightened only by a silver-foil carnation, a man troubled by
the anger that pervades Liberty City despite promises of Government help.

''I talked to some guys late last night,'' Clyde Pettaway, assistant executive
director of the James E. Scott Community Association, said last week. ''Each one
had a crowbar in his hand.  They were 14 or 15 years old.

''I said: 'Wait. See what the man's gonna do.' '' He paused. ''But the waiting
period is almost over.''

Two Months of Promises

Since the rioting in May, blacks in Miami have received promises big and small,
including a pledge of $90 million in Federal funds.  But that help has been slow
to reach Liberty City's hot streets.

An effort last week to take applications for 200 permanent jobs in private
business caused such a crush of applicants that some community leaders believe
it contributed to the eruption of violence hours later, when a crowd attacked
two white police officers who were trying to arrest two black robbery suspects.

More than 40 people were injured, many by sniper fire, and it was not until
Sunday that a dusk-to-dawn curfew in the area was lifted.  It had been just two
months since the first wave of rioting, which took 18 lives and cost local
businesses more than $100 million.

In the days immediately after the first outbreak, Miami business leaders urged a
one-cent sales tax increase in Dade County to raise $291 million for
redevelopment, and the Dade County School Board hoped for $1.3 million in state
funds for job training. Both proposals were rejected by the Florida Legislature.

The Legislature offered only $8 million in loans and grants statewide to
riot-burned businesses, $2 million in tax credits for companies in blighted
areas and $850,000 for a summer youth program.  In a meeting with a citizens'
group yesterday, State Representative Barry Kunun, Democrat of Dade County,
voiced the Legislature's prevailing sentiment: ''In no way will legislation be
passed that will be a reward to rioting.''

At this point, hopes for redevelopment are pinned on the Federal Government. The
original $71 million aid package offered by President Carter included $40
million in loans to rebuild businesses, $5 million in economic development, $4.3
million for job training, $1.3 million to improve security in public housing, $2
million to improve police-community relations, $17.3 million to expedite rapid
transit construction using minority concerns and $1.25 million for health care
in the riot area.

The package was denounced by Senator Lawton Chiles, Democrat of Florida, as
inadequate, an amalgam of Federal programs that had been planned anyway.

This month $19 million was added to the package. It included $10 million that
could be used for housing, a need not addressed in the original program.

So far, 155 businesses have applied for more than $20 million in loan money
available from the Small Business Administration. Other economic development
ventures are also on the drawing boards, however helpful they may be in the long
run, they will not be seen instantly on the street in a community where many are
skeptical of promises and some have run out of patience.

Last week the conditions that the Federal money is supposed to alleviate grew
worse. Police-community relations seemed to be at a nadir, security in the James
E. Scott housing project evaporated in the crackle of sniper fire, and a
health-care center that had treated 100 people a day was vandalized and burned.

The police called those who threw stones and attacked motorists ''hoodlums'' and
''animals.'' A few residents called them ''freedom fighters.'' Others privately
agreed with the police. Some of the victims were black.

''What you're talking about is frustration,'' said Mr. Pettaway.  ''When you
live on top of each other, you swing out at the people closest to you.'' In
normal times in the aging, crowded Scott project, where 70 percent are
unemployed and more than half are under 21, those people are neighbors. Last
week those people were the police.

'Not Just Poor Blacks'

But, Mr. Pettaway said, ''What's happening in Dade County is not just poor
blacks. Blacks as a whole, from the T-shirt to the threepiece suit, are
frustrated.''

In part, according to Mr. Pettaway and others, it is a question of numbers. At
most, blacks make up only 15 percent of Dade County's population of about one
and a quarter million people. They complain of being outvoted and
underrepresented in government. They work primarily in the tourist industry,
which caters increasingly to Latin America, demanding a language that most
blacks do not speak. With the recent influx of refugees, many blacks see their
situation deteriorating.

''They bring everyone to Miami,'' said Dedgra Washington, who works in the
Liberty City area. ''Nicaraguans, Vietnamese, Cubans, Haitians. And we're still
on the bottom. We can't even get to the first step to make it to the top.''

As Annie Love, a member of the Scott-Carver Homes Tenants Council, told
yesterday's meeting of public officials, residents of Liberty City want
''permanent, permanent, permanent jobs.''

In a recession year, this will require ''an extraordinary commitment'' from
private business, Lester Freeman, executive director of the Greater Miami
Chamber of Commerce, told the meeting.

Need for New Jobs

In its most prosperous year, Mr. Freeman said, Miami created 33,000 jobs. The
average is 17,000. This year, to accommodate the influx of refugees, it will
have to find 75,000 new jobs, ''three times what we've ever done before.''

Most of the 900 people who lost their jobs because of the May rioting have found
new ones, city officials say. The Chamber of Commerce has been canvassing 2,000
businesses for new jobs for Liberty City residents and has asked the Urban
League and the Opportunities Industrialization Center to help match jobs and
applicants.

Today the Southern Florida Employment and Training Consortium, which administers
the Federal Comprehensive Employment and Training Act (CETA) funds, announced
that it had 3,000 jobs in the public sector: 1,085 permanent jobs and 1,915
summer jobs for the young.

Summer jobs provided in the riot relief program are seen in Liberty City as just
that - riot relief. ''They pacify you,'' said James Pasley, a youth worker.
''They give you three months' employment and you're supposed to be happy. It's a
lie, a hood you put over the black community's face.''

Doubts About Job Programs

Marvin Dunn, an associate vice president of Florida International University,
spent the week talking with residents of the area. He, too, fears that job
training programs without channels into the private sector ''in the long run are
doomed to lead nowhere.''

He praised efforts to rebuild businesses in the riot area and to provide public
housing but said he felt that the Federal Government had missed the message of
the May rioting, which followed the acquittal by an all-white jury of four white
policemen accused of fatally beating Arthur McDuffie, a black insurance
executive.

''Black people didn't riot because they didn't have jobs,'' he said, ''or
because they were overcrowded in housing. People rioted because of the perceived
and real injustices in the criminal justice system.'' He said that he felt there
were wide disparities between the sentences given blacks and whites and too few
black state attorneys and public defenders.

''On top of that,'' he added, ''is still the potential for police abuse that has
not been addressed. I don't think we've reduced the chances of violence at
all.''

There are few blacks on the police force and, according to a report released
July 9 by the United States Commission on Civil Rights, the proportion of black
male officers on the Dade County Public Safety Department declined in the last
five years, from 6.3 percent to 5.5 percent.

The department has announced plans to hire 200 more officers, with 60 percent of
the jobs to be filled with black, female and Hispanic applicants. In the future,
according to a settlement reached five months ago in a suit brought by the
Protective Officers Club, a group of black officers, at least one-third of those
hired must be black.  The settlement also calls for more promotions of blacks.

In the meantime, Liberty City is living with the dilemma voiced by Lois Carter,
who works in the area and lived there for nine years.  ''Half of these kids
don't want to work,'' she said. ''They want the easy life. Police arrest them,
beat them. Police start the brutality, taking them off and kicking them. Nobody
watches the police.

''But as soon as something happens to my family - call the police.  My baby's
sick - call the police. Somebody shot my mama - call the police.''

She looked around the part of the Scott project known as ''Vietnam'' because
there are so many guns and said, ''It will be hard to get a police in here
now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 23, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 392 words


REGISTRATION IS RAISING QUESTIONS ON POWERS TO BAR DEMONSTRATORS

WASHINGTON, July 22 (UPI) - Registration for the draft has raised legal
questions revolving around antidraft groups' protests.  Postal regulations
forbid obstructing the public from doing business at post offices, but the
dividing line between constitutionally protected free speech and unlawful
obstruction is unclear.

David Landau, a lawyer for the American Civil Liberties Union, said that the
program had created ''an enormous potential for invasion of the First
Amendment'' and its protection of free speech.

When workers for the A.C.L.U. and the Committee Against Registration and the
Draft who fanned out to post offices yesterday to inform 19- and 20-year-old men
of their legal rights, local postmasters in more than a dozen cities either
barred demonstrations or denied groups entry to post offices.

One constitutional scholar said the postmasters could be ''within their
constitutional authority because the operation of the postal facility could be
totally frustrated'' by such activities.

''Two issues are being confused: whether protesters can be arrested for telling
people not to register and whether there may be restrictions on access to public
property,'' said Dennis Hutchinson, a Georgetown University law professor. He
said that postmasters' restrictions ''clearly fall within the second category.''

Mr. Landau maintained that ''there's a First Amendment right to demonstrate
outside and to go inside to counsel'' registrants, but that the legality of
urging men not to register was ''very unclear.'' The civil liberties group is
refraining from such advice.

Brayton Harris, a spokesman for the Selective Service, said today that
registration was ''going very well.'' ''We expect 98 percent will register,'' he
said. ''That's based on our Vietnam experience.'' The service is not releasing
figures on the numbers registered so far, however, and officials say that it
will take 90 days to get final, official figures.

----

Puerto Rican Post Offices Bombed

SAN JUAN, P.R., July 22 (UPI) -Bombs blew out the windows of two post offices
early today here and in a suburb, and an organization called Revolutionary
Commandos of the People said that the bombings were to protest the ''Yankee
Government's'' draft registration. No injuries were reported.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 23, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE HEARING IS TOLD DOW KNEW IN 1964 THAT DEFOILANT WAS TOXIC

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 464 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 22


A professor of occupational and environmental medicine told a House subcommittee
today that the Dow Chemical Company knew as early as 1964 that Agent Orange, a
defoliant used in the Vietnam War, contained a strongly toxic substance called
dioxin but that it failed to notify the appropriate Federal agencies of this
fact.

Dr. Samuel S. Epstein, author of ''The Politics of Cancer,'' a professor at the
University of Illinois School of Public Health, said he based his statement on
previous Congressional testimony by a former Dow vice president. He told the
House Veterans Affairs Subcommittee on Medical Facilities and Benefits that in
1970 the Dow executive, Dr. Julius Johnson, told a Senate panel that the company
had known since 1964 of the presence of dioxin in 2,4,5-T, the chemical name for
Agent Orange.

Dr. Johnson, now a Dow consultant, said in a telephone interview that his 1970
testimony ''related some of the information on toxicity'' of dioxin but that he
also had said at the same time that ''in the dose involved, it did not cause
damage.''

Dioxin is considered carcinogenic, and veterans' groups have maintained that
Agent Orange has caused a variety of illnesses and cancers among servicemen
exposed to the defoliant, as well as genetic defects in their offspring.

Produced in Manufacturing

Dioxin is not an original component of 2,4,5-T, but is produced as a result of
the manufacturing process.  The Government contends that there is no documented
evidence linking Agent Orange to the illnesses that veterans contend are a
result of exposure to it. It thus pays no disability benefits to veterans
exposed to the substance.

Today's hearings were the first at which nongovernmental witnesses were invited
to testify on Agent Orange. Earlier this year, officials of the Veterans
Administration, the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department
of Defense said that more research was needed on Agent Orange and that their
research had failed to establish that exposure to it was responsible for the
illnesses of many Vietnam-era veterans.

Dr. Epstein's testimony prompted Representative Thomas A. Daschle, Democrat of
South Dakota who is a member of the subcommittee, to request new hearings on the
subject.

''For six years hundreds of thousands of American servicemen and millions of
Vietnamese were exposed to a chemical that Dow knew posed severe health risks,
but Dow said nothing to the Government and the Government asked nothing of
Dow,'' said Mr. Daschle, vice chairman of Vietnam Veterans in Congress.

Representative David E. Satterfield 3d, Democrat of Virginia who is chairman of
the subcommittee, said he would hold new hearings based on today's testimony and
would ask that Dow representatives and Federal officials testify.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 23, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CAVANAUGH SAYS ARMY FACES LONG MARCH

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 241 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., July 22


Ed Cavanaugh, Army's new football coach, indicated today that the Cadets' return
to the ranks of the nation's powers was still a long way off.

''I can't see any drastic improvement in overall talent in the upperclassmen
players,'' he said. Those are the players returning from last year's team, which
won two games, tied one and lost eight.

The 51-year-old Connecticut native took over when Lou Saban abruptly resigned
last Thursday after only one year as coach.  Cavanaugh is not taking over
blindly; he was an assistant under Saban last season when the team lost its last
seven games.

Cavanaugh, who becomes Army's 29th coach, said there was room for optimism,
however, through recruiting.  For years Army officials have felt that the
football program suffered because of the Vietnam War, when it was difficult to
recruit high school athletes.

Freshmen Look Good

Cavanaugh said the incoming freshmen who arrived three weeks ago included
several promising players. He said that the public and young athletes were
learning that ''not many players make professional football.'' All cadets are
required to remain in the service for a minimum of five years after graduation.
That virtually eliminates those good enough to play pro football from seeking a
career in it.

Cavanaugh has been given a multiyear contract, indicating the return of some
stability to the program, which has had three coaches in each of the last two
decades.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 24, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LAOS AND THAILAND HALT TALKS ON A BORDER CONFLICT

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 519 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 23


Laos and Thailand angrily broke off a ministerial meeting here today that had
been convened to resolve a conflict that caused Thailand to close its border
with landlocked Laos last month. Members of the Laotian delegation left abruptly
after three days of deadlock and flew back to Vientiane, their capital.

Laos depends heavily on supplies from Thailand or goods transshipped via
Thailand, since it produces only part of the food it consumes and the roads and
fuel pipeline from Vietnam, the only other country providing access, can supply
only a small share of Laotian needs.

Thailand closed the border, partly at first and then along its full length,
after an incident on the Mekong River on June 15 in which a Thai Navy patrol
craft was fired on from the Laotian bank near Vientiane. The incident, in which
an officer was killed and two sailors were wounded, was preceded by the killing
of a man said to have been a Thai on the Laotian bank of the river.

Gasoline rationing has been imposed in Laos since the border closing, and
Western diplomats in Vientiane report that the price of rice has risen.

Relief Operations Affected

A number of United Nations agencies as well as Sweden, the principal Western
source of development assistance to the impoverished country, are likely to find
their operations seriously curtailed. Four thousand tons of relief rice,
hospital supplies shipped by the Swiss Red Cross and considerable quantities of
mechanical equipment for Swedish development projects are already backed up
here.

Diplomats here are unsure whether any international conventions oblige Thailand
to allow necessities of daily life to reach its neighbor. The Thai position has
stiffened since June 23, when Vietnamese troops in Cambodia attacked Thai border
villages. Vietnam holds dominant power in Laos as well as Cambodia.

Leading Thai officials have linked the Mekong incident to the border violation
by Vietnam and depicted both acts as part of a Vietnamese design against
Thailand. Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda, Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila
and other Government ministers have insisted in repeated public statements that
the border will not be reopened unless Laos formally apologizes.

Laos, blaming Thailand for the incident, has refused to apologize.  The refusal
was reiterated in a departure statement this afternoon by Soubhan Salithirath,
secretary general of the Foreign Ministry.

The border closing and the breakdown of the talks are viewed by diplomats here
as the culmination of a deterioration in relations between Thailand and the
three Indochinese nations. A significant easing of these relations was regarded
as the major foreign policy achievement of the Government of former Prime
Minister Kriangsak Chamanand, who resigned under pressure last February.

A Thai Foreign Ministry statement issued tonight accused Laos of having asked
for the meeting without any intention of reaching a solution. ''Therefore
Thailand has no alternative, when its border security cannot be assured, but to
impose the continued closing of the border,'' the Ministry declared.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 24, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET PUTS SPACECRAFT ALOFT WITH 2 ABOARD; ONE IS A VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 343 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 23


The Soviet Union launched a Soyuz spacecraft today with a 33-year-old Vietnamese
Air Force pilot and a Soviet astronaut aboard, Tass, the official press agency,
announced.

The launching at Baikonur comes while Moscow is in the spotlight as host of the
1980 Olympics. Observers had expected a space ''spectacular'' to mark the
occasion.

Lieut. Col. Pham Tuan became the first Asian space traveler and the sixth
citizen of an Eastern bloc country launched into orbit along with Soviet space
commanders as part of the Intercosmos program.  Astronauts in the Intercosmos
program generally spend a week in space.

The latest Russian space capsule, commanded by Col. Viktor Gorbatko, is to link
up with two Soviet astronauts who have been orbiting the earth for more than
three months in the space laboratory Salyut 6.

Tass said that Colonel Pham Tuan was an Air Force pilot who served in the
Vietnamese Army, studied in a Soviet flight school as a cadet with Colonel
Gorbatko, and returned home in 1979 to prepare for a space flight under the
Intercosmos program. Colonel Gorbatko made two previous space flights, in 1969
and in 1977.

'Cooperation Between Peoples'

Tass said the latest international flight was ''a vivid example of the fraternal
friendship and close cooperation between the peoples'' of Vietnam and the Soviet
Union.

Colonel Gorbatko and Colonel Pham Tuan are the third space pair to join the
Salyut 6 crew members, Valery Ryumin and Leonid Popov, who have been in space
since April 9. One of the previous teams was made up of two Soviet astronauts.
The other included a Russian and a Hungarian, Bertalan Farkas.

Colonel Pham Tuan said in a message distributed by Tass that he was dedicating
his flight ''to the Communist Party and the heroic people of Vietnam.'' He said
he would ''exert all my energy and use all my knowledge to fulfill this
honorable assignment.'' Soviet television showed him in Moscow on the days
before the launching, visiting the tomb of Lenin and the grave of Yuri A.
Gagarin, the world's first astronaut.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ASIAN AND RUSSIAN BOARD SALYUT 6

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 326 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 24


A Vietnamese astronaut, the first Asian in space, and his Soviet partner boarded
the Salyut 6 space station today, joining two Russians who have been orbiting
Earth for three and a half months, the Soviet press agency Tass said.

Viktor Gorbatko, the flight commander, and Lieut. Col. Pham Tuan, a Vietnamese
air force hero, were hurtled aloft aboard the Soyuz 37 shuttle craft yesterday
from Soviet Central Asia.

Tass reported that the two boarded the orbiting space laboratory after checking
the docking unit to make sure it was airtight. The agency said all four
astronauts were feeling well and would carry out a variety of experiments and
studies, including aerial photography and medical tests.

Shot Down First B-52

Colonel Tuan, 33 years old, is credited with being the first Vietnamese fighter
pilot to shoot down an American B-52 bomber in the Vietnam conflict.

The launch last night was part of the Intercosmos program, in which astronauts
from five other nations - Poland, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary and
Bulgaria - have accompanied Soviet commanders into space.

Other Intercosmos nations that have not yet had a man in space are Rumania,
Mongolia and Cuba.  After the launch, Tass said the shuttle would dock with
Salyut 6 within 24 hours and that Colonel Tuan and Mr. Gorbatko would stay
aboard the orbiting station for one week. Valery Ryumin and Leonid Popov have
been on board the Salyut since April 9.

Space 'Spectacular' Expected

Observers in Moscow had expected some sort of space ''spectacular'' during the
current Olympic Games here. It is widely thought that Mr.  Ryumin and Mr. Popov
will stay in orbit through the conclusion of the games.

The teams of astronauts who have visited the Salyut station have carried out
scores of biological, physical and other experiments.  For gunning down the
American bomber, Colonel Tuan was awarded the Gold Star as a ''Hero of Vietnam,
'' Soviet newspapers reported.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN HELPERS OF PRESIDENT MARCOS

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


To the Editor:

John B. Oakes's accurate portrayal of the Philippines under Ferdinand Marcos
(columns July 4, 5 and 6) should prompt progressive Americans, long disenchanted
with U.S. foreign policy, to thoroughly question America's continuing support of
rightwing dictators.v.hen will the U.S. learn that backing despots like Marcos
is not in the best interests of the American people? Did we not learn in Vietnam
the utter folly of supporting totalitarian third-world nations that use the
excuse of ''stopping Communism'' to exploit their own peoples?

Most assuredly we did not learn in the case of the Philippines, where for almost
eight years under martial law the people have been denied basic human liberties
and have been unable to determine their own futures.

One hopes Mr. Oakes's frank assessment of the situation will lead others to
articulate as forthrightly the realities of the Marcos dictatorship and its U.S.
supporters.  J.J. KAUFMANN Friends of the Filipino People Hawaii Chapter
Washington, July 9, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW FACE:A BARITONE ASPIRING TO BE AN ARTHURIAN LEGEND IN HIS OWN TIME

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words


TO hear Richard Muenz tell it, getting the role of Lancelot, opposite Richard
Burton and Christine Ebersole in the revival of ''Camelot'' at the New York
State Theater was the easy part. What was hard was making the role believable to
himself so that his Lancelot -that stiff and self-righteous Frenchman who
abandons all his principles for his love of Guinevere - would be believable to
the audience.

''It was a struggle,'' he said over lunch recently. ''There are too many
impossible changes for Lancelot to go through. There is no scene involved to
indicate that Lancelot is falling in love with her. At first he has all the
answers. He knows he's right. He's totally one with God. In the course of the
play he contradicts everything he believes in. He could not look God in the
face. And overlying it all is that sense of mysticism.

''It's hard. There are some things I still can't bridge. No way could I come
close to it - unless the guy is crazy, schizophrenic.  But it matters to me. I
have to believe this to do it, so that everyone else believes it, too.''

To Mr. Muenz, a serious, matter-of-fact man given to touches of sardonic humor,
Lancelot is ''basically a standard romantic leadingman part.'' ''You can go out
there and look stiff and stupid or whatever and just sing your way to the end. I
can't do that.'' What he did do was to read his way through the Arthurian
legends and work at creating his own character.

''That's the thing about doing a revival,'' he said. ''People think you're doing
a part that was created by somebody else and you are just reviving it. It isn't;
apart from Burton, it's a whole new set of people and characters that have to be
created again.''

Follows 'Most Happy Fella'

Mr. Muenz came to ''Camelot'' following his highly praised portrayal of Joey in
''The Most Happy Fella'' last season on Broadway. A baritone, he has also sung
in ''The Fantasticks,'' ''Trouble in Tahiti'' and ''1600 Pennsylvania Avenue,''
his Broaadway debut. For two seasons he sang with the Gregg Smith singers,
making nine albumns of classical music for the Vox and Columbia labels.

Richard Muenz was born in 1948 in Hartford, and grew up around Ridgewood, N.J.
His surname comes from his German grandfather's family. His background is
otherwise Scottish and English. ''My mother's mother - my grandmother Hawes -
has traced back her lineage to the barons of Runnymede,'' he said with a wry
smile. He has one brother, Robert, and two adopted brothers, Teddy and Farenc,
Hungarians who fled in the wake of the 1956 uprising.

A musical child with a grandfather who was once an opera singer, he began to
play the piano at the age of 5.  ''I always sang,'' he said. My first solo - in
the junior choir at church -was 'See the farmer sow his seed; up the fields and
down.' I was going to go to a boys' choir school in New York somewhere. My
parents approached me with the idea, but I didn't want to leave all my little
friends. So I cried. And they said, 'Well, O.K.' '' He went on to Ridgewood High
School, where he played and sang in school productions. He was a member of the
New Jersey All-State Choir for two years as well as the All-Eastern chorus.

Mr. Muenz went off to Eastern College in Pennsylvania to study music, ''but
there was a mutual dislike between the music instructor and me.'' He switched to
chemistry and physics. ''Then I got a 21 on a final exam. That was tantamount to
being removed from college, and during the Vietnam conflict there was always a
need to be associated with some institution of higher education. In the second
semester of my junior year, I went back to music, majoring in voice and minoring
in composition.'' Since then Mr, Muenz has composed a work based on folk music,
some songs and piano music. He works from time to time on ''a little show.''

After college he escaped the draft by getting a high lottery number - ''They
would have taken all the women and children first.'' He didn't want to teach. He
had more or less ruled out opera -''The biggest consideraion in an opera career
when you're just starting was whether or not you wanted to go to Europe for a
couple of years. I didn't want to do that.'' He went to work for a carpenter
instead.  ''I always wanted to do whatever job I could,'' he said by way of
explanation.

His first professional music job was as soloist at the Upper Ridgewood Community
Church for $19 a week. ''I sang with a semiprofessional chorus in Jersey,'' he
said. ''I met someone there who got me an audition with a professional chorus in
New York.'' I got a job and toured with them. I did a lot of oratorio and
chamber opera.''

He also sang with a chorus of the New York City Opera and with several groups
doing major oratorios at Avery Fisher Hall. He learned from all those
experiences.

''But Gregg Smith is really my mentor as far as music goes,'' he said. It was
while performing in ''Trouble in Tahiti'' that Leonard Bernstein, who wrote the
opera, noticed Mr. Muenz and brought him into ''1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.''

''Camelot'' is Mr. Muenz's first heavily costumed role. ''Up to now my costumes
have been more or less contemporary or casual. For Joey, they did doctor up the
jeans. They actually painted them a funny color blue and outlined the creases.
I've never worn painted jeans before. Now I'm painting all my jeans,'' he says,
deadpan, as he begins to eat his chopped steak and mashed potatoes. Looking at
the meal, he comments, ''I have very pedestrian tastes.''

''I used to be really exhausted by this show,'' he said. ''I wear layers and
layers of clothes. That's really long underwear I'm wearing that looks like
chain mail. That theater is very hot -the lights are very hot and much brighter
than in the theater in Toronto where we first did 'Camelot.' And the leg armor -
the part around my calf -cuts into my leg. I should get hazard pay.''

The show will go on from New York to Chicago, Dallas, Miami Beach, New Orleans
San Francisco and Los Angeles. The full-year contract meant Mr. Muenz had to
give up his leading role of Joe Novak on the daytime soap opera ''Ryan's Hope.''
He launched into a re-enactment of his final episode - full of bodies and
bloodied clothes, candlesticks and whatnot - ending with: ''They never find my
body.  That leaves open the possibility of writing the character back into the
show.''

Mr. Muenz has been something of a bird watcher all his life. He once thought of
making a study of ornithology. Now living in Manhattan, with the actress Nana
Tucker, he focuses his interest on Central Park. ''I go to the park now and
then, especially in May; that's when they are all migrating through. The first
couple of weeks in May, the park is really saturated with birds.'' He doesn't
think much of jogging and other strenuous activity.

''I'm not as active as I should be,'' he said. ''In fact, right now I'm missing
a cast softball game I signed up for. Luckily, this interview came along and
saved me from that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Muenz

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 25, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
Vietnam Veteran's Brother Refuses to Register for Draft

BYLINE: By Laurie Johnston and Albin Krebs

SECTION: Section D; Page 12, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 838 words


The anger seems disciplined now but the situation is all too deja vu for Ron
Kovic, the writer and paraplegic Vietnam veteran: the draft registration and the
resulting position of his 19-year-old brother, Jack.

The former Marine Corps sergeant from Massapequa, L.I., said with pride from his
California home yesterday that his brother was refusing to register and had
joined him at a Los Angeles demonstration this week.

''It's his decision to face the consequences, but our whole family feels that
Jack should not have to go through what I did,'' said Mr.  Kovic, who is now 34
years old.

At the 1976 Democratic National Convention the author of ''Born on the Fourth of
July,'' lifted to the podium in his wheelchair, called himself ''your living
Memorial Day'' and nominated Fritz Efaw, a former draft exile, for Vice
President. He will be back this year, writing about the convention for Penthouse
magazine and vacationing later on Long Island and in Maine. He is now studying
American history at Pasadena College.

Rona Barrett Bids 'Good Morning' Goodbye, NBC Hello

Rona Barrett, the Hollywood gossip columnist who has been a staple on the ABC-TV
''Good Morning, America'' show since its premiere almost five years ago, is
being dropped from the program and will be joining NBC-TV.

Yesterday NBC-TV announced that Miss Barrett would become a regular contributor
to the ''Today'' program and the ''West Coast anchor'' of a new expanded
''Tomorrow'' show with Tom Snyder this fall.

''I've always believed that her talent and creativity were never properly
tapped,'' said Brandon Tartikoff, president of NBC Entertainment.

An ABC spokesman in New York said yesterday that negotiations on a new contract
with the Los Angeles-based columnist, who styles herself ''Miss Rona,'' had
''reached an impasse following an inability to come to agreement on salary and
other matters.'' Her current contract expires Oct. 24.

Miss Barrett could not be reached for comment, but for the past several weeks
she has been publicly stating her grievances against ABC. These include the
network's alleged refusal to give her a contract that would allow her to appear
on prime time with celebrity interviews, the way Barbara Walters does.

Moving From Law to the Priesthood

Alexander H. Bradshaw, the British-born former husband of Susan Eisenhower,
granddaughter of President Dwight D. Eisenhower, is entering St. Bernard's
Seminary, in Rochester, to study for the Roman Catholic priesthood.

Mr. Bradshaw, a 38-year-old Rochester lawyer, said yesterday: ''It's something
that's long been a wish of mine, in the sense that I nearly did it in my
twenties. I had the inclination but not the courage, and instead I got
married.''

His marriage of seven years was annulled in 1978, and his former wife is now
married to another lawyer, John F. Mahon. The Bradshaws, who had two children,
met in Brussels when Miss Eisenhower's father, John S. D. Eisenhower, was
Ambassador to Belgium and Mr. Bradshaw's father, F. John Bradshaw, was first
secretary and consul at the British Embassy in Brussels.

Newman Wonders Why Futurology Has a Present

Up in Toronto yesterday, 5,000 people who call themselves ''futurists'' ended a
weeklong series of meetings, seminars, speeches, and just plain bull sessions
charting the future of the world.

And in New York, Edwin Newman, the NBC news correspondent who dabbles in a
variety of things, including the writing of books on language, takes a look at
futurism - or ''futurology,'' as he prefers to call it - and concludes that,
well, there's no future in it.

''Futurologists have made a large and thriving business out of saying which
grain will grow,'' Mr. Newman says in the August issue of Geo magazine. ''But
much of what they tell us is hardly worth hearing. Inflation will continue, they
say. Energy supplies will be uncertain. Nuclear sabers may be rattled, and don't
be surprised if there is a rash of assassinations. Any self-respecting witch
would be ashamed to churn out such stuff.''

Mr. Newman said that ''it's constructive to recall that not quite five centuries
ago, a panel of experts told Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain that a four-year
study had convinced them that the westward voyage of Columbus was impossible.''

A Driving Desire to Cool Off on a Hot Night

The New York metropolitan area's heat wave brought out some unusual ways for
people to cool off, as Trooper Alexander Havelick of Connecticut's state police
found out earlier this week.

The trooper chased a motorcyclist named Donald Keling through the town of Essex
because he was ostentatiously lacking some essentials: (1) registration plates
on his motorcycle and (2) clothing on his body.

''He was wearing nothing from head to toe except his tooth fillings,'' said
Trooper Havelick, who charged Mr. Keling with reckless driving, failure to
display plates and public indecency.

Mr. Keling had an explanation for his unclothed outing: ''The weather was too
hot to bear and things were boring.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 26, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
INDIANA'S LONG-WINNING LIBERAL

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 25


When the special panel to investigate Billy Carter's ties to the Libyan
Government was being formed this week and Senator Kennedy ceremoniously
relinquished his seat as chairman of the Judiciary Committee to Birch Bayh, the
second-ranking Democrat, he was passing the gavel to a personal friend.

Senator Bayh, who has been about as close politically to the Kennedy family as
one can be, is also the man who lifted Senator Kennedy from the wreckage of the
plane crash in which he broke his back 16 years ago.

The voters of Indiana, generally a conservative lot, first sent the liberal Mr.
Bayh to the Senate in 1962, and have returned him twice more; he has yet to lose
an election. And the fact that he is up for re-election this fall in a
conservative state and, many would argue, in a time of rising conservatism, is
likely to preclude less than his best effort in pursuing the Billy Carter
matter.

Since he entered politics almost a generation ago, Senator Bayh has been tagged
with the label, ''All-American Boy,'' and it almost fits.  Birch Evan Bayh Jr.
was born in the heartland, on a farm in Vigo County, Ind., and attended schools
in Fayette Township. He won a prize as Indiana's best teen-age gardener, and was
a 4-H Club debating champion. After two years in the Army, ending his service as
a private first class, he graduated from Purdue University with a degree in
agriculture, where he had made a name as a baseball and boxing star.

Farmer, Legislator, Lawyer

Mr. Bayh - the name is German and rhymes with ''dye'' - then took over the
family's 340-acre spread. But after three years behind the plow, nothing could
keep him down on the farm, and he won a seat in the Indiana House at the age of
26. In two years he was minority leader, and in four, Speaker.

While in the House he decided he needed a legal underpinning, so went to law
school at Indiana University, graduating in 1960. Two years later, with only
eight years of politics behind him, he challenged the then-powerful Senator
Homer Capehart, a Republican with a national following. Mr. Bayh won by 10,000
votes out of almost 2 million cast, in what was regarded as the political upset
of the year.

In his three Senate terms Mr. Bayh has compiled a solid Farm Belt voting record,
backed civil rights legislation, gained strong labor support and appealed to the
young by pressing the legislation that extended voting rights to 18-year-olds.
He was an early supporter of the Vietnam War, but in 1968 began to advocate
withdrawal of American forces.

Senator Bayh's biggest victory on Capitol Hill was his successful effort to
block confirmation of two of President Nixon's nominees for seats on the Supreme
Court, Clement F. Haynesworth Jr. and G.  Harrold Carswell.

Presidential Race in '72

Mr. Bayh made a brief run for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1972,
but withdrew when his wife, Marvella, underwent surgery for cancer. Mrs. Bayh,
regarded as a driving force behind her husband's political career, died last
year.

Their only child, a namesake of his father who uses Evan as his first name, is a
student at the University of Virginia Law School. He is managing his father's
re-election campaign, one made all the more difficult by the fact that Senator
Bayh is one of five liberal Democrats in the Senate who have been targeted for
defeat by a national conservative coalition.

They will be especially watchful of Senator Bayh's conduct when the special
committee's investigation gets under way, probably next week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA CHARGES THAILAND WITH MILITARY INTRUSIONS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 565 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 26


Cambodia formally accused Thailand today of repeated military violations of its
territory and warned that Thailand ''must assume full responsibility for all
consequences that might flow from its actions.''

The protest and warning came in a declaration by the Foreign Ministry in Phnom
Penh, distributed today by the Vietnam News Agency. The diplomatic isolation of
Cambodia makes Hanoi the outlet for its official statements.

Phnom Penh asserted that between last Sunday and Wednesday, Thai planes and
helicopters flew 49 reconnaissance missions that penetrated from one to seven
miles into Cambodian airspace. Phnom Penh also charged that the Thais had fired
into Cambodia on more than 100 occasions with mortars, recoilless rifles and
rockets.

Thais Reject Initiative

The Cambodian protest accused Thailand of engaging on a course of deepening
hostility toward the three countries of Indochina at the behest of ''the Peking
expansionists.'' Cambodia condemned Thailand's rejection of an initiative by the
Foreign Ministers of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia last week to improve their
relations with Thailand and other non-Communist nations in Southeast Asia.

The three-nation proposal, which included an offer of nonaggression treaties and
the demilitarization of the Cambodian-Thai border, was rejected by Thailand as
an attempt to weaken its sovereignty over its border regions.

Thailand was also attacked today in an editorial in the Vietnamese Communist
Party newspaper Nhan Dan. The authoritative statement charged that Thailand
opposed the demilitarization of the border because it wanted to tranform the
refugee concentrations along the border into ''places of refuge for Cambodian
reactionaries and thus facilitate the transport of foods and Chinese arms to the
debris of the Pol Pot army and the other Cambodian reactionaries, permitting
them to continue to sabotage the Cambodian revolution.'' The Government of
former Prime Minister Pol Pot was ousted by Vietnamese-led troops in January
1979.

New Attacks Reported

Reports reaching here from the border today indicated that Vietnamese troops
were stepping up their attacks to dislodge remnants of the Pol Pot forces from
one of their principal mountain strongholds, the Phnom Malai range. Artillery
shelling of Phnom Malai was heard in the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet.

The Cambodian and Vietnamese denunciations of Thailand followed a barrage of
attacks from Laos after Thai-Laotian negotiations here broke down on Wednesday.
Last month Thailand closed its borders with its landlocked neighbor, which
depends on Thai transit rights for most of its vital commodities. The
ministerial-level negotiations to lift the blockade ended in angry division, and
the Laotian delegation left hurriedly.

Thailand's relations with the three Communist nations have deteriorated sharply
since a repatriation of about 9,000 Cambodians from the Thai side of the border,
under the auspices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, led to
an armed Vietnamese incursion into Thai border villages and military clashes.
Vietnam staged the incursion to protest the fact that most of the returnees were
Pol Pot followers going back to aid in the war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DRAFT REGISTRATION POSES PROBLEMS FOR MEXICAN YOUTHS BORN IN U.S.

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: CIUDAD JUAREZ, Mexico, July 26


The decision by the United States Government to require young men to register
with the Selective Service System for possible military service is creating
problems for young men born in the United States to Mexican parents.

Many prominent people in Juarez said they were concerned about the registration
of their sons who were born in 1960 and 1961 in the relative luxury of an El
Paso hospital, said Gaston de Bayona, director of international relations for
the Mayor of Juarez.

Mr. de Bayona mentioned a ''civic leader'' whose El Paso son was attending the
University of Texas at El Paso. The Mexican leader wanted his son to attend a
better university in the United States, but because of the renewal of draft
registration earlier this month he is not sure what his son should do.

In El Paso County, the city-county health unit reported that of 11,251 births
last year, 4,354 were to Mexico-born mothers of either American or Mexican
citizenship. Parents of American citizens can apply for legal resident alien
status in the United States after the child reaches 21 years of age, without
obtaining labor certificates from the Department of Labor, according to Henry V.
McGehee, a supervisory inspector with the Immigration and Naturalization
Service.

Some Hope to 'Lay Low'

American citizens in Juarez are reluctant to discuss the concerns they have
about registration with the Selective Service System. By ''laying low,'' some
hope to escape detection and retain their American citizenship by contending
that they were ignorant of the law, said Nelson Smith, an lawyer and president
of the El Paso Association of Immigration Practitioners.

But those who plan to register were open about it. Robert Caffery, a 19-year-old
El Paso resident whose mother is Mexican and father is American, said, ''I was
born in this country, so I'll defend this country if needed.''

Mr. Caffery said his El Paso friends with dual citizenship feel the same. ''It's
not a big deal like it was in the Vietnam crisis,'' he added.

Elea Aguirre, a 32-year-old mortgage banker who was born in El Paso to Mexican
parents, said that in Mexico ''the empathy was with the Vietnamese'' in the
Vietnam War.

Unable to Regain Citizenship

Mr. Smith said he had received a number of cases in which American citizens from
Mexico made no claim to American citizenship until after hostilities ceased in
the Vietnam War. Some who renounced their American citizenship have not been
able to regain it, he added.

Employees at El Paso's post offices have noticed a few Juarez residents who
registered with the Selective Service System this week.  Keith Powell of the
American Consulate in Juarez said 26 Americans registered for the armed forces
this week. But three 20-year-olds renounced their American citizenship this week
also, he said.

In Matamoros, the Mexican city opposite Brownsville, Tex., Wayne Griffith, a
consul, said that only two men registered this week for the draft.

Law Applies to All Aliens

''There are no group statistics on how many Americans live on the border,'' Mr.
Griffith added, ''because very few of them register with us.''

In addition to American citizens living in foreign countries, the registration
law applies to all legal and illegal aliens who live in the United States and
were born in 1960 and 1961.

Brayton Harris, assistant director of the Selective Service Service, said that,
starting next January, all men must register 30 days after their 18th birthday.

While officials do not know how many illegal residents live in El Paso, the
metropolitan area was the home of 5,214 legal resident aliens of various ages
and both sexes in 1978, according to the immigration agency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA SEES TROUBLE IF REAGAN IS VICTOR

BYLINE: By HARRISON E. SALISBURY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 71, Column b; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 893 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 26


A member of the Chinese leadership feels that if Ronald Reagan is elected
President and restores diplomatic relations with Taiwan, ''there will be
trouble.''

The official, Li Xiannian, who is both a Deputy Prime Minister and a deputy
chairman of the Communist Party, emphasized that he did not wish to say anything
that might be construed as interfering in the internal affairs of the United
States. But he associated himself with criticism of Mr. Reagan's views on Taiwan
that was published recently by The People's Daily under the signature of its
Washington correspondent, Wang Fei.

Mr. Li spoke yesterday in an interview in the Great Hall of the People.  He said
that China would not negotiate its differences with the Soviet Union unless the
present 54 Soviet divisions on the Chinese border were reduced to 12, the number
stationed there during the 1960's. The Soviet Union must also remove its troops
from Outer Mongolia, officially known as the Mongolian People's Republic, cease
support of Vietnam in Cambodia and withdraw all forces from Afghanistan before
China is willing to reopen the long-stalled talks, Mr. Li said.

Shake-Up Expected in August

The Chinese leader also said that Hua Guofeng would submit his resignation as
Prime Minister in late August at a meeting of the National People's Congress,
the nominal Parliament. His successor will be Zhao Ziyang, now the executive
Deputy Prime Minister who has in effect been running the Government.

At that time, Mr. Li said, five of the Deputy Prime Ministers will also submit
their resignations: Deng Xiaoping, Chen Yun, Xu Xiangqian, Wang Zhen and Mr. Li
himself. They will not resign their posts in the party's ruling Politburo.

Mr. Li said that the Gang of Four, Jiang Qing, Mao Zedong's widow, and her three
radical associates, would be placed on trial this autumn in accordance with
procedures to be established by the National People's Congress. The trial will
be carried out in terms of strict legality, Mr. Li said, but will be closed
because of the many state secrets involved. The question of what information
will be made public will be resolved by the Politburo's Standing Committee, the
inner circle.

Deng Away on 'Working Vacation'

Mr. Li said that while Mao's former associates would be tried with full regard
to the legal code, ''actually we can decide upon whatever verdict that we wish
because of the nature of the vast number of crimes of which they are guilty.''

Mr. Li, who had granted the interview in the absence of Mr. Deng, who is taking
a ''working vacation'' in Hubei Province, took the hardest of hard lines toward
the Soviet Union, in addition to stating the conditions that the Chinese would
impose for any resumption of talks with Moscow.

He linked his comments about the Soviet Union to those he made about Mr. Reagan,
as if to underscore that Peking's attitude toward Moscow was at least as hard as
toward the Republican candidate.

The Russians, Mr. Li said, are interested in negotiations, but only to produce a
communique that would be limited to an expansion of trade and resumption of
cultural and sports relations. Substantive issues such as troop withdrawals
would be ignored, Mr. Li said.

''Of course,'' he said,'' the Soviet Union will not agree to our points.'' He
said the Soviet Union had ''two designs for the soft underbelly of Asia.'' One,
he added, is to establish a strategic position in the Indian Ocean, and he
described the move into Afghanistan as part of that plan. The other, Mr. Li
said, is to help Vietnam consolidate its position in Southeast Asia, thus
insuring Soviet control of the Strait of Malacca and linking Soviet strength in
the Indian and Pacific oceans.

Turbulent Decade Is Predicted

He said China expected the decade of the 1980's to be one of turbulence and
tension. He called for halting the Soviet Union before it completed its
strategic dispositions, warning that otherwise a world war was inevitable.

''We do not favor making concessions, compromises or appeasing the Soviet
Union,'' Mr. Li said, adding that he did not believe negotiations could change
the long-term Soviet objectives.

He said that the Great Leap Forward, the intensive economic development program
of 1958-60 that collapsed, could be called nothing but a mistake and that the
Cultural Revolution, the radicalization program of the late 1960's, was a
disaster that brought China to the brink of economic ruin. He put the blame for
the Cultural Revolution on Mao and, by implication, blamed him for having put
his radical associates in positions of power.

Mr. Li said that Mao came to realize that Lin Biao, the Defense Minister who was
killed in a mysterious plane crash in 1971 after having allegedly tried to
overthrow Mao, had been out to usurp power. But Mr. Li added that Mao had not
come to the same conclusion regarding his radical associates, and they were
exposed only after his death in 1976.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Li Xiannian

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BY CAROL RAND HERON,MICHAEL WRIGHT AND DON WYCLIFF;
THE NATION IN SUMMARY;
Can Anderson Cross a Legal Minefield?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1521 words


At this stage of Representative John B. Anderson's independent Presidential
campaign, lawyers are as important as media consultants. Out on the domestic
hustings last week, after a swing through Europe and the Middle East, he is
about to enter a crucial phase - an attempt to overcome a variety of hurdles,
some of them placed there by his political opponents' legal retainers, between
him and a place on many states' ballots.

For now, Mr. Anderson is a sure candidate in only eight states.  Efforts to win
a line on election day are under way in at least 35 others. This week, his
attorneys are scheduled to do battle in North Carolina with lawyers for the
Democratic National Committee which is among the plaintiffs claiming that a
state commission erred when it ruled earlier that Mr. Anderson was launching a
new party and wasn't just a sorehead attempting to spoil things for the two
major parties.

Republicans also faced a court challenge launched by the Democrats. President
Carter's re-election committee filed suit last week to keep Republican nominee
Ronald Reagan from getting $29.4 million in Federal campaign funds. The
Democratic suit charged that Mr. Reagan wasn't entitled because he stood to get
an unfair break from a plethora of independent committees that have sprung up to
help him. A Federal appeals court in Washington refused to hold up the money,
and a three-judge panel will rule later on the Democratic suit.

For his part, Mr. Reagan, still riding high in the polls, met with George Bush,
his running mate, and a wagon-load of advisers to talk unity and plan campaign
strategy, stressing industrial states. And in additional gestures toward toward
party solidarity, Anne Armstrong and James Baker, two moderate Republicans
who've not been especially close to Mr. Reagan, were given high-sounding titles
on the campaign's flow chart.

Alaska Lands: Staking Turf

With ringing declarations of principle barely drowning out the invective, the
Senate last week withdrew from the floor and sent into closed session a bill
setting aside as Federal lands 104 million still-pristine acres of Alaska.

Thus, whether Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, and Gary Hart, Democrat of
Colorado, still argued over broken promises and ''unconscionable acts'' is not
known. What is known is that they and their aides worked into the night and
beyond to refashion the Senate Energy Committee's legislation - not to satisfy
the Alaska-firsters such as the state's Democratic Senator Mike Gravel (those
who prefer no law to one that gives Washington the preserve's oil reserves,
timber, and important minerals) but to make the bill acceptable to the majority
of the state's officials and to environmentalists.

Like Mr. Stevens, Alaska's Republican Gov. Jay S. Hammond had reluctantly
supported the energy committee bill as the lesser of two evils. It protects less
land and allows more development of natural resourses than a House measure
already approved; another carrot is that passage would mean the millions of
acres Secretary of the Interior Cecil D. Andrus withdraw from state use will
probably be restored. Mr. Hart is negotiating for tougher land-use restrictions,
introduced during last week's floor debate.

Up the Flagpole for Draft Registration

It wasn't like the Vietnam War days at all. Mandatory registration for the draft
resumed last week for the first time in five years and - despite promises by
some organizations that an outbreak of protests would make the signup a shambles
- disruptions were few. Men born in 1960 appeared to have lined up, with varying
degrees of enthusiasm, and filled out forms at 34,000 post offices across the
land. Those born in 1961 are due to queue up starting tomorrow.

''It's going very, very well,'' said Bernard Rostker, director of the Selective
Service System said early in the week. Demonstrators were taken into custody in
Boston and in Hartford; how many young men had failed to register was unknown.
Antidraft organizers estimated 20 to 25 percent. Selective Service officials
predicted that as many as 98 percent of the four million affected men would
ultimately register, although the agency had budgeted only $400,000 for
publicity. The actual turnout won't be tallied right away, however, and 2
percent not registering would mean that as many as 80,000 young men have opted
to take their chances with the Feds.

Constitutional questions about registration, now bucked up to the United States
Supreme Court, won't be settled for months. A Federal appeals court in
Philadelphia ruled earlier this month that the signup was unconstitutional
because women weren't included. Spokesmen for some antidraft groups argued that
until the High Court ruled, the Government would be reluctant to prosecute
alleged violators. Not so, said the Department of Justice. Attorney General
Benjamin R.  Civiletti told a news conference that ''young men should understand
one thing very clearly: this law is in full effect.''

Chattanooga Blacks' Verdict

A mere brush fire compared to the conflagration that gutted Miami's Liberty City
ghetto in May, racial violence in the Alton Park slum of Chattanooga last week
burst from the same sort of spark and tinder.

On Tuesday, an all-white jury acquitted two Klu Klux Klansmen charged with
shooting and wounding four black women in April. A third Klansman was sentenced
to nine-to-20 months on a reduced charge.

As in Liberty City, following the acquittal by whites of white policemen charged
with killing a black insurance executive, Chattanooga blacks vented their
frustration with the courts and the poor quality of life in general in the
streets. No one was killed, but seven policemen were wounded by birdshot. Damage
from arson, looting and vandalism was estimated at about $250,000.

That the damage figure was so low - in Liberty City, it was $100 million -was
indicative of the city's depressed economic state. Local officials and
businessmen conceded that the Sunbelt boom of the past decade and a half has
passed Chattanooga by.

Local black officials said black anger had been rising for years because of poor
housing and high unemployment, which at the end of May reached 7.5 percent, the
highest in the state.

There is also a lack of political representation. About 35 percent of the city's
170,000 residents are black, but there is only one black elected official, a
City Commissioner, and no black prosecutors or judges.

An outside pacifier, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, flew in from Chicago last week and
helped to ease tensions by persuading Chattanooga officials to withdraw police
patrols from Alton Park. They were replaced by volunteer ''peace patrols'' of
black community leaders.  The city was put under a 9:30 P.M. to 5 A.M. curfew.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation also helped to stem the violence when it
agreed to look into whether the three Klansmen should be charged with civil
rights violations, under Federal law.

In Miami, attorneys for former Police Officer Charles Veverka said last week
they had been told their client would be indicted by a Federal grand jury
tommorrow for conspiracy to violate the civil rights of Arthur McDuffie, the
insurance executive whose death triggered the Liberty City riots.

Bethlehem Yards Afloat on Bribes

After the Arab oil boycott of 1973-74, when the market for new supertankers
collapsed, so did business in the nation's shipyards. In the ensuing scramble
for maintenance and repair contracts, Bethlehem Steel Corporation - in the
tradition of Lockheed, Westinghouse, et al - attempted to busy its yards by
paying hundreds of thousands of dollars to shipowner's representatives in the
United States, Venezuela and Colombia.

Last week, in a Federal District Court in New York, Bethlehem pleaded guilty to
charges that it paid more than $400,000 in bribes over a five-year period.

According to court papers, some of the cash - much which was doled out by
Bethlehem's ship repair sales office in New York - was smuggled into the United
States from Switzerland, where it had accumulated in a secret account. Bethlehem
said it had ''accepted corporate responsibility'' for the illegal payments. The
company, which won't be sentenced until Aug. 25, could be fined as much as
$500,000. In 1977, Bethlehem had sued two former employees to recover money
alledgedly misappropriated for the bribe schemes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Caroline Rand Herron Michael Wright, and Don Wycliff

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF A CHATTANOOGA POLICEMAN

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS LOBBY DUG IN,BATTLE READY

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Scarcely anyone paid any attention that July day, half a century ago last week,
when President Herbert Hoover signed an executive order establishing the
Veterans Administration.

The agency has since become an entrenched and influential fixture of the Federal
bureaucracy. It now has a budget of $21 billion, a work force of 218,000 -second
in size only to the Department of Defense -and it serves more than 30 million
veterans and 60 million of their dependents and survivors.

''Now, that's a helluva lot of people, a whole lot of votes,'' says A.M. (Monk)
Willis Jr., staff director of the House Veterans Affairs Committee, a panel that
has long championed the cause of the veteran.

Veterans are indeed everywhere. They include the old, the middleaged, the young,
persons in every social and economic stratum, Democrats (including President
Carter), Republicans (Ronald Reagan among them) and Independents. They are
entitled to and - through groups that field some of the most efficient lobbyists
in Washington - are quick to defend such goodies as the nation's most extensive
health care system, pension and disability benefits, education allowances for
themselves and their families, guaranteed home loans and drug counseling.

More than half the Congress are veterans, although the number has shrunk
slightly in recent years. Most of these ex-servicemen usually look kindly on
preserving and expanding wherever possible programs that aid fellow veterans.

While not a current favorite of pro-veterans' groups, Representative Morris K.
Udall, Democrat of Arizona, noted a few years ago some of the benefits he had
received because he had worn a uniform during World War II. ''The United States
gave me an education,'' he said, '' a law degree, it helped me buy my first
home, it enabled me to get a loan to buy the building I had my law office in.''

For all their friends in high places, the veterans and their Washington
lobbyists have had to contend this year with Congress's sporadic attempts to cut
spending and a President (an old Navy hand) who isn't at all times dedicated to
preserving all those veterans' benefits.

''There was a time,'' says Mr. Willis, ''when nearly any veterans' bill that got
to the floor would fly. That's no longer true.'' In the late spring, for
instance, the House and Senate refused to approve substantial spending increases
sought by their veterans' affairs committees.

As a result, some lobbyists are adopting new, more partisan tactics. The oldest
of the major veterans' groups, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, recently became the
first to organize a political action committee. The V.F.W. unit will support
about 200 Congressional candidates, most of them conservatives and professed
friends of the veteran, and contribute about $200,000 to their campaigns. The
V.F.W. also endorsed Republican Presidential nominee Ronald Reagan and voted to
give $5,000 to his campaign.

Founded in 1899, and currently boasting a membership of 1.8 million members,
plus a women's auxiliary of 600,000, the V.F.W. is not the largest of the
veterans' groups. It ranks second in size to the American Legion, which has 2.7
million members and a millionmember women's auxiliary.

But the Veterans of Foreign Wars is generally considered the most outspoken
voice among the veterans' groups on issues not directly related to veterans'
benefits. For instance, it strongly opposes the Equal Rights Amendment as well
as any arms limitation agreements and cuts in defense spending. The V.F.W.'s
endorsement of Mr. Reagan reflected growing unhappiness within that organization
(and in other large veterans' groups) with the Carter Administration.

''Jimmy Carter has done more to destroy the veterans program than any President
that ever sat in the White House,'' says Cooper Holt, executive director of the
V.F.W. He is also critical of Max Cleland, head of the Veterans Administration,
terming him ''a mere puppet'' of the Carter administration.

A Georgia native who lost both legs and his right forearm while serving in
Vietnam with the Army, Mr. Cleland vigorously denies that the Carter
Administration is down on veterans. Defending the reduction of 10,000 beds in
V.A. hospitals since Mr. Carter took office, Mr. Cleland says that the President
wants to focus on more pressing problems, such as drug and alcohol abuse,
service-connected illness and psychological counseling, using less-expensive
outpatient care wherever possible.

While he succeeded in reducing the number of available hospital beds in use, the
President failed in his bid to modify a law that gives veterans an automatic leg
up on other applicants for Federal jobs. Opposition by the veterans' lobby a few
years ago helped bury a proposal by the National Academy of Sciences to
gradually merge the V.A. hospital network with the nation's general community
hospitals.

In addition to the ''Big Three'' - the Legion, V.F.W. and D.A.V. - the veterans'
lobby includes AMVETS (American Veterans of World War II, Korea and Vietnam),
with 150,000 members; Paralyzed Veterans of America, with 11,000 members; and
the Blinded Veterans of America, with 2,700 members. One small but vocal
organization is the Vietnam Veterans of America, with about 1,400 members, which
has concentrated on what it feels are the particular problems of Vietnam-era
veterans, including high unemployment and psychological difficulties. The bigger
veterans' organizations, after some years of footdragging, are attempting to
recruit many of the 8 million or so Vietnam veterans.  The Legion claims about
750,000 Vietnam-era members; the V.F.W., about 500,000; and the D.A.V., more
than 200,000.

All these groups view their mission as getting as much as they can for veterans.
Not so the American Veterans Committee, founded in 1944 by a group of servicemen
and servicewomen as an alternative to the more traditional organizations. With
its motto ''Citizens First, Veterans Second,'' the 25,000-member A.V.C. has
supported educational benefits and aid to the disabled. But, unlike the other
organizations, it has vigorously opposed special privileges and generous bonuses
for perfectly healthy veterans. The A.V.C. has actively espoused civil rights
legislation, abortion rights and the Equal Rights Amendment, even marching in
E.R.A. demonstrations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: PHOTO OF MAX CLELAND,HEAD OF THE VETERANS ADMINISTRATION

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RESULTS OF YESTERDAY'S COMPETITION IN THE SUMMER OLYMPICS;
BASKETBALL;
MEN'S SEMIFINALS;
Group A Spain 110Brazil 81 U.S.S.R. 85Italy 87 Yugoslavia 112Cuba 84;
Group B Senegal 81India 59 Sweden 61, Czechoslovakia 59 Poland 101Australia 74

SECTION: Section 5; Page 11, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 6545 words


BOXING

Preliminary Bouts

112-Pound Class
Roman Gilberto, Mexico, stopped Al- b erto Mercado, Puerto Rico, (1st round 1
:32); Petar Lessov, Bulgaria, defeated.  H assen Sherif, Ethiopia, (points);
Hugh R ussell, Ireland, defeated. Emmanuel M lundwa, Tanzania, (points); Ryon
Sik Y o, North Korea, defeated. Ramon Ar- m ando Guevara, Venezuela, (points); D
aniel Radu, Rumania, defeated Keith W allace, Britain, (points); Janos Varadi, H
ungary, stopped Rabiraj Thapa, Nepal,

(1st round 1:58).  140-Pound Class
Faruok Chanchoun Jawad, Iraq, de- f eated John Munduga, Uganda, (knock- o ut 1st
round 2:01); Jose Aguilar, Cuba, d efeated Bun Hwa Ryu, North Korea, ( points);
Jose Angel Molina, Puerto Rico, s topped Dietmar Schwarz, East Germa- n y, (3d
round 1:04); Serik Konakbaev, U .S.S.R., defeated Imre Bacskai, Hun- g ary, (2d
round :002); William Lyimo, T anzania, defeated Khast Jamgan, Mon- g olia,
(points); Anthony Willis, Britain, d efeated Shadrach Odhiambo, Sweden, (
points); Ace Rusevski, Yugoslavia, de- f eated Boualem Belaouane, Algeria, (
points); Patrizio Oliva, Italy, stopped

Farez Halabi, Syria, (3d round 2:36).  179-Pound Class
Slobodan Kacar, Yugoslavia, knocked o ut Nassoro Michael, Tanzania, (2d- r ound
1:01); David Kvachadze, U.S.S.R., k nocked out Straughn Andrew Mcdona, B ritain,
(2d round 2:51).  Herbert Bauch, East Germany, de- f eated Bojidar Ivanov,
Bulgaria, ( points); Geoffrey Pike, Australia, de- f eated Anaclet Wamba, Congo,
(2d round 2 :10); Pawel Skrzecz, Poland, defeatd M ohammed Bouchiche, Algeria,
(walk- o ver); Georgica Donici, Rumania, s topped Jean-Paul Nanga Ntsah, Camer-
o on, (2d round 2:05); Michael Madsen, D enmark, defeated Csaba Kuzma, Hun- g
ary, (points).
CYCLING

4,000-Meter Team Pursuit

Final
1, U.S.S.R., (Viktor Manakov, Valery M ovchan, Vladimir Osokin, Vitaly Petra- k
ov), 4:15.70; 2, East Germany, (Gerald M ortag, Uwe Unterwalder, Matthias Wie- g
and, Volker Winkler), 4:19.67; 3, Czecho- s lovakia, (Teodor Cerny, Martin Penc,
J iri Pokorny, Igor Slama); 4, Italy, (Pie- r angelo Bincoletto, Guido Bontempi,
I vano Maffei, Silvestro Milani); 5, F rance, (Alain Bondue, Philippe Cheval- i
er, Pascal Poisson, Jean-Marc Rebiere); 6 , Australia, (Colin Fitzgerald, Kevin
Ni- c hols, Kelvin Poole, Garry Sutton); 7, B ritain, (Anthony Doyle, Malcolm
Elliott, G len Mitchell, Sean Yates); 8, Switzer- l and, (Robert Dill-Bundi, Urs
Fleuler, H ans Kaenel, Hans Ledermann).

Sprint Final
Lutz Hesslich, East Germany defeated Y ave Cahard, France, 2-1; Sergei Kopy- l
ov, U.S.S.R. defeated Anton Tkac, C zechoslovakia, 2-0.
DIVING

WOMEN'S

Platform Final
1, Martina Jaschke, East Germany, 5 96.25; 2, Servard Emirzyan, U.S.S.R., 5
76.46; 3, Liana Tsotadze, U.S.S.R., 5 75.92; 4, Rumona Wenzel, East Germa- n y,
542.07; 5, Yelena Matyushenko, U .S.S.R., 540.18; 6, Elsa Tenorio, Mexico, 5
39.44; 7, Valerie McFarlane, Australia, 4 99.78; 8, Ildiko Kelemen, Hungary, 4
76.53.
EQUESTRIAN

Three-Day Event

Individual Cross-Country
1, Federico Euro Roman, (Italy, Rossi- n an), 49.2; 2, Aleksandr Blinov, (
.U.S.S.R, Galzun), 56.4; 3, Yuri Salnikov, ( U.S.S.R., Pintset), 93.6; 4, Valery
Vol- k ov, (U.S.S.R., Tskheti), 125.6; 5, Tzvetan D ontchev, (Bulgaria,
Medisson), 114.4; 6, M iroslaw Szlapka, (Poland, Erywan), 1 84.4; 7, Anna
Casagrande, (Italy, Dal- e ye), 190.0; 8, Mauro Roman, (Italy, D ourakine 4),
218.0.
FENCING

MEN'S

Foil Final Ranking
1. France (Didier Flament, 3, Paskal J olyot, 2, Bruno Boscherie, 1, Philippe B
onnin, 2), 8) ; 2, U.S.S.R. (Aleksandr R omankov, 3, Vladimir Smirnov, 3, Sa- b
irzhan Ruziev, 2, Ashot Karagyan, 0), 8; 3 , Poland (Adam Robak, 3, Boguslaw Z
ych, 3, Lech Koziejowski, 2, Marian Syp- n iewski, 1), 9; 4, East Germany (Hart-
m uth Behrens, 2, Siegmar Gutzeit, 1, K laus Haertter, 0, Klaus Kotzmann, 2), 5;
5 , Rumania (Petru Kuki, 1, Mihai Tiu, 3, T udor Petrus, 2, Sorin Roca, 3), 9;
6, Hun- g ary (Istvan Szelei, 2, Andras Papp, 1, L aszlo Demeny, 3, Jeno Pap,
1), 7.
FIELD
HOCKEY

MEN India 4U.S.S.R 2 Poland 9Tanzania 1
TEAM
HANDBALL

MEN'S Preliminary Pool

Group A Hungary 16Denmark 15 Spain 24Cuba 24

Group B Switzerland 26Algeria 18 Yugoslavia 44Kuwait 10
ROWING

WOMEN

Final

Fours With Coxswain
1, East Germany, (Ramona Kapheim, Sil- via Frohlich, Angelika Noack, Romy
Saalfeld, Kirsten Wenzel), 3:19.27; 2, Bul- garia, (Ghinka Ghurova, Mariika
Mode- va, Rita Todorova, Iskra Velinova, Na- dejda Filipova), 3:20.75; 3,
U.S.S.R., (Ma- riya Fadeyeva, Galina Sovetnikova, Marina Studneva, Svetlana
Semyonova, Nina Cheremisina), 3:20.92; 4, Rumania, (Georgeta Masca Militaru,
Florica Silaghi, Maria Tanasa, Valeria Catescu, Aneta Matei), 3:22.08; 5,
Australia, (Anne Chirnside, Verna Westwood, Pamela Westendorf, Sally Harding,
Susanne Pal- freyman), 3:26.37.

Pairs Without Coxswain
1, East Germany, (Ute Steindorf, Corne- lia Klier), 3:30.49; 2, Poland,
(Malgorzata Dluzewska, Czeslawa Koscianska), 3:30.95; 3, Bulgaria, (Siika
Barboulova, Stoyanka Kubatova), 3:32.39; 4, Ruma- nia, (Florica Dospinescu,
Elena Oprea), 3:35.14; 5, U.S.S.R., (Larisa Zavarzina, Galina Stepanova),
4:12.53.

Double Sculls
1, U.S.S.R., (Yelena Khloptseva, Larisa Popova), 3:16.27; 2, East Germany,
(Cornelia Linse, Heidi Westphal), 3:17.63; 3, Rumania, (Olga Homeghi, Va- leria
Rosca Racila), 3:18.91; 4, Bulgaria, (Svetla Otzetova, Zdravka Yordanova),
3:23.14; 5, Poland, (Hanna Jarkiewicz, Janina Klucznik), 3:27.25; 6, Hungary,
(Ilona Bata, Klara Langhoffer), 3:35.70.

Single Sculls
1, Sanda Toma, Rumania, 3:40.69; 2, An- tonina Makhina, U.S.S.R., 3:41.65; 3,
Martina Schroter, East Germany, 3:43.54; 4, Rossitza Spassova, Bulgaria,
3:47.22; 5, Beryl Mitchell, Britain, 3:49.71; 6, Beata Dziadura, Poland,
3:51.45.

Eights
1. East Germany, (Martina Boesler, Ker- sten Neisser, Christiane Kopke, Birgit
Schutz, Gabriele Kuhn, Ilona Richter, Marita Sandig, Karin Metze, Marina Wilke),
3:03.32; 2, U.S.S.R., (Olga Pivo- varova, Nina Umanets, Nadyezhda Prishchepa,
Valentina Zhulina, Tatyana Stetsenko, Yelena Tereshina, Nina Preo- brazhenskaya,
Mariya Pazyun, Nina Frolova), 3:04.29; 3, Rumania, (Angelica Aposteanu, Marlena
Zagoni, Rodica Frintu, Florica Bucur, Rodica Puscatu, Ana Iliuta, Maria
Constantinescu, Elena Bondar, Elena Dobritoiu), 3:05.63; 4, Bul- garia, (Daniela
Stavreva, Stefka Koleva, Todorka Vassileva, Snejka Khristeva, Roumiana Kostova,
Veneta Karamand- joukova, Mariana Mintcheva, Valentina Alexandrova, Stanka
Gheorghieva), 3:10.03; 5, Britain, (Gillian Hodges, Joanne Toch, Penny Sweet,
Lin Clark, Elizabeth Paton, Rosemary Glugston, Ni- cola Boyes, Beverley Jones,
Pauline Wright), 3:13.85.

Quadruple Sculls
1, East Germany, (Sybille Reinhardt, Jutta Ploch, Jutta Lau, Roswietha Zobelt,
Liane Buhr), 3:15.32; 2, U.S.S.R., (Anto- nina Pustovit, Yelena Matievskaya,
Olga Vasilchenko, Nadyezhda Lyubimova, Nina Cheremisina), 3:15.73; 3, Bulgaria,
(Mariana Serbezova, Roumeliana Bontcheva, Doloress Nakova, Anka Bako- va, Anka
Gheorghieva), 3:16.10; 4, Ruma- nia, (Maria Macoviciuc, Aneta Mihaly, Sofia
Banovici, Mariana Zaharia, Elena Giurca), 3:16.82; 5, Poland, (Boguslawa
Tomasiak, Mariola Abrahamczyk, Maria Kobylinska, Aleksandra Kaczynska, Maria
Dzieza), 3:20.95; 6, Netherlands, (Ineke Donkervoort, Lily Meeuwisse, Greet
Hellemans, Jos Compaan, Monique Pronk), 3:22.64.
SHOOTING

Clay-Target Skeet

(Five-Man Shootoff For Tiebreaker.)
1, Hans Kjeld Rasmussen, Denmark, 1 96; 2, Lars-Goran Carlsson, Sweden, 196; 3 ,
Roberto Castrillo, Cuba, 196; 4, Pavel P ulda, Czechoslovakia, 196; 5, Celso
Giar- d ini, Italy, 196; 6, Guillermo Torres, C uba, 195; 7, Francisco Perez,
Spain, 195; 8 , Ari Westergard, Finland, 195.
SWIMMING

MEN

200-Meter Backstroke

Heat 1
1, Vladimir Shemetov, U.S.S.R., 2 :04.20; 2, Douglas Campbell, Britain, 2
:04.78; 3, Fred Eefting, Netherlands, 2 :04.84; 4, Vladimir Dolgov, U.S.S.R., 2
:05.11; 5, Jimmy Carter, Britain, 2 :09.94; 6, David Cummins, Ireland, 2 :12.45.


Heat 2
1, Paul Moorfoot, Australia, 2:04.87; 2, M iloslav Rolko, Czechoslovakia,
2:05.13; 3 , Viktor Kuznetsov, U.S.S.R., 2:05.14; 4, F rederic Delcourt, France,
2:05.20; 5, F ranky de Groote, Belgium, 2:06.97; 6, N goc Thanh Pham, Vietnam,
2:28.40.

Heat 3
1, Mark Kerry, Australia, 2:03.60; 2, Mi- c hael Soderlund, Sweden, 2:04.67; 3,
Jorg S tingl, East Germany, 2:05.19; 4, Robert R udolf, Hungary, 2:08.23; 5,
Dietmar G ohring, East Germany, 2:14.11; 6, Dan- i el Ayora, Peru, 2:17.12.

Heat 4
1, Sandor Wladar, Hungary, 2:02.62; 2, Z oltan Verraszto, Hungary, 2:03.08; 3, M
ark Tonelli, Australia, 2:07.04; 4, Bengt B aron, Sweden, 2:07.13; 5, Nenad
Milos, Y ugoslavia, 2:07.51; 6, Mihai Mandache, R umania, 2:07.97; 7, Zbigniew
Januszkie- w icz, Poland, 2:08.11.

Semifinal
1, Wladar, Hungary, 2:01.93; 2, Verrasz- t o, Hungary, 2:02.40; 3, Kerry,
Australia, 2 :03.14; 4, Shemetov, U.S.S.R., 2:03.48; 5, E efting, Netherlands,
2:03.92; 6, Soder- l und, Sweden, 2:04.10; 7, Campbell, Brit- a in, 2:04.23; 8,
Moorfoot, Australia, 2 :06.15.

Qualifiers For Final
1, Wladar, 2:02.62. 2, Verraszto, 2:03.08.  3 , Kerry, 2:03.60. 4, Shemetov,
2:04.20. 5, S oderlund, 2:04.67. 6, Campbell, 2:04.78. 7, E efting, 2:04.84. 8,
Moorfoot, Australia, 2 :04.87.

200-Meter Breast-Stroke

Heat 1
1, Arsen Miskarov, U.S.S.R., 2:19.57; 2, J org Walter, East Germany, 2:23.19; 3,
G len Christiansen, Sweden, 2:26.00; 4, P eter Evans, Australia, 2:26.62; 5,
Gus- t avo Torrijos, Spain, 2:26.96; 6, Albert B oonstra, Netherlands, 2:27.21.

Heat 2
1, Alban Vermes, Hungary, 2:20.62; 2, L indsay Spencer, Australia, 2:21.08; 3.
G ennady Utenkov, U.S.S.R., 2:21.17; 4, P ablo Restrepo, Colombia, 2:23.74; 5,
An- d rey Aguilar, Costa Rica, 2:33.19; 6, Da- r iusz Wolny, Poland, 2:38.52.

Heat 3
1, Robertas Zulpa, U.S.S.R., 2:17.83; 2, D uncan Goodhew, Britain, 2:21.25; 3, P
eter Berggren, Sweden, 2:22.09; 4, J anos Dzvonyar, Hungary, 2:24.43; 5, H
elmunt Levy, Colombia, 2:27.94; 6, M artti Jarventaus, Finland, 2:28.04; 7, D
jamel Yahiouche, Algeria, 2:41.65.

Qualifiers For Final
1, Zulpa, U.S.S.R., 2:17.83; 2, Miskarov, U .S.S.R., 2:19.57; 3, Vermes,
Hungary, 2 :20.62; 4, Spencer, Australia, 2:21.08. 5, U tenkov, U.S.S.R.,
2:21.17; 6, Goodhew, B ritain, 2:21.25; 7, Berggren, Sweden, 2 :22.09; 8,
Walter, East Germany, 2:23.19.

Final
1, Robertas Zulpa, U.S.S.R., 2:15.85; 2, A lban Vermes, Hungary, 2:16.93; 3, A
rsen Miskarov, U.S.S.R., 2:17.28; 4, G ennady Utenkov, U.S.S.R., 2:19.64; 5, L
indsay Spencer, Australia, 2:19.68; 6, D uncan Goodhew, Britain, 2:20.92; 7, P
eter Berggren, Sweden, 2:21.65; 8, Jorg W alter, East Germany, 2:22.39.

100-Meter Freestyle

Heat 1
1, Sergei Krasyuk, U.S.S.R., 52.08; 2, P elle Wikstrom, Sweden, 52.29; 3, Stefan
V olery, Switzerland, 52.68; 4, Fabrizio R ampazzo, Italy, 52.71; 5, Rui Pinto A
breu, Portugal, 52.85; 6, Gabor Mesza- r os, Hungary, 54.41; 7, Abdulwahab W
erfeli, Libya, 1:01.55; 8, Bilall Ya- m outh, Lebanon, 1:03.48.

Heat 2
1, Sergei Kopliakov, U.S.S.R., 52.08; 2, D avid Lopez, Spain, 52.43; 3, Mark
Tay- l or, Britain, 52.65; 4, Paolo Revelli, Italy, 5 2.74; 5, Guy Goosen,
Zimbabwe, 52.87; 6, Y ulian Vassilev, Bulgaria, 53.61; 7, Laris P hylactou,
Cyprus, 57.41; 8, Jorge Lima, A ngola, 59.39.

Heat 3
1 (tie), Per Johansson, Sweden, 52.11 a nd Neil Brooks, Australia, 52.11; 3,
Raf- f aele Franceschi, Italy, 52.26; 4, Graeme B rewer, Australia, 52.59; 5,
Ramon L avin, Spain, 53.45; 6, Tzvetan Golomeev, B ulgaria, 53.50; 7, Mohamed
Halimi, Al- g eria, 55.16; 8, Zoe Andrianifaha, Mada- g ascar, 1:04.92.

Heat 4
1, Per Holmertz, Sweden, 52.01; 2, Rene E cuyer, France, 52.09; 3, Sergei
Smiria- g in, U.S.S.R., 52.21; 4, Jorge Luiz L. Fer- n andes, Brazil, 52.51; 5,
Alberto Eugenio M estre, Venezuela, 52.62; 6, Ciro Marques D elgado, Brazil,
53.00; 7, Adham Hem- d an, Kuwait, 58.33.

Qualifiers For Semifinal
1, Woithe, East Germany, 50.49; 2, S mith, Britain, 51.88; 3, Holmertz, S weden,
52.01; 4, Mark Tonelli, Australia, 5 2.04; 5 (tie), Sergei Krasyuk, U.S.S.R., a
nd Sergei Kopliakov, U.S.S.R., 52.08; 7, R ene Ecuyer, France, 52.09; 8(tie),
Per J ohansson, Sweden, and Neil Brooks, A ustralia, 52.11; 10, Sergei
Smiriagin, U .S.S.R., 52.21; 11, Raffaele Franceschi, I taly, 52.26; 12, Pelle
Wikstrom, Sweden, 5 2.29; 13, David Lopez, Spain, 52.43; 14, J orge Luiz L.
Fernandes, Brazil, 52.51; 15, K ees Vervoorn, Netherlands, 52.57; 16, G raeme
Brewer, Australia, 52.59.

Qualifiers For Final
1, Woithe, 50.49; 2, Smith, 51.88; 3, T onelli, 52.04; 4, Vervoorn, 52.57; 5, B
ayer, 52.79; 6, Kuhne, 52.93; 7, Van Ve T o, 56.75; 8, Martins, 1:06.17.

WOMEN

800-Meter Freestyle

Heat 1
1, Heike Dahne, East Germany, 8:36.09; 2 , Irina Aksyonova, U.S.S.R., 8:44.42;
3, P ascale Verbauwen, Belgium, 8:45.12; 4, O xana Komissarova, U.S.S.R.,
8:45.80; 5, Y elena Ivanova, U.S.S.R., 8:47.33; 6, Ro- b erta Felotti, Italy,
8:58.54.

Heat 2
1, Ines Diers, East Germany, 8:40.29; 2, M ichelle Ford, Australia, 8:42.36; 3,
Ines G eisler, East Germany, 8:46.96; 4, Rose- m ary Brown, Australia, 8:49.47;
5, J acquelene Willmott, Britain, 8:50.51; 6, R eggie de Jong, Netherlands,
8:54.49; 7, S ophia Dara, Greece, 9:02.37; 8, Nikole S chrepfer, Switzerland,
9:15.11.

Qualifiers For Final
1, Miss Dahne, 8:36.09; 2, Miss Diers, 8 :40.29; 3, Miss Ford, 8:42.36; 4, Miss
Ak- s yonova, 8:44.42; 5, Miss Verbauwen, 8 :45.12; 6, Miss Komissarova,
8:45.80; 7, M iss Geisler, 8:46.96; 8, Miss Ivanova, 8 :47.33.

100-Meter Breast-Stroke

Final
1, Ute Geweniger, East Germany, 1 :10.22; 2, Elvira Vasilkova, U.S.S.R., 1
:10.41; 3, Susanne Schultz Nielsson, Den- m ark, 1:11.16; 4, Margaret Kelly,
Britain, 1 :11.48; 5, Eva-Marie Hakansson, S weden, 1:11.72; 6, Susannah
Brownsdon, B ritain, 1:12.11; 7, Lina Kachushite, U .S.S.R., 1:12.21; 8, Monica
Bonon, Italy, 1 :12.51.

400-Meter Individual Meledy

Heat 1
1, Sharon Davies, Britain, 4:52.38; 2, O lga Klevakina, U.S.S.R., 4:55.99; 3, S
arah Kerswell, Britain, 5:03.75; 4, Mari- a na Paraschiv, Rumania, 5:04.56; 5, M
aria Pia Ayora, Peru, 5:27.19.

Heat 2
1, Ulrike Tauber, East Germany, 4 :51.97; 2, Grit Slaby, East Germany, 4 :52.01;
3, Stoyanka Dangalakova, Bul- g aria, 4:56.26; 4, Christel Fechner, Bel- g ium,
4:56.92.

Heat 3
1, Petra Schneider, East Germany, 4 :46.53; 2, Agnieszka Czopek, Poland, 4
:49.04; 3, Magdalena Bialas, Poland, 4 :51.59; 4, Ann-Sofi Roos, Sweden, 4
:57.13; 5, Lisa Curry, Australia, 5:01.58; 6 , Irinel Panulescu, Rumania,
5:07.74; 7, C atherine Bohan, Ireland, 5:21.82.

Qualifiers for Final
1, Petra Schneider, East Germany, 4 :46.53; 2, Agnieszka Czopek, Poland, 4
:49.04; 3, Magdalena Bialas, Poland, 4 :51.59; 4, Ulrike Tauber, East Germany ,
4 :51.97; 5, Grit Slaby, East Germany, 4 :52.01; 6, Sharron Davies, Britain, 4
:52.38; 7, Olga Klevakina, U.S.S.R., 4 :55.99; 8, Stoyanka Dangalakova, Bul- g
aria, 4:56.26.

Final
1. Petra Schneider, East Germany, 4 :36.29, (world record); 2, Sharon Davies, B
ritain, 4:46.83; 3, Agnieszka Czopek, Po- l and, 4:48.17; 4, Grit Slaby, East
Germa- n y, 4:48.54; 5, Ulrike Tauber, East Ger- m any, 4:49.18; 6, Stoyanka
Dangalakova, B ulgaria, 4:49.25; 7, Olga Klevakina, U .S.S.R., 4:50.91; 8,
Magdalena Bialas, P oland, 4:53.30.
WATER
POLO

Group D Hungary 6Spain 5

Group E
Australia 4Greece 2 Italy 5Bulgaria 4 Rumania 8Sweden 3
TRACK AND
FIELD

MEN'S DECATHLON

110-Meter Hurdles

Heat 1
1, Atanass Andonov, Bulgaria, (14.83) 8 67; 2, Yuri Kutsenko, U.S.S.R., (15.04)
8 44; 3, Georg Werthner, Austria, (15.08) 8 40; 4, Alessandro Brogini, Italy,
(15.21) 8 26; 5, Columba Blango, Sierra Leone, ( 15.45) 802; 6, Esa Jokinen,
Finland, ( 15.62) 785.

Heat 2
1, Valery Kachanov, U.S.S.R., (14.40) 9 15; 2, Josef Zeilbauer, Austria, (14.80)
8 70; 3, Peter Hadfield, Australia, (15.18) 8 30; 4, Bradley McStravick,
Britain, ( 15.23) 824; 5, Dariusz Ludwig, Poland, ( 15.38) 809; 6, Razvigor
Yankov, Bulgar- i a, (15.69) 778.

Heat 3
1, Daley Thompson, Britain, (14.47) 907; 2 , Janusz Szczerkowski, Poland,
(14.57) 8 96; 3, Steffen Grummt, East Germany, ( 14.82) 868; 4, Sergei Zhelanov,
U.S.S.R., ( 14.83) 867; 5, Stefan Niklaus, Switzer- l and, (14.96) 853; 6,
Johannes Lahti, Fin- l and, (15.141) 834; 7, Miro Ronac, Peru, ( 17.19) 645.

Discus Throw

Group A
1, Razvigor Yankov, Bulgaria, (157-6.5) 8 37; 2, Valery Kachanov, U.S.S.R.,
(150- 1 1.5) 800; 3, Dariusz Ludwig, Poland, (150- 4 ) 797; 4, Peter Hadfield,
Australia, (147- 1 1.5) 783; 5, Josef Zeilbauer, Austria, (144- 4 ) 763; 6,
Sergei Zhelanov, U.S.S.R., (140- 5 ) 740; 7, Daley Thompson, Britain, (138- 7 )
729; 8, Esa Jokinen, Finland, (132-9.5) 6 95; 9, Alessandro Brogini, Italy,
(129-8.5) 6 76; 10, Columba Blango, Sierra-Leone, ( 75-8.75) 306.

Group B
1, Steffen Grummt, East Germany, ( 159-4) 846; 2, Atanass Andonov, Bulgar- i a,
(156-3) 829; 3, Miro Ronac, Peru, (152- 3 .5) 808; 4, Janusz Szczerkowski,
Poland, ( 146-9.5) 777; 5, Johannes Lahti, Finland, ( 139-3) 733; 6, Stefan
Niklaus, Switzer- l and, (138-4.5) 728; 7, Yuri Kutsenko, U .S.S.R., (130-9)
683; 8, Bradley McStra- v ick, Britain, (129-5.5) 675; 9, Georg W erthner,
Austria, (125-1.5) 648.

Javelin Throw

Group B
1, Georg Werthner, Austria, 920 points, ( 241 feet 8 inches); 2, Yuri Kutsenko,
U .S.S.R., 857, (223-4 1/4); 3, Dariusz Lud- w ig, Poland, 741, (191-6 1/2); 4,
Razvigor Y ankov, Bulgaria, 738, (190-8); 5, Bradley M cStravick, Britain, 736,
(190-2 1/2); 6, S ergei Zhelanov, U.S.S.R., 728, (188); 7, J ohannes Lahti,
Finland, 723, (186-9 3/4); 8 , Miro Ronac, Peru, 716, (184-10).

Group A
1, Esa Jokinen, Finland, (221 feet, 3/4 i nches) 849 points; 2, Stefan Niklaus,
S witzerland, (218-3 1/2) 839; 3, Josef Zeil- b auer, Austria, (212-9 1/2) 820;
4, Daley T hompson, Britain, (210-6) 811; 5, Peter H adfield, Australia, (184-1
1/2) 713; 6, S teffen Grummi, East Germany, (181- 2 3/4) 701.

Pole Vault

Group A
1, Dariusz Ludwig, Poland, (13-4 3/4 f eet) 1,005 points; 2, Daley Thompson, B
ritain, (15-5) 981; 3, Sergei Shelanov, U .S.S.R., (15-1 1/4) 957; 4, Josef
Zeilbauer, A ustria, (14-9 1/4) 932; 5, Peter Hadfield, A ustralia, (14-5 1/4)
909.

Group B
1, Yuri Kutsenko, U.S.S.R. (16-1 feet) 1 ,028 points; 2, Jaunz Szczerkowski, Po-
l and, (16-1) 1,028; 3, Georg Werthner, A ustria, (15-11) 1,017; 4, Atanass
Ando- n ov, Bulgaria, (15-5) 981; 5, Johannes L ahti, Finland, (15-1 1/4) 957;
6, Razvigor Y ankov, Bulgaria, (15-1 1/4) 957; 7, Miro R onac, Peru, (14-5 1/4)
909; 8, Bradley M cStravick, Britain, (14-1 1/4) 884.

1,500-Meter Run

Heat 1
1, Bradley McStravick, Britain, ( 4:31.00) 583 points; 2, Peter Hadfield, A
ustralia, (4:44.70) 496; 3, Razvigor Yan- k ov, Bulgaria, (4:51.20) 457; 4,
Columba B lango, Sierra-Leone, (5:22.90) 293.

Heat 2
1, Atanass Andonov, Bulgaria, (4:29.20) 5 95 points. 2, Steffen Grummt, East
Ger- m any, (4:30.20) 588. 3, Esa Jokinen, Fin- l and, (4:34.40) 560. 4,
Johannes Lahti, Fin- l and, (4:44.00) 500. 5, Janusz Szczerkow- s ki, Poland,
(4:44.90) 495. 6, Stefan Nik- l aus, Switzerland, (4:44.90) 495.

Heat 3
1, Yuri Kutsenko, U.S.S.R., (4:22.60) 641 p oints; 2, Georg Werthner, Austria, (
4:23.40) 635; 3, Sergei Zhelanov, U .S.S.R., (4:27.50) 606; 4, Dariusz Lud- w
ig, Poland, (4:29.70) 591; 5, Josef Zeil- b auer, Austria, (4:30.60) 585; 6,
Daley T hompson, Britain, (4:39.90) 525.

Standing
1,Thompson, 8,495 points; 2, Kutsenko, 8 ,331; 3, Zhelanov, 8,135; 4, W
erthner,8,050; 5,Zeilbauer, 8,007; 6, L udwig, 7,978; 7, Andonov, 7,927; 8, G
rummt, 7,892.

MEN'S EVENTS

Javelin Throw Qualifying

(262-5.5 feet)

Group A
1, Ferenc Paragi, Hungary, 291-2.5; 2, W olfgang Hanisch, East Germany, 281- 6
.8; 3, Dainis Kula, U.S.S.R., 281-4.5; 4, M iklos Nemeth, Hungary, 278-4; 5,
Antero P uranen, Finland, 275-8; 6, Aleksandr M akarov, U.S.S.R., 273-3.8; 7,
Kheino P uuste, U.S.S.R., 272-2; 8, Justin Arop, U ganda, 271-3; 9, Aimo Aho,
Finland, 269- 5 ; 10, Pentti Sinersaari, Finland, 263-5.5.

3,000-Meter Steeplechase

Prelimiaries
(First 6 in each heat and 6 fastest losers qualify for semifinals.)

Heat 1
1, Filbert Bayi, Tanzania, 8:21.40; 2, E shetu Tura, Ethiopia, 8:23.80; 3,
Bogus- l aw Maminski, Poland, 8:24.00; 4, Wolf- g ang Konrad, Austria, 8:25.00;
5, Fran- c isco Sanchez, Spain, 8:27.50; 6, Tommy E kblom, Finland, 8:27.80; 7,
Aleksandr V orobei, U.S.S.R., 8:42.60; 8, Anthony S taynings, Britain, 8:47.50.

Heat 2
1, Bronislaw Malinowski, Poland, 8 :29.8; 2, Dusan Moravcik, Czechoslova- k ia,
8:33.4; 3, Sergei Olizarenko, U .S.S.R., 8:34.2; 4, Colin Reitz, Britain, 8
:35.3; 5, Roberto Volpi, Italy, 8:35.6; 6, V esa Laukkanen, Finland, 8:38.4; 7,
Paul C opu, Rumania, 8:45.6. 8, Girma Wolde- h ana, Ethiopia, 8:54.6.

Heat 3
1, Domingo Ramon, Spain, 8:31.90; 2, A natoly Dimov, U.S.S.R., 8:33.20; 3, Va- s
ile Bichea, Rumania, 8:35.40; 4, Krzysz- t of Wesolowski, Poland, 8:35.60; 5,
Roger H ackney, Britain, 8:36.40; 6, Giuseppe G erbi, Italy, 8:37.10; 7, Lahcene
Babaci, A lgeria, 8:38.70; 8, Hailu Woldetsadik, E thiopia, 8:41.00.

400-Meter Hurdles

Final
1, Volker Beck, East Germany, 48.70; 2, V asily Arkhipenko, U.S.S.R., 48.86; 3,
G ary Oakes, Britain, 49.11; 4, Nicolai Vas- s ilev, U.S.S.R., 49.34; 5, Rok
Kopitar, Y ugoslavia, 49.67; 6, Horia Toboc, Ruma- n ia, 49.84; 7, Franz Meier,
Switzerland, 5 0.00; 8, Yanko Bratanov, Bulgaria, 56.35.

800-Meter Run

Final
1, Steve Ovett, Britain, 1:45.4; 2, Sebas- t ian Coe, Britain, 1:45.9; 3,
Nikolai Kirov, U .S.S.R., 1:46.0; 4, Agberto Guimaraes, B razil, 1:46.2; 5,
Andreas Busse, East G ermany, 1:46.9; 6, Detlef Wagenknecht, E ast Germany,
1:47.0; 7, Jose Marajo, F rance, 1:47.3; 8, David Warren, Britain, 1 :49.3.

WOMEN'S EVENTS

100-Meter Dash

Semifinal

Heat 1
1, Romy Muller, East Germany, 11.22; 2 , Ingrid Auerswald, East Germany, 1 1.27;
3, Kathryn Smallwood, Britain, 1 1.30; 4, Heather Hunte, Britain, 11.36; 5, V
era Anisimova, U.S.S.R., 11.51; 6, E mma Sulter, France, 11.63; 7, Maria C
hichkova, Bulgaria, 11.65; 8, Laureen B eckles, France, 11.70.

Heat 2
1, Lyudmila Kondratyeva, U.S.S.R., 1 1.11; 2, Marlies Gohr, East Germany, 1
1.18; 3, Linda Haglund, Sweden, 11.36; 4, C hantal Rega, France, 11.36; 5, Sonia
L annaman, Britain, 11.38; 6, Natalya B ochina, U.S.S.R., 11.38; 7, Sofka
Popova, B ulgaria, 11.40; 8, Denise Boyd, Austral- i a, 11.44.

100 Meter Final
1, Lyudmila Kondratyeva, U.S.S.R., 1 1.06; 2, Marlies Gohr, East Germany, 1
1.07; 3, Ingrid Auerswald, East Germa- n y, 11.14; 4, Linda Haglund, Sweden, 1
1.16; 5, Romy Muller, East Germany, 1 1.16; 6, Kathryn Smallwood, Britain, 1
1.28; 7, Chantal Rega, France, 11.32; 8, H eather Hunte, Britain, 11.34.

High Jump

Final
1, Sara Simeoni, Italy, 6 feet, 5 1/2 inches ( Olympic record; previous record,
6-4, R osemary Ackermann, East Germany, 1 976); 2, Urszula Kielan, Poland, 6-3
7/8; 3, J utta Kirst, East Germany, 6-3 7/8; 4, R osemary Ackermann, East
Germany, 6 -2 3/4; 5, Marina Sysoeva, U.S.S.R., 6 -2 3/4; 6, Andrea Reichstein,
East Germa- n y, 6-2 3/4; 7, Christine Stanton, Australia, 6 -2 3/4; 8, Cornelia
Popa, Rumania, 6-1 5/8.
VOLLEYBALL

MEN'S

Preliminaries

Group A
U.S.S.R. 3Bulgaria 0 (15-6, 15-8, 15-10)

Group B Brazil 3Libya 0 Romania 3Yugoslavia 1
WEIGHT
LIFTING

182-Pound Class

Total
1, Yurik Vardanyan, U.S.S.R., 881.8 lbs; 2 , Blagoi Blagoev, Bulgaria, 821.2
lbs; 3, D usan Poliacik, Czechoslovakia, 810.1 l bs; 4. Jan Lisowski, Poland,
782.6 lbs; 5, K rassimir Drandarov, Bulgaria, 782.6 l bs; 6, Pawel Rabczewski,
Poland, 771.6 l bs; 7, Detlef Blasche, East Germany 7 60.5 lbs; 8, Juhani
Avellan, Finland, 733.0 l bs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CARTER'S VISION OF AMERICA

BYLINE: By Adam Clymer

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5369 words


In 1976, Jimmy Carter offered the country a vision of the kind of America he
hoped for and the kind of a President he wanted to be. He wanted to make the
Federal Government responsive and honorable, efficient and cost-conscious. He
wanted comprehensive policies that would meet the problems of energy, health
care and the cities. He wanted the United States to stand for human rights and
for arms control, and he expected an open and honest foreign policy to be
reciprocated abroad. Later, he glued a thick layer of traditional liberal
Democratic policies to his campaign, but those initial, simpler aims were the
promise -or at least the intention - of the first Carter Presidential candidacy.

Jimmy Carter is harder to figure out today, and that is extraordinary. Most
Presidents become easier to read after some time in office. The expectations
they have raised may prove wrong (as when Lyndon Johnson supported the increased
involvement in Vietnam he had opposed in the 1964 campaign, or when Watergate
unraveled in 1973 and surprised all except the most confirmed Nixon-haters). But
at the time at least the expectations seem quite obvious. In the course of his
first term, Mr. Carter has not left tracks that tell the voters clearly where he
would go - or even where he would like to go - if he were re-elected.

When Mr. Carter's most earnest and thoughtful supporters talk about a second
term, they sound like the blind men describing the elephant. One of them
discerns a diligent budget-balancer; another imagines a closet liberal about to
be freed to show his empathy with the poor. One supporter speaks of a leader who
will conciliate Congress while another talks about a leader who will, at last,
punish his enemies on Capitol Hill. One Carter man expects redoubled efforts for
weapons control while another expects more and more weapons.

''I've been so busy trying to get him elected,'' a top Carter campaign figure
said, ''I haven't stopped to worry about what he'd be like.'' But some aides see
the issue as a major stumbling block in the way of a Carter victory. One called
it ''the question of the year.''

In two interviews with The New York Times this month, the President addressed
this question, setting forth his ideas on topics ranging from comprehensive
health insurance to the revitalization of American industry. Yet it was a very
different kind of vision from that which he offered during the 1976 campaign.

Zbigniew Brzezinski, Mr. Carter's national security adviser, speaks of his boss
as ''the moralist and the engineer.'' Four years ago, the moralist was clearly
dominant. But in 1980, with many of the hopes of 1976 thwarted by the realities
of his four years in the job, Mr. Carter approaches the race with the emphasis
reversed. His experience as President seems to have altered his sense of what is
realistic, what is possible. He now emphasizes the difficulties to be overcome.
In 1980, what he has to offer often resembles a blueprint more than a vision.

At the Democratic National Convention in New York City next month, unless a
stunning political upset intrudes, Jimmy Carter will be nominated to be the
candidate of his party in November. As an incumbent, he is heir to certain
assumptions. There is, for example, the widespread feeling among his supporters
-and some of his enemies, as well - that a second term would somehow liberate
him from the restraints that political considerations have heretofore placed
upon him. Then there is the expectation that he will have automatic access to
television, since Presidents make news with their every utterance.

But this candidate and this election are dramatically different from any in the
nation's recent history. The presence of Representative John B. Anderson on the
ballot in a few tight states could cost Mr. Carter the election. And the contest
promises a special test of the public response to the conservative view: The
Republicans have nominated the voice of their right wing, and Mr.  Carter, in
the words of one top aide, is seeking to move his party away from its longtime
commitment to the ''liberalism of the New Deal'' toward a more conservative
stance.

Still, Mr. Carter is banking upon the advantages of his office.  During one of
the interviews this month, he was asked, ''What single thing would you think, if
you had to narrow it down to that, most entitles you to a vote for a second
term?''

His response, in essence: experience. Traditionally, that's a vital argument for
an incumbent President. The public knows that the candidate has had a chance to
learn the job and that, at the very least, he can be trusted not to push the
wrong button and ignite a nuclear war. But for the increasingly restless
American voter, experience may no longer be enough. In 1976, Mr. Carter banked
on that change when he gibed at President Ford's long service in Washington and
said, ''Anything you don't like about Washington, I suggest you blame on him.''
This time, Mr. Carter will be the candidate with the experience, the one who can
be blamed - for unemployment or inflation or for the hostages in Iran.

Jimmy Carter has a special set of problems, of course, when he seeks to convince
the voters of the advantages of experience. One major difficulty is the public's
view of his record in office.  According to the latest New York Times/CBS News
Poll, only three Americans in 10 now approve of the way he is handling his job.
Moreover, Mr. Carter has made it his mission to emphasize the complexities of
the problems facing America - often to the extent that he is perceived to be
uncertain and indecisive - and he is facing, in Ronald Reagan, a contender with
a vision of a simpler age and the solutions to match.

The contrast is stark, between the men and between their ideas as to where the
nation should be going. In the Times interviews, Mr.  Carter listed these among
the goals he would seek if he won his second term:

The revitalization of American industry. The President said it would be ''built
around the new technology that's going to be forthcoming on solar energy and the
synthesization of fuel from both coal and shale on the one hand and growing
crops on the other.'' He said more deregulation would be a part of the effort
and that, ''within the bounds of propriety,'' there would have to be ''a much
closer partnership between the Government on the one hand and industry on the
other, to make sure that we have full employment and also give industry the
chance to be competitive on a worldwide basis.''

The President's first tentative steps to implement this policy, a major topic of
discussion at the White House this summer, have been directed toward the
automobile industry. Mr. Carter said that steel ''and maybe shipbuilding'' would
also be early targets for the new approach, with further reductions in the
regulatory burden on industry expected as part of the effort to spur the lagging
productivity of American industry.

Health care. ''We will put a top priority on passing the health bill that we've
now devised and put forth to the Congress,'' Mr.  Carter said. ''We want to
implement fully a comprehensive national health-care program, phased in very
carefully so that Congress will buy it after all these years of failure to
act.'' Mr. Carter's plan would eventually provide health insurance for all
Americans; the program now before Congress would cover catastrophic illness and
the medical bills of the needy and aged. The President said he hoped that once
he and Senator Edward M. Kennedy ''get past the competition of candidacies,''
they could work together on this legislation. (Mr.  Kennedy, however, feels that
the Administration's legislative approach is in fact piecemeal, not carefully
''phased,'' and thus invites Congressional defeat.)

National health insurance is the major unfinished item on the liberal Democratic
agenda of the last several decades. In 1976, it was a major topic of Mr.
Carter's campaign, but it has been deferred since he took office, taking a back
seat to budget constraints, and the political rivalry with Mr. Kennedy has
helped muddy the waters.

Land policy. Mr. Carter said he saw ''profound challenges in the handling of
Government land.'' The 110 million acres in Alaska that he has locked away from
private mineral development is the example he points to, with pride: ''This
involves more public land than any single action that the Government has ever
taken.'' It was also one of the few instances in which he was able to bypass
determined Congressional opposition and achieve his goal.

The economic stakes are huge and the emotions are intense in the dispute between
conservationists and developers over Federal holdings. When Mr. Carter set aside
the vast acreage, he described the passage of responsible legislation on the
issue as ''the highest environmental priority of my Administration.''

The executive order that accomplished the removal of the Alaska lands was
described by Mr. Carter as having an effect ''for the next 50 or 100 years,''
but only Congress can make the act permanent. The House has passed legislation
covering Alaska lands, and it is coming before the Senate this month, but that
has happened twice before. It was after the Senate failure to act in 1978 that
the President moved to freeze the acreage.

The Supreme Court. Five of the nine justices are over 70 years of age, and
within the next few years, Mr. Carter said, some President will have ''the
chance to shape the basic attitudes of the Supreme Court for the next 15 to 20
years.'' Supreme Court appointments - Dwight Eisenhower's choice of Earl Warren
as Chief Justice, for example - can be the most significant domestic-policy
decisions a President ever makes, and Mr. Carter showed a feeling for that
impact in his address to the convention of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People this month.

''When local school boards and mayors, state legislatures and governors,
Presidents and the Congress have not been willing to give the rights to
Americans that have been withheld,'' Mr. Carter said, ''the United States
Supreme Court has been the final bulwark of freedom.'' Then, with an eye toward
the election and the kind of Justices his conservative Republican opponent might
select, the President said, ''You just think about what will happen with another
three or four appointments.''

In his speech before the N.A.A.C.P. and in both interviews with The New York
Times, Mr. Carter said that the kind of nominations he would make to the high
court could be predicted by looking at his choices for the lower Federal courts.

The Middle East. What had brought progress toward a permanent peace settlement
so far, Mr. Carter said, was ''the intense desire for peace on the part of the
Egyptian and Israeli people, and my belief is that that same intense desire for
peace and harmony and stability and mutual economic progress exists among the
Jordanians, the Syrians and the Lebanese people. And, I think, the Palestinians,
as well.''

Mr. Carter said that progress toward a settlement would probably be slowed by
the distraction of the American election and current ''political uncertainty''
in Israel affecting Prime Minister Menachem Begin. But he was optimistic, both
for Mr. Begin and for peace, saying, ''My guess is that he will weather the
challenge and go on and finish his term, and my guess is that Begin, like Sadat
and myself, all three of us want to have a Mideast peace settlement as part of
the historical record of our life's political work.''

National security. Mr. Carter said he had ''an absolute commitment to
maintaining our nation at peace - to strengthening, not weakening detente with
the Soviet Union and to controlling and reducing, working toward the elimination
of nuclear weapons.'' He spoke of ''a strong defense capability'' as the best
way to preserve peace, but laid more emphasis on olive branches than on
missiles.

Mr. Carter argued that his pursuit of detente had been working ''until the
Soviets invaded Afghanistan'' and he looked for a resumption of progress toward
detente in a second term. ''My hope,'' he said, ''is that with the worldwide,
concerted condemnation and pressure on the Soviets, and with the unexpected
resistance that is being mounted by the freedom fighters' struggle for national
liberation within Afghanistan, that the Soviets may decide to withdraw, opening
up a new opportunity, which I desire, to strengthen detente, control nuclear
weapons and to continue to keep our nation at peace.''

Candidate Jimmy Carter clearly bases his vision of the future upon his record in
the job. Why should a voter support him? In the first Times interview, he
answered this way:

''I would say experience, and all the ramifications of that word. I am better
knowledgeable about our nation now, its strengths and its limitations, its
opportunities and its problems, the relationship between the President and the
administration of the Government, between the President and the Congress,
between the United States and foreign leaders. This comes with study before one
gets in the Oval Office, if you intend to be a person who gets to be President.
But obviously, three and a half, four years of learning under the most
challenging circumstances acquaints one with the issues and prepares one to make
a better judgment about what is best for our country. We also have the
correlative advantage of continuity, to build upon what we have achieved, and to
continue some of the efforts that have not yet been successful.''

From the voter's point of view, of course, Mr. Carter's record cuts both ways.
In the interviews, for example, he spoke proudly of the people he had nominated
for the Federal bench (''more blacks, more women, more Hispanics in three and a
half years than all of the other previous Presidents in 200 years'') and said he
would appoint similarly ''superb'' people to the Supreme Court should the
occasion arise. And there is a consensus that Mr. Carter's selections have been
generally impressive. (In the view of Charles Morgan Jr., an attorney in
Washington who fought in the civil-rights battles in the South, the Carter
choices have been ''the best in the history of the country.'') But there have
been weaknesses in his record, as well, enough to send his general standing with
the public plummeting back to where it was before the Iranian seizure of
hostages in November.  For each achievement the President can cite, his critics
can find a failure - or a signal lack of public enthusiasm.

His Administration brought unemployment down, for example, but seemed perfectly
content to stand aside and watch unemployment go up again as recession put a
damper upon inflation. Now Mr. Carter can point to the fact that inflation has
begun to drop, but that may strike voters as small comfort given the fact that
it remains at very painful levels and the drop comes only after months at
astonishing heights. The drop in interest rates, too, comes in the
better-latethan-never category.

In 1976, the Democratic platform contained a traditional party position
inveighing against the use of unemployment as a tool against inflation; that
argument has now found its way into the platform of the Republican Party.

Mr. Carter promised four years ago to streamline Government bureaucracy. He can
point to accomplishments in that area, but they are not calculated to have great
impact upon the mass of voters. The creation of the Departments of Energy and
Education, for example, primarily impresses those groups immediately affected,
such as the National Education Association. Civil Service reform legislation was
passed after an intense struggle but - as one high Administration aide who
labored for its passage said recently - it has had no discernible effect on the
efficiency of the bureaucracy.

Similarly, the immense legislative effort required to get airline and trucking
deregulation bills passed and the administrative achievement in deregulating
banking and investment institutions have left the general public largely
unmoved.

Mr. Carter has won a substantial portion of the energy legislation he sought, a
major achievement considering the regionalism and parochialism of Congress in
dealing with that subject. His policies are, to a marked degree, responsible for
the fact that gasoline use is slipping while the natural-gas problem now seems
to have evaporated. Yet all this seems to have won him little public credit.

The Camp David agreement he negotiated between Egypt and Israel was a monumental
accomplishment, but that was nearly two years ago, and further progress has been
elusive. A second strategic arms treaty with the Soviet Union was negotiated,
after several false starts, but has never been adopted. Full diplomatic
relations with China were established and the Panama Canal Treaties were pushed
through, but like so many of Mr. Carter's moves in foreign affairs, they never
seemed to stir proponents as much as foes. And the 52 hostages in Iran still sit
there, no longer an election asset, now more of a symbol of nation
al frustration and, with the failed rescue mission, even of national impotence.

During his first term, Mr. Carter did tackle the tough ones, a theme he hammered
at last May in Ohio during his only day on the primary campaign trail. Some of
those tough ones were problems that his predecessors had approached much more
quietly (human rights, for example), and others (the Panama Canal, for example)
they had simply chosen to ignore. ''Try to discern some areas where we have been
timid or avoided them,'' he challenged in one of the Times interviews. Yet the
willingness to take on the tough ones, in and of itself, fails to answer those
who see his policies as naive or wrongheaded, or those who believe that Mr.
Carter tried to do too much too soon, lacking a clear set of priorities. The
President, himself, conceded that, during his first year working with Congress,
he tried ''to do too many things simultaneously.''

The public will judge the promise of a second Carter term not only on the record
of his Administration but also on its perception of the man himself and his
personal performance in office.

Richard A. Pinaire, a Democratic delegate from Junction City, Kan., recently
spoke of Mr. Carter as ''honest, courageous and forthright.'' In the 1976
campaign, it was Mr. Carter who promised never to lie or make a misleading
statement or avoid a contoversial issue, and who one day in Salem, Mass.,
offered the voter a Government ''as honest and truthful and decent and fair and
competent and idealistic and compassionate and as full of love as are the
American people.''

In the first Times interview, Mr. Carter was asked how he felt he'd lived up to
these promises. His reply: ''That's been an inner motivation of mine, not
something that I contrived, and I think we've had fairly good success in that.
We've tried to tell the truth; we've tried to have an open Government; we've
tried to deal with the matter of human or civil rights; we've tried to involve
minorities and other deprived people in the inner workings of Government, not
just to hand out favors to them; we've tried to exemplify the characteristics of
our nation of which we are proud in foreign affairs.

''We have tried to do this, to let the Government itself as an entity be a
source of admiration, certainly to avoid any legitimate allegation that the
Government was subject to legitimate condemnation. I can't say that we've
completely succeeded, no. But that's been our goal. If you compare it with the
depths of the Government status out of which we were emerging - that is,
Vietnam, Watergate, C.I.A., lies, obfuscation, misleading actions and
statements, illegalities - then we've had notable success. We're still fallible.
We make our mistakes. We're required because of our democratic system to
intermix statesmanship and political truisms under certain circumstances.''

Evidence of Mr. Carter's concern for ''political truisms'' has indeed not been
hard to detect. In early 1977, when he boldly sought to eliminate a number of
dams, drainage projects and waterways as environmentally or economically
unsound, certain projects dear to the hearts of key senators like Russell B.
Long of Louisiana and John C.  Stennis of Mississippi somehow were dropped from
the ''hit list.'' Archibald Cox was rejected by Mr. Carter as a nominee for a
judgeship on the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in spite
of high, impartial recommendations, after Senator Kennedy sponsored him. Half
the public came to believe that Mr. Carter was staying off the campaign trail
last winter, not because he was working every minute on the hostages in Iran,
but because the tactic was winning him votes.

Any President would find such moves remarked upon; Jimmy Carter finds them made
much of because of his insistence that he never, or almost never, considers
politics when he makes Government decisions.  Not only is such a position
intrinsically implausible in a successful politician, but it also leads skeptics
to view him as more political than he is.

Senator Howard H. Baker Jr., during his brief run for the White House, declared
that a President should be not only the nation's Chief Executive but also its
Chief Politician. Mr. Carter's wellpublicized disdain for the details of
political dealing puts him at the opposite end of the spectrum, and feeds the
idea that a President can and should be above politics. That attitude is abroad
these days in the form of proposals for a single six-year Presidential term.
John B. Connally, another unsuccessful Republican Presidential candidate,
advocates the idea; Mr. Carter himself flirted with it last year. (The argument
against it, simply put, is that accountability to the electorate is good for
politicians, though that argument partially went by the board with the 1947
enactment of the 22d Amendment to the Constitution. By limiting Presidents to
two terms, the nation opted for second-term lame ducks.)

Jody Powell, Mr. Carter's press secretary, points out that when the President
dealt forthrightly with problems that were obviously dangerous politically, from
energy issues to the Panama Canal, he was frequently criticized for not being
political enough. ''I don't think the President or any of the rest of us are
trying to claim that we never think about politics,'' he says, ''but a hell of a
lot more than most folks, we're willing to take the heat and not duck the
issues.''

Among Jimmy Carter's supporters, the most hopeful expectation for a second term,
expressed again and again, is that it would free him to go ahead and do what is
''right'' and not what is ''political.''

John C. White, the Democratic national chairman, predicted that ''without the
burden of re-election considerations, you can expect some bold programs. He'll
balance the budget, and he'll fight the Congress on water projects and the
pork-barrel bills to do it. You can expect more vetoes and more Government
reorganization plans.''

One Georgia Democrat, remembering Mr. Carter's administration there as Governor,
predicted that a re-elected President would pay less attention to the Business
Roundtable, a collection of the top executives of the nation's largest
companies, as he once brushed aside the Georgia Chamber of Commerce. A likely
area of change, this supporter said, was a tougher stand in defense of the
environment.

Chris Brown, the 31-year-old New Mexican who rides in out of the West every four
years to run a successful New Hampshire primary campaign for Mr. Carter, said he
thought that electoral freedom would enable Mr. Carter finally to get the budget
balanced. And a liberal Congressman, though expressing some skepticism about the
theory of second-term transformations, said, ''I think we're going to see the
real Jimmy Carter stand up, and he's not going to be as illiberal as some of my
friends say he is.''

The idea of a transformed Jimmy Carter leads to fears as well as hopes. David
Brody, chief Washington representative for the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai
B'rith, said there is widespread concern within the Jewish community that Mr.
Carter would be much tougher on Israel if he no longer had to think about the
reaction of Jewish voters. (However, Mr. Brody said he felt that other
institutions of Government, particularly Congress, would discourage such an
approach.) Bill Brock, the Republican national chairman, spoke more generally
about how Mr. Carter would operate. Only the realities of re-election now keep
the President at all ''in touch'' with the real problems of the nation, he said.
''You can only make the argument that he would 'rise above politics and do what
is right' if he had a sure sense of what is the right thing to do,'' Mr. Brock
added. ''He doesn't.''

Meanwhile, at the White House, the whole notion of a transformation wins scorn.
''It's not the way the system works,'' said Anne Wexler, an assistant to the
President. ''You've still got a Congress that legislates, special interests that
look out for themselves. You can't be nonpolitical when you're the President of
the United States.''

Mr. Carter himself dismissed the idea out of hand, saying he had never ducked a
problem because of its political consequences. ''I don't know of any
controversial issue that we have deliberately avoided, or a decision that we
have delayed, in hopes that we could postpone it beyond the electoral time,'' he
said. ''I have felt an adequate sense of freedom from political pressure in my
first term.  It might be that I would feel more freedom in the second term, but
if so, I would be surprised.''

In mid-June, the Times/CBS News Poll asked 1,517 adults this question: ''Whether
or not you agree with him, do you think Jimmy Carter's positions on the issues
are firm and consistent?'' Only 40 percent said yes, while 53 percent said no.
Mr. Reagan, Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Anderson all had more favorable ratings on
consistency. Nine percent of the people polled identified the quality they
disliked about Mr. Carter as his indecisiveness. Such concerns must, unless
changed, affect the voter's judgment as to whether Mr. Carter will be able to
deliver on his goals for a second term.

Changing circumstances explain some of this perception. The President's
about-face concerning the Soviet Union, for example, dates from the sudden
Russian invasion of Afghanistan. And part of the image of uncertainty and
indecision seems caused by Mr. Carter's own failure to get across his ideas and
feelings clearly. That can range from a knack for the distracting phrase (his
comment in May, for example, that the Iranian hostage situation had somehow
become ''manageable'') to a more serious communications problem.

The first Carter Administration has conveyed indecision even when it knew what
it wanted, calling for policy changes without adequately explaining the reasons
for the change. The ''don't buy on credit/buy on credit'' two-step of this
spring, for example, thoroughly confused most of the public, even though in
Washington the Administration was explaining that the economy's tilt toward
recession made any credit controls redundant at best. Mr. Carter's penchant for
calling every problem the gravest, or worst, or most serious that the nation
faces has also led to public confusion. If everything is at a nadir, nothing
seems worth worrying about. Dr. Brzezinski offered an interesting explanation of
this trait, which he conceded was a problem. After defending and explaining Mr.
Carter's description of the Afghanistan invasion as the ''most serious threat to
the peace since the Second World War,'' Dr. Brzezinski agreed that Mr. Carter
himself had not explained what he meant. ''Perhaps because he's so bright,''
said the national security aide, ''he assumes if he says something in shorthand,
a lot of people understand exactly what he means.''

Jody Powell says, hopefully, that in a second term, with fewer problems to face
after the heavy legislative agenda of the first term, the President would take
more time explaining the ones he is dealing with, and would do it more
successfully.

Mr. Carter himself attributed the public impression of uncertainty and
indecision largely to press coverage - ''partial achievements are often ignored
in the press.'' He admitted that some of the problem was caused by the fact
that, ''in the first year, we had so many things going on simultaneously that
there was a sense of confusion there.'' But then Mr. Carter returned to the
press, saying it took advantage of ''the new openness of government, which I
espouse,'' to report on departmental arguments and describe Administration
divisions before matters reached his desk, despite that fact that ''I am the
only one ultimately that can make that Administration position official.''

In competition with an opponent with neat, seemingly clear and unambiguous
answers to the nation's problems, Mr. Carter's communications problems become
particularly significant. So does his need to convince the public how tough the
situation really is. Mr.  Reagan says that energy shortages can be solved by
turning the oil industry loose. The economy can be set right with big tax cuts.
The Federal bureaucracy can be managed by returning many of its jobs to the
states. Even the ills of the American family can be cured by having the Federal
Government do less. In contrast, Mr. Carter emphasizes, in speech after speech,
that these are difficult problems that will take a long time to solve.
Sometimes, in fact, his emphasis on the complexities suggests that he isn't sure
they can ever be solved. On inflation, for example, Mr. Reagan says flatly,
''Government causes inflation,'' and then offers his solution: ''We've got to
make Government make it go away.'' Mr. Carter meanwhile says of inflation, ''The
battle to reduce it will be long and hard, and there will be no easy
victories.''

That stark contrast between the ways the two candidates present themselves to
the electorate is one of the reasons why the whole question of what Mr. Carter
would be like in a second term as President may turn out to be academic. He may
find that the voters will not accept his criticism of Mr. Reagan's vision of
America as simplistic if he, himself, fails to convey clearly a vision of his
own.

When Chris Brown, a dedicated follower, was asked what Jimmy Carter would do if
re-elected, he responded: ''He'll pursue his most deeply held convictions.''

But then Mr. Brown noted a difficulty: ''The problem is sometimes discerning
whatever those true beliefs are.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WE DIDN'T KNOW WE WERE IN TROUBLE?

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN; Steven R. Weisman, a White House correspondent for
The New York Times, is a former chief of its City Hall and Albany Bureaus.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2025 words


THE COST OF GOOD INTENTIONS New York City and the Liberal Experiment, 1960-1975.
By Charles R. Morris.  256 pp. New York: W.W. Norton & Co. $14.95.

''A PROBLEM that strikes one in the study of history, regardless of period, is
why man makes a poorer performance of government than of almost any other human
activity,'' Barbara Tuchman observed recently. What then would the historian
make of Charles R. Morris's description of New York City government as it
wheezed and clank-ed into the late 1960's?

''The inability to perform cut right across the most routine business,'' Mr.
Morris writes. ''The city couldn't issue birth certificates on time, pay
overtime when it was due, maintain its automotive fleets, deliver asphalt to men
filling potholes, submit claims for federal and state aid payments, supply
diaper pins to obstetric wards, or hire key staff. ... If employees were late or
participated in job actions, the payroll system couldn't dock them; when they
were hired they weren't paid; and when they retired they would as likely keep on
being paid.''

The managerial breakdown described here, of course, merely foreshadowed the
crisis to come, as New York City's financial structure strained and then
collapsed in 1975, under pressures building for at least 15 years.

If ''The Cost of Good Intentions,'' which covers the turbulent period in the
city from 1960 to 1975, had simply provided us with the most complete, lucid and
thoughtful chronicle yet written about the city fiscal crisis - which it has -
the author would deserve honor and credit for setting the historical record
straight on one of the most complex, critical domestic occurrences of our time.
But by tracing what city officials thought was happening, as well as what was
really happening, Mr.  Morris has produced something more - a meticulous case
study of ''good intentions'' gone awry and of mistakes made because policy
makers were unaware of the terrain shifting underneath them.

Like David Halberstam's ''The Best and the Brightest,'' ''The Cost of Good
Intentions'' poses an unsettling historical question: how could the leaders of
New York City - not simply its politicians but its financiers, ''watchdogs,''
reporters and editorialists - have failed to realize what was happening? How
could anyone have been unaware that the city's huge backlog of accumulated
budget deficits and its billions of dollars of unredeemable debt would not
produce some sort of day of reckoning? The similarity to Vietnam is indeed
striking, because in both cases disaster was courted unwittingly by a mixture of
hubris, temporizing and refusal to face facts.

In New York City, officials were continually hampered by what Mr.  Morris
describes as ''the policy consequences of imperfect problem definitions.'' City
officials, he says, ''were looking at the wrong ball.'' They did not come up
with the right answers to the fiscal crisis because they had not asked the right
questions. But, as James A. Cavanagh, the top deputy to Mayor Abraham D. Beame,
once put it: ''Maybe we were dumb, but nobody else seems to have understood what
was happening either.''

Nobody, not even the bankers and budget whiz-kids, understood that covering over
deficit after deficit with accounting gimmicks would one day lead to debts the
city could not support. Nobody, not even the city planners, understood that
embarking on a giant construction program of gleaming new hospitals and senior
colleges - financed by the state - would leave the city with the impossible
problem of operating costs once the the facilities were built. Nobody, not even
his opponents, understood the full consequences of Mayor John V.  Lindsay's
uncomplicated moral view of welfare rights and black control of black schools.
Nobody, not even the economists, understood that in the late 1960's the city had
begun hemorrhaging industrial jobs, and that the service-oriented jobs replacing
them were not enough to support the city's tax base.

In each instance, policy makers had moved to solve a problem, only to find out
that they had misunderstood the problem's nature. Making excellent use of the
recollections of dozens of participants, Mr.  Morris tells how even Mayor
Lindsay's long-overdue management reforms, his attempt to rationalize city
government by introducing productivity targets, had the unintended effect of
raising costs. The city opened new drug treatment centers without realizing that
they would not affect the rising level of addiction in the city. Newly designed
neighborhood swimming pools were cheaper to install and reduced the cost per
user, but installing them meant spending more money - a fact the productivity
experts somehow overlooked.

Mr. Morris, who was a budget official in the Lindsay Adminstration, is currently
a vice president for international finance at Chase Manhattan Bank. He
exonerates neither his former nor his current employer. His eloquent and
dispassionate narrative was compiled with precision.

''The city was tossed by forces of such magnitude - racial shifts, an aggressive
civil rights movement, a revolution in citizens' expectations, newly muscular
unions, a collapse of basic managerial capacity, steep and seemingly permanent
economic recession - that to speak of a crisis seems almost anti-climactic,'' he
writes.  ''Buffeted by change, local elected officials lost control. The fiscal
crisis is in fact more a symptom and a symbol of the loss of control than a
separate event requiring separate explanations.''

For example, he puts the crucial 1971-72 city budget into context.  In 1969, New
York City's economy was hit by a recession from which it never fully recovered.
As jobs flowed out of the city, revenues plummeted and Medicaid and welfare
costs surged. Mayor Lindsay finished the fiscal year in mid-1971 with a sizable
deficit, ''openly hostile'' relations with Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller, and the
prospect of a staggering new deficit the following year.

The final budget, hammered out in an awesome display of recrimination in Albany,
''looked remarkably close'' to the very budget Mayor Lindsay had earlier said
would require a cut of 60,000 jobs, Mr. Morris writes, but, in return for state
aid, it included an agreement not to lay off workers. In order to ''balance''
the budget, Mayor Lindsay resorted to a stupefying array of fiscal gimmickry
that Mr. Morris outlines in gruesome detail: rollovers and rollbacks of state
aid; tapping fictitious surpluses in a series of special funds; arbitrarily
raising revenue estimates; ''deferrals'' of required payments into other funds
and borrowing in anticipation of questionable receipts.

Everybody seemed relieved and satisfied with the shared result, except that,
given earlier rhetoric about cutbacks, it eroded the city's credibility. ''For
one thing,'' Mr. Morris writes, ''the city seemed finally to renounce spending
cutbacks - as opposed to slower spending growth - as a feasible budget balancing
alternative.'' Earlier budget gimmicks proffered by Mayors Robert F. Wagner,
Lindsay and Beame had been ''relatively open and above board,'' he adds.  ''But
when hundreds of millions of dollars were made to materialize by methods that
most newspaper reporters, much less ordinary citizens, simply didn't understand,
the common conclusion was that the budget gaps hadn't existed in the first
place. Mere lack of money would no longer be a very convincing argument against
spending.''

Mayor Lindsay's aides were quite honestly gambling that their juggling would
purchase another year to improve the city's overall position. Here again, the
Vietnam analogy is pertinent, as shortsighted city officials sank deeper into
the quagmire.

Again and again in Mr. Morris's sad, unrelenting narrative, we see that the
city's problem was more than a budget crisis. It was also a general economic
crisis, a managerial crisis and most of all a political crisis. In retelling the
story of the municipal labor movement, the city's demographic and economic
changes, and the varying styles of Mayors Lindsay, Beame and Wagner, the author
succeeds in demolishing erroneous stereotypes.

He finds, for example, that Mayor Lindsay's record of labor contract
''giveaways'' - for all its ''oddly assorted grab bag'' of fringe and pension
benefits -was not out of line with Mayor Wagner's, or with what other mayors
were handing out at the time. The record growth in welfare caseloads under Mayor
Lindsay also mirrored what was going on nationwide, although the city's actual
welfare benefits were the highest in the nation, a distinction long since left
behind. (Mr. Morris makes plain his view, nonetheless, that welfare and labor
costs were more than the city could afford.)

One other conclusion seems inescapable, however, even though the author does not
reach it. The city's huge middle-income housing debacle - in which more than $1
billion in city-financed mortgages have simply been written off as worthless -
and the health and higher education subsidies hardly amounted to programs for
the poor.  Middle-class students benefited from ''Open Enrollment'' at City
University; and those billions of dollars in Medicaid expenditures flowed
inefficiently into nursing homes, hospitals and other health care ''providers,''
not the patients themselves.

The city seems thus to have bankrupted itself with benefits for its middle and
working class, not its poor, despite the rhetoric of recent years. Whether it
had to help out the middle class, as a way of maintaining its stability and its
tax base, is a fair question.  That the city did so under a delusion of solvency
is beyond dispute.

''The Cost of Good Intentions'' supports the notion that the city's leaders were
honest, intelligent, well-meaning persons who recruited some of the best and the
brightest of their day into government. Thus one returns again to the question:
how did these people, and all the others, fail to see the consequences of the
city's succession of deficits and spiraling debt? More generally, why was
government so susceptible to paralysis and failure?

Charles Morris is most trenchant explaining how, ''for all the apparent artifice
underlying the most complex and elegant gimmicks, they were for the most not the
product of conscious design.'' The city's financial superstructure, he writes,
''was a kind of evolutionary extrusion that had emerged from hundreds of
piecemeal decisions.''

Quoting Peter Goldmark, the state budget director in 1975, Mr.  Morris notes how
''gradually and painfully'' the city officials began to comprehend ''the
interconnections between state deficits and local borrowings'' that they had
wrought, ''the laocoon coils of gimmicks and deferrals, advances and accruals,
floating debt and seasonal anticipations - the entire compound of expediencies
that created such dangerous credit interdependence.''

'' 'Remember the fourteenth century and the advent of the plague,' says Mr.
Goldmark. 'Was it possible for those people to stand on the docks in Genoa or
Venice, watch the rats pouring off the ships, and not understand?'
''Yes, it was possible.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of Mayors Wagner, Lindsay and Beame

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT CREATIVE WRITING CREATES IS STUDENTS

BYLINE: By MARK HARRIS; Mark Harris, author of many books, including ''Bang the
Drum Slowly,'' ''Wake Up, Stupid'' and ''Best Father Ever Invented,'' is
professor of English at Pittsburgh University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2484 words


''TERRIBLE things are happening to universities and colleges, and to the English
departments within them. Formula budgeting, basing money allocated for education
on student head count, has enormous appeal. ... So now in many schools, we are
playing the game of students, students, who's got the students. And who does
have the students right now in the English departments? We have. The writing
programs have. ... I say that with no glee and even with a little fear. ... Now
we must funnel students into those worthy fields of literary study that find
themselves jeopardized by a society that puts a growing premium on careers, on
the professions, on what is loosely called 'the practical.' And in my opinion,
it is our duty to see to it that the traditional teaching of great literature
does not disappear.''

I am pleased to tell you that the speaker of that passage was not a professor of
literature with a vested interest in his own continuation, but the poet Richard
Hugo. The passage was part of his address at San Antonio earlier this year to
the Associated Writing Programs. Given the economic moment, the prevailing
authoritarianism of professors and the high-flying opportunism of hustlers in
the profession, heavy duty falls upon the writers and the poets to redivide the
territory.

Mr. Hugo's address was entitled ''Creative Writing: The New Responsibility.''
Sometimes I really feel I must apologize to the United States of America and all
its territories for my own part in perpetuating this tyranny called ''creative
writing.'' It has quite run away with us. It has run away certainly with the
Department of English, whose rescue and retrieval I too now seem to view as the
best hope of writers and readers.

Much of my thinking on this subject fell into place for me on my recent trip to
River Basin, where my outgoing, hearty, efficient, loud-laughing, back-slapping
(''Hey, Tiger,'' he called everybody) but finally treacherous and contemptible
host was Clifton David Grappler.

I counted in the Department of English at River Basin about 50 professors at all
ranks, of whom about 12 teach ''creative writing'' as a full-time task. Each
class in ''creative writing'' enrolls about 20 students. The teachers of
''creative writing'' complain that this is too many, too big, they need help,
new sections, new teachers, new staff. Each of them knows a friend at a distance
who'd ''be perfect.''

Grappler will deliver. Behind him the teachers of ''creative writing'' are
absolutely unified. Lacking conventional degrees, teachers of ''creative
writing'' at River Basin depend for their future upon the argument that the old
literary curriculum is obsolete. And who can teach the new curriculum? Only they
-courses in writing of every proliferating kind: Writing the Short Story,
Writing the Longer Story, Writing the Novella, Writing the Narrative, Writing
the Poem, Writing Poems for Children, Writing for Women, Writing for Blacks,
Writing for Gays.

As Grappler delivers the curriculum so do his teachers deliver the students.
They claim an alert, forward-looking student body demanding relevant
instruction. Students look forward to jobs in editing, P.R., journalism. Writing
for Magazines, Writing for Industry. The head count swells. The number of
students at River Basin who declares itself ''writing majors'' far exceeds the
number of ''literature majors.'' And yet it was never my observation, at River
Basin or anywhere, that students of ''creative writing'' cared especially to
write. ''Why are you enrolling for my course?'' I often ask. ''I need three
credits,'' they reply.

The student power of the 1960's has been cheapened. On the question of Vietnam I
was with the students. On the question of curriculum I'm not. The young writer
is not entirely the judge of his needs. But the students' discovery that they
can shape dormitory policy had led to their confidence that they may also define
curriculum. To universities fretfully seeking revenue at a time of economic
difficulty the students effectively threaten: ''If you make us study literature
we'll go someplace that won't.''

Thus courses in literature are smaller than before. And shrinking.  Some courses
would not exist at all if they were not required by the ancient curriculum. (For
''ancient'' read ''1964.'') No new teachers of literature have received tenure
at River Basin in 10 years, although during that time five of the ''creative
writing'' teachers have been awarded tenure, and the others almost certainly
will receive it as their probationary years expire. They view themselves as
shoo-ins, such is the campus leverage of Grappler. He delivers.

A professor of literature leaving River Basin is no longer replaced. No figure
of the past is indispensable. Did Shakespeare read Henry James? ''Literature is
dead,'' the students cry. ''What's left to say about Spenser?'' ''Literary study
is a dead end.''

Also, ''Professors of literature are dead.'' This may be true. Why have almost
all of the 38 professors of literature at River Basin surrendered to Clifton
David Grappler? Why aren't they running after him running away with their
English Department? They scarcely raise a voice. ''Hey, Tiger.'' But they are
not tigers.

The professors tell me that the 60's are dead, but they are the proof of its
having entered the mainstream. They appear to me to be the victims of their own
improved tolerance. Their consciousness was raised. They believe more openly now
in claims for creativity and in the special and particular appeals of diversity.
As always, they are slightly late. They are perfectly respectful of that
doubtful discipline called ''creative writing'' in ways they never respected it
before, now that it has been verified by numbers, respectably institutionalized.
They respect Grappler's ''clout,'' Grappler's ''power.''

If in some secret recesses of themselves they recognize that ''creative
writing'' badly educates people for writing, they remain for the moment silent.
They assemble loyally at department meetings, where they may dispute details but
never assumptions, and they vote the solidest unanimity for their Chair's own
two-way obedience: to the dean above and to Grappler below. The name of the game
is consumerism.

I had gone there, of course, for the Seasonal Writing Conference.  Four seasons
a year, 250 students per season, $315 per student, it was a year-round benefice
woven with the greatest economy in and out of the economic calendar. The last
conference I'd been to was a much simpler event: two summer weeks at Bemidji,
Minnesota, 10 years before. A certain bad pattern of things now repeated itself
- something my lawyer calls ''add-ons ... things they don't tell you until you
get there.''

At Bemidji, in 1970, after I got there, I was required by state law to sign a
loyalty oath pledging not to overthrow Minnesota by force or violence. I
protested. They replied: no oath, no pay. I could have lived without the fee,
but I hated to lose the round-trip travel expenses out-of-pocket from
California. They said: no oath, no travel expenses. I telephoned my friend the
lawyer. ''Sign it,'' he impatiently said, ''they got you.''

At River Basin the sticking point was Grappler's telling me, ''What we do is we
assign them topics to write about.'' Them! Consumers!  Customers! Those were
words he never used. Certainly not. ''Students,'' he sometimes said, ''folks ...
the people we work with ... friends ... the community,'' but never
''customers.'' Let the dean say - I heard him say - ''the name of the game is
consumerism,'' and when he said it Grappler winced with faint embarrassment, for
by that time he knew that I was wincing all over the place. I said I couldn't
teach writing that way, I had never assigned topics and I expected I wouldn't
begin now. I expected every writer, however young, however inexperienced, to
assign himself/herself his/her own topic, to discover sources by soul-search, by
examining their own unexamined lives, etc. One couldn't teach writing, I said.
One could only be there waiting when the student, inspired by his reading,
decided to write something of his own.

Grappler admitted that he remembered that sort of thing from the old days when
he'd been a writer and written some stories. But he could no longer view writing
as arising from passion, conviction, hatred, zeal, or the young writer's dream
of the better world. No, writing was a trade, a skill. His folks, his people,
his constituency cared nothing for waiting. They wanted their degrees in writing
so they could turn right around and teach it. ''You've got to do it my way,'' he
said, ''because that's how we advertised it, and that's what they're expecting.
We give them what they want.''

Giving people what they want is neither art nor education. We argued all day my
first day at River Basin, standing, sitting, walking, dining, and that was the
day the dean joined us and said, ''The name of the game is consumerism.'' I said
I'd been writing many years and teaching many years, I defied them, I'd go home
then, fee or no fee, travel expenses or not. The dean mediated. Consider
Grappler's genius! It was Grappler who kept the whole English Department going
with ''this creative-writing thing'' (the dean's phrase), expanding enrollment
fabulously just when literature seemed to be dead. Said the dean of Grappler,
''I never knew an English professor could be so cost-efficient.'' It was
Grappler's Creative Writing Program in conjunction with his Seasonal Writing
Conference that kept the whole ''humanities thing'' going, Grappler's
techniques, Grappler's methods, it was the wave of the future, better than
football, no uniforms, no travel, cheap, cheap, classes tucked away quaintly in
all sorts of corners of old buildings, and under the trees in fair seasons.

''I can't teach it that way,'' said I to Grappler. ''You've no doubt done
remarkable things here and kept the whole place from falling down, but I can't
violate my own experience.'' To this he replied once more that the way to teach
was to assign topics because that was what he'd advertised and that was what
they wanted. If I was going to quibble and quarrel and make troublesome scenes
all over campus (people were staring at us) I could go the hell back to
Pittsburgh. I telephoned my friend the lawyer. ''You again,'' he said. ''You
don't want to lose the money and the travel expenses. Do it. They got you.''

I had not heard of Clifton David Grappler until he phoned me. He is 40 years
old. His long hair falls charmingly across his face. His wife, who was silent
all the while, was a student of his in the first class he ever taught - the
first ''creative writing'' class at River Basin. They are the parents of
tow-headed children, each of whom is handsomer than the other. Grappler
(pronounced Grape-ler) possesses a degree as Master of Fine Arts (plural?) from
River Basin, but he will not now hire graduates from there. For incoming staff
he goes to New York and California - ''the scene ... where the action is.''

He has published two books. One is of poems. ''Only a chapbook, really,'' he
told me at the beginning, when we were Modesty and Cordiality traveling together
back from the airport into town. Later he knew he'd been too confidential with
me. He warned his wife to be silent. His second book is a collection of five
stories preceded by a preface quoting at length admiration of him by colleagues
and dependent associates. When I say that he has published two books I mean
pointedly he, for his publisher is River Basin Press, which is he. Wasn't that
misleading? Wouldn't people think River Basin Press was part of River Basin
University? I had thought so myself. Grappler said no, no, everybody gives
misleading impressions, it was all in the interest of the Creative Writing
Program and therefore in the interest of the university. ''What if we go
under?'' The great fear at River Basin is of going under, but that is a great
fear elsewhere, too, where people nevertheless avoid being misleading -they'd
rather go under than lie. ''I wouldn't,'' says Grappler.

Time and again I had the feeling Grappler was on the verge of enjoying the
ironies of his own speech and behavior. Any moment he might smile. But he had
gone over now from the literary impulse into the managerial direction, where
language was not beautiful but functional. In a life of relentless meeting-going
and committeeriding he didn't care whom he misled. He had slogans for all
occasions, arguments on every side of every issue, depending upon whose meeting
was attended by whom. In the presence of the statelier members of the English
Department he resisted ''commerce,'' condemned that very ''New York'' from which
he hired proudly, and shouted out against ''Hollywood,'' as if there were any
longer any such place.  But in the same voice at other meetings he rejected the
English Department.

He is no self-defeating fool. Consciously he sees where he has been, and
instinctively he goes on, for it seems to work. He halfway knows what he is
doing. He is an associate professor of English specializing in ''creative
writing'' without ever having been a scholar or a writer, en route to dean,
provost, chancellor, Secretary of State. Ten years ago he was a graduate
student. He saw how to cut through academic convention, driving to the center,
where the money was. He was prematurely cynical. He knew that the secret was not
knowledge but organization, that the avenue to the future was customers. The
pressure was on, and Grappler found a specialty for himself, the right job. We
all must eat -his handsome children, his silent wife. When I remarked to
Grappler's wife upon her silence she replied, ''Cliff told me not to speak to
you, you'd expose us. You're a writer, you bastard.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HE GETS A FILM,THEN PICKS THE AUDIENCE

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 2, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 630 words


''IT'S very easy to sell to the public a picture with John Travolta in it or a
big Hollywood production,'' said Richard C. Hassanein.  ''But there is a special
type of picture that needs special handling.''

That is where he comes in. The 28-year-old Mr. Hassanein, who grew up in Glen
Cove and lives in Melville, is president of the United Film Distribution
Company, whose business is the distribution - and sometimes the financing - of
such pictures.

''They should be promoted and put into the marketplace,'' he said, ''in a proper
and professional manner by selecting the right theaters for the picture and
developing an advertising campaign targeted toward the audience the picture
would appeal to.''

As an example, he cited ''The Kentucky Fried Movie,'' a 1977 film that
introduced John Landis, who next directed the immensely successful ''Animal
House.'' ''It would not have played to the extent it did if the target audience
- between the ages of 18 and 26 -had not been reached through the targeting of
advertising in various media,'' Mr. Hassanein said.

United Film Distribution, with headquarters in Great Neck, is a wholly owned
subsidiary of the United Artists Theater Circuit. Since U.F.D. was created by
the United Artists Theater Circuit to distribute ''The Kentucky Fried Movie,''
it has also been behind such films as ''Dawn of the Dead,'' George Romero's
sequel to the longtime favorite of horror film fans, ''Night of the Living
Dead,'' and the praised comedy ''Sitting Ducks.''

Coming up next month is ''Twinkle, Twinkle, Killer Kane,'' a film about Vietnam
-era G.I.'s from William Peter Blatty, author of ''The Exorcist.'' And, Mr.
Hassanein said, the company is also financing three new George Romero horror
films.

Mr. Hassanein, whose father, Salah, is president of United Artists Eastern
Theaters, has been working in the motion picture business since he was 13 years
old. ''I guess it's been my basic love,'' he said.

Although he has worked as a booker, who scheduled films into theaters in Nassau
and Suffolk; and as a production executive on a wildlife film that took him to
South America for seven months; and as a print booker, who sold pictures to
theater owners, Mr. Hassanein said the best preparation for his current job was
his teen-age work as a ticket taker and in drive-ins as a carhop.

''The best place to learn what people like is not in an office but in the
theater itself,'' he said. ''By working a neighborhood theater, you get
audiences that come weekly. You get to know the people that visit that theater,
and by getting to know them, you get to know what they like and don't like.''

He said his adolescent ventures into the movie business took him to theaters in
Massapequa, Syosset, Westbury, Manhasset and Copiague.  Mr. Hassanein's first
job after graduation in 1974 from American University, where he studied film,
added to his appreciation for the understanding of audiences. Booking films into
theaters in Nassau and Suffolk, he said, involved ''making sure you pick the
correct picture for the correct theater.''

Among the factors in the decision, he said, are ''the income level of the area
and if the picture is a drive-in type, say, like 'Smokey and the Bandit,' which
is more of a blue-collar picture, versus a subtitled foreign film, which
wouldn't belong in a blue-collar area.''

''There's always a market for good commercial pictures regardless of who
distributes them,'' he added. ''We're looking to remain small so that we can
concentrate on pictures and do the best job we can for the producers and the
pictures themselves.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of richard hassanein

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER 'SOUTH PACIFIC':SCORE WITHOUT NOSTALGIA

BYLINE: By HASKEL FRANKEL

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 14, Column 5; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 818 words


THE cast assembles in the aisle of the Darien Dinner Theater to lead the
audience in ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' before the curtain goes up on ''South
Pacific.'' The purpose is to take us back to the days of World War II. Fine,
except that while this is going on, the front curtain has a projection on it of
an American flag with 50 stars. So much for nostalgia.

As for this ''South Pacific,'' if you can't get Mary Martin and Ezio Pinza, the
original stars, Marianne Challis and Michael Tartel will do very nicely. She has
a fine, open innocence about her, and he is sophisticated, European and
experienced. These two create the feeling of love cutting through all barriers,
which is crucial to the production's success.

''South Pacific'' opened on Broadway in April of 1949 and ran for 1,925
performances, picking up the Pulitzer Prize along with its other awards. It
contained another memorable score by Rodgers and Hammerstein, and offered the
amazing sight of the leading lady washing her hair on stage, eight times a week.
More importantly, it took musicals into areas where they had not been before -
war and race prejudice. Rodgers and Hammerstein, for the third time -
''Oklahoma!'' and ''Carousel'' preceded ''South Pacific'' - proved that the
American musical could be more than singing and dancing loosely tied to an
idiotic story line.

Unfortunately, the majority of their best work seems curiously out of date
today. As ''South Pacific'' was ahead of its time, it was also tied to its time,
the just-passed years of World War II. To a 1980 audience that can recall Korea
and Vietnam, the gung-ho attitude of the military men of ''South Pacific'' looks
unreal and sadly naive.

While ''South Pacific'' seems just old enough to be out of date, it is not old
enough to have gathered the warm glow of nostalgia.  Therefore, it has only its
very fine score to sell, and plot lines that seem to show their construction
today and take on the nonhelpful feel of soap opera toward the end.

''South Pacific'' offers two love stories. First there is the French planter,
Emile, and Nellie, the American nurse. Second there is Lieutenant Cable and the
native girl, Liat. Both involve white American attitudes toward people of color.
One love story ends happily, the other tragically. For comedy, there is Luther
Billis, a SeaBee with an angle on everything, and Bloody Mary, a native
entrepreneur.

Alyce Webb caught all the facets of Bloody Mary, mother of Liat.  Mary is
willing to sell native skirts, shrunken heads and even her daughter into
marriage. Miss Webb captured both the humanity and the pathos of Bloody Mary and
she sang like a dream when she got to ''Bali Ha'i.'' Unfortunately, Kenneth
Bridges revealed only the greed of Luther Billis, not the humor.

Two roles that are usually colorless - Captain Brackett and Commander Harbison -
both come alive in the performances of Edmund Loughlin and Mark Zimmerman.

Makalina made a lovely Liat and one could easily see why Lieutenant Cable falls
in love with her as she performs the little love dance with her hands to ''Happy
Talk.'' Cris Groenendaal is both tall and attractive as Lieutenant Cable. It
took a while to get with this character, since Mr. Groenendaal seemed rather
stiff as an actor.  However, when he gets around to singing, he is pure joy. His
voice is big and open and totally in control.

In the main, I liked Robert Johanson's staging and choreography. He did
everything possible to keep the show moving briskly. But he could not erase the
fact that this is 1980 and much of America's thinking about love and war has
changed to the point where the attitudes of the men and women of ''South
Pacific'' have become dated without acquiring charm, and can hardly be used
against the directorchoreographer.

In fairness, I should point out that I was thinking during ''South Pacific,''
while most of the audience at the Darien Dinner Theater was relaxing and, I
believe, enjoying. The time when ''South Pacific'' asked us to think was 1949.
Today the musical exists in limbo. Its score is such that South Pacific will
eventually take on antique charm, like operettas. Until then it's a nice show to
take the kiddies to. The buffet is fine and the air-conditioning works well and
this production of ''South Pacific'' is a good one.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
''South Pacific,'' book by Oscar Hammerstein 2d and Joshua Logan; music by
Richard Rodgers, lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein 2d. Darien Dinner Theater, 65
Tokeneke Road., Darien, Conn. Through Sept. 21.  (203) 655-7667.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER 'SOUTH PACIFIC'CRUISES INTO NOSTALGIA

BYLINE: By HASKEL FRANKEL

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 16, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 839 words


DARIEN THE cast assembles in the aisle of the Darien Dinner Theater to lead the
audience in ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' before the curtain goes up on ''South
Pacific.'' The purpose is to take us back to the days of World War II. Fine,
except that while this is going on, the front curtain has a projection on it of
an American flag with 50 stars. So much for nostalgia.

As for this ''South Pacific,'' if you can't get Mary Martin and Ezio Pinza, the
original stars, Marianne Challis and Michael Tartel will do very nicely. She has
a fine, open innocence about her, and he is sophisticated, European and
experienced. These two create the feeling of love cutting through all barriers,
which is crucial to the production's success.

''South Pacific'' opened on Broadway in April of 1949 and ran for 1,925
performances, picking up the Pulitzer Prize along with its other awards. It
contained another memorable score by Rodgers and Hammerstein, and offered the
amazing sight of the leading lady washing her hair on stage, eight times a week.
More importantly, it took musicals into areas where they had not been before -
war and race prejudice. Rodgers and Hammerstein, for the third time -
''Oklahoma!'' and ''Carousel'' preceded ''South Pacific'' - proved that the
American musical could be more than singing and dancing loosely tied to an
idiotic story line.

Unfortunately, the majority of their best work seems curiously out of date
today. As ''South Pacific'' was ahead of its time, it was also tied to its time,
the just-passed years of World War II. To a 1980 audience that can recall Korea
and Vietnam, the gung-ho attitude of the military men of ''South Pacific'' looks
unreal and sadly naive.

While ''South Pacific'' seems just old enough to be out of date, it is not old
enough to have gathered the warm glow of nostalgia.  Therefore, it has only its
very fine score to sell, and plot lines that seem to show their construction
today and take on the nonhelpful feel of soap opera toward the end.

''South Pacific'' offers two love stories. First there is the French planter,
Emile, and Nellie, the American nurse. Second there is Lieutenant Cable and the
native girl, Liat. Both involve white American attitudes toward people of color.
One love story ends happily, the other tragically. For comedy, there is Luther
Billis, a SeaBee with an angle on everything, and Bloody Mary, a native
entrepreneur.

Alyce Webb caught all the facets of Bloody Mary, mother of Liat.  Mary is
willing to sell native skirts, shrunken heads and even her daughter into
marriage. Miss Webb captured both the humanity and the pathos of Bloody Mary and
she sang like a dream when she got to ''Bali Ha'i.'' Unfortunately, Kenneth
Bridges revealed only the greed of Luther Billis, not the humor .

Two roles that are usually colorless - Captain Brackett and Commander Harbison -
both come alive in the performances of Edmund Loughlin and Mark Zimmerman.

Makalina made a lovely Liat and one could easily see why Lieutenant Cable falls
in love with her as she performs the little love dance with her hands to ''Happy
Talk.'' Cris Groenendaal is both tall and attractive as Lieutenant Cable. It
took a while to get with this character, since Mr. Groenendaal seemed rather
stiff as an actor.  However, when he gets around to singing, he is pure joy. His
voice is big and open and totally in control.

In the main, I liked Robert Johanson's staging and choreography. He did
everything possible to keep the show moving briskly. But he could not erase the
fact that this is 1980 and much of America's thinking about love and war has
changed to the point where the attitudes of the men and women of ''South
Pacific'' have become dated without acquiring charm, and can hardly be used
against the directorchoreographer.

In fairness, I should point out that I was thinking during ''South Pacific,''
while most of the audience at the Darien Dinner Theater was relaxing and, I
believe, enjoying. The time when ''South Pacific'' asked us to think was 1949.
Today the musical exists in limbo. Its score is such that South Pacific will
eventually take on antique charm, like operettas. Until then it's a nice show to
take the kiddies to. The buffet is fine and the air-conditioning works well and
this production of ''South Pacific'' is a good one.

''South Pacific,'' book by Oscar Hammer- stein 2d and Joshua Logan; music by
Rich- ard Rodgers, lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein 2d. Darien Dinner Theater, 65
Tokeneke Rd., Darien, Conn. Through Sept. 21. Box office: (203)655-7667.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Marianne Challis and Kenneth Bridges

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AN ECLECTIC CROWD GATRHERS TO SAVE THE BLACK HILLS

BYLINE: By MOLLY IVINS

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: KAMMERER RANCH, S.D., July 25


Thousands of people have come to these dry hillsides in the last week to talk,
plan and organize about how to save the Black Hills from intensive energy
development by big corporations.

It is a wonderfully eclectic gathering, featuring old left, new left, Indians,
earnest academics, the straightest of straight farmers and ranchers (slightly
bemused to find themselves fallen in with long-hairs) and one busload of fine,
old-fashioned furry freaks from California.

They came to save the beautiful paha sapa (black hills) of the Sioux from what
they perceive as ruination. The gathering is sponsored by the Black Hills
Alliance, an antinuclear group.

The Black Hills contain extensive gold and uranium deposits as well as
long-mined gold. Various energy concerns, including the Union Carbide
Corporation and the federally owned Tennessee Valley Authority, have,
collectively, planned 13 coal-fired, 10,000-megawatt power plants and a nuclear
''park'' with up to 25 reactors, plus waste-reprocessing and disposal
facilities.

Perhaps the most interesting feature of this burgeoning protest movement is the
new coalition between socially conservative farmers and ranchers and Indians and
1960's social activists.

Tent City With Food Co-op

Thousands of campers have created a tent city here, complete with health-food
kitchens, a food co-op and one Pepsi-Cola stand. However, there is nothing of
Woodstock about this ''survival gathering;'' they have come to learn and to
work.

''No alcohol, no drugs, no firearms,'' says the sign at the entrance to the
Black Hills International Survival Gathering. The security guards at the
entrance wear T-shirts that read ''Question Authority,'' but the guards are
quite firm about seeing that the rules are obeyed. A concert tonight featuring
Jackson Browne, a rockand-roll singer, and Bonnie Raitt, a folk singer, drew at
least a thousand local residents - the gathering site is only 10 miles from
Rapid City. But there was none of the beer and marijuana that so often marks a
rock concert these days, even in South Dakota.

The daily workshops ranged over alternative technologies, varieties of solar
energy, organic gardening, Indian history, community planning, water rights,
treaty rights, legal action, how to research corporations and much more.

Long-time alternative life style/social activists from Berkeley, Calif., and
Minneapolis said they were learning a great deal about Indian culture and about
how farmers and ranchers felt about the land. The farmers and the ranchers were
discovering that they had more in common with long-hairs, both Indian and white,
than they ever suspected.

Changing Perceptions

Gloria Woida, a farmer's wife from Lowry, Minn., who is a formidable public
speaker, talked of her changing perceptions of power in America at last night's
session. ''I wished I'd a' been a Vietnam War protester,'' she said.

Mrs. Woida, who is associated with the General Assembly to Stop Power Lines,
recounted the struggle of Minnesota farmers whose property has recently been
traversed by a 400-kilovolt power line.  Her blunt style of speaking - ''Them
corporations is out to make money and they don't care who they hurt doin' it, so
we all got to stick together,'' she said - drew a laugh from Marvin Davidoff, a
longtime political activist from Minneapolis.

''When I think of all the talk and talk and talk we used to have in the 60's,''
he said, ''just listen to her. She gets right to the point and then to the
action and right down to work. That's what we've always needed.''

The survival gathering is from July 18 to July 27. The Indians came with
teepees, the alternative life-style people arrived with small tents and the
farmers and ranchers came in trailers and recreational vehicles. The gathering
is within a mile of the end of the runway of Ellsworth Air Force Base, a
Strategic Air Command center, and bombers roar over the gathering day and night.


Linking Land and Life

Most of the talk was about land and life and their interconnection - those who
make their living from the land, like the farmers and ranchers; those who hold
it sacred, as do the Indians; those who love its beauty, as do the
environmentalists.

There were some odd strains in the conference. There were at least two workshops
to denounce the Trilateral Commission as a tool of international capitalism and
of economic imperialism. The commission is also being assailed these days by
members of the John Birch Society and the Freeman Institute for a supposed
Communist-front role. The commission consists of businessmen, scholars and
public officials in North America, Japan and Western Europe who discuss economic
and foreign policy issues.

The gathering took up matters ranging from those of the gravest import to the
faintly absurd. Participants could be heard talking about how to prevent World
War III and exchanging recipes for zucchini bread.

According to the conference's organizers, 8,000 people had registered as
participants by Wednesday. But since there clearly were not 8,000 people on the
site lent by a rancher, Marvin Kammerer, it seems that most participants came
for a day or two and then left.  American Express cards were accepted at the
only facility on the site that sold ''junk'' food.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a B-52 Bomber

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RESULTS OF YESTERDAY'S COMPETITION AT THE OLYMPIC GAMES;
Summaries of Moscow Olympics

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 4243 words


BASKETBALL

MEN'S SEMIFINALS Group A Brazil 90Italy 77 Spain 96....(o't)Cuba 95 Yugoslavia
101U.S.S.R. 91

Group B Australia 95Senegal 64 Poland 88Czechoslovakia 84 Sweden 119India 63

WOMEN'S SEMIFINALS Bulgaria 90Hungary 75
BOXING

Preliminary Bouts

119 Pound Class
Juan Hernandez, Cuba, stopped Ayele M ohammed, Ethiopia, 2nd; Geraldi Is- s
aick, Tanzania, stopped Ganapathy M anoharan, India, 2nd; Daniel Zaragoza, M
exico, defeated Raymond Gilbody, Brit- a in. Michael Anthony, Guyana, defeated F
ayez Zaghloul, Syria. Samson Khacha- t rian, U.S.S.R., defeated Joseph Ahanda, C
ameroon, (points) ; John Siryakibbe, U ganda, defeated Ali Ben Maghenia, F
rance, (points); Bernardo Jose Pinan- g o, Venezuela, defeated Veli Koota, Fin-
l and, (disqualified 2nd round 1:14); D umitru Cipere, Rumania, defeated Rys- z
ard Czerwinski, Poland, (points).

148 Pound Class
Plamen Yankov, Bulgaria, defeated S adie Jabbar Mohammad, Iraq. Andres A ldama,
Cuba, defeated Israel Akopkohy- a n, U.S.S.R.; Joseph Michael Frost, Brit- a in,
stopped Reter Talanti, Zambia, 1st; K arl-Heinz Kruger, East Germany, de- f
eated Lucas Msomba, Tanzania. Kazi- m ierz Szczerba, Poland, defeated Kebede S
ahilu, Ethiopia, (points); Ionel Budu- s an, Rumania, stopped Kalevi Marja- m
aa, Finland, (3rd round 1:03); John M ugabi, Uganda, defeated Paul Rasami- m
anana, Madagascar, (knockout 2nd r ound 1:25); Memet Bogujevci, Yugosla- v ia,
defeated Nichael Pillay, Seychelles, ( knockout 1st round 2:47).

165 Pound Class
Valentin Silaghi, Rumania, defeated Al- f red Thomas, Guyana; Mark Kaylor, B
ritain, defeated Carlos Antunes Fonse- c a, Brazil; Bong Mun Jang, North Korea,
s topped Jesus Antonio Cabeza, Venezue- l a, 2nd. Jerzy Rybicki, Poland, stopped
T armo Uusivirta, Finland, (2nd round 2 :10); Peter Odhiambo, Uganda, de- f
eated John Martins, Nigeria, (knockout 2 nd round 0:24); Viktor Savchenko, U
.S.S.R., stopped Robert Pfitscher, Aus- t ria, (2nd round 2:53); Manfred
Trauten, E ast Germany, stopped Christer Corpi, S weden, (2nd round 1:09)
EQUESTRIAN

Three-day Event

Finals

Individual
1. Federico Euro Roman, Italy, Rossi- n an, (dressage 54.40, endurance test
49.2, j umping 5.00), 108.60; 2. Aleksandr B linov, U.S.S.R., Galzun, (64.40,
56.4. 00), 1 20.80; 3. Yuri Salnikov, U.S.S.R., Pint- s et, (53.00, 93.6, 5.00),
151.60; 4. Valery V olkov, U.S.S.R., Tskheti, (54.00, 125.6, 5 .00), 184.60; 5.
Tzvetan Dontchev, Bul- g aria, Medisson, (66.40, 114.4, 5.00), 1 85.80; 6.
Miroslaw Szlapka, Poland, Ery- w an, (52.40, 184.4, 5.00), 241.80; 7. Anna C
asagrande, Italy, Daleye, (61.20, 190.0, 1 5.00), 266.20; 8. Mauro Roman, Italy,
D ourakine 4, (63.40, 218.0. 00), 281.40.

Team Final
1. U.S.S.R. (Aleksandr Blinov, Galzun, 1 20.80, Yuri Salnikov, Pintset, 151.60,
V alery Volkov, Tskheti, 184.60), 457.00; 2.  I taly (Federico Euro Roman,
Rossinan, 1 08.60, Anna Casagrande, Daleye, 266.20, M auro Roman, Dourakine 4,
281.40), 6 56.20; 3. Mexico (Yocupicio Manuel Men- d ivil, Remember, 319.75,
Rios David B arcena, Bombona, 362.50, Soto Jose Luis P erez, Quelite, 490.60),
1172.85; 4. Hun- g ary (Laszlo Cseresnyes, Fapipa, 436.20, I stvan Grozner,
Biboros, 498.60, Zoltan H orvath, Lamour, 668.60), 1603.40.
FENCING

WOMEN

Team foil

Final Ranking
1. France (Brigitte Latri-Gaudin; 2.  P ascale Trinquet. 3, Isabelle Boeri-Be- g
ard, 2, Veronique Brouquier, 2) 9. 2.  U .S.S.R. (Valentina Sidorova, 1, Nailya
G ilyazova, 2, Yeaena Belova, 1, Irina U shakova, 2), 6. 3. Hungary (Ildiko S
chwarczenberger, 2, Magda Maros, 2, G ertrud Stefanek, 1, Zsuzsa Szocs, 4), 9.
4.  P oland (Delfina Skapska, 3, Agnieszka D ubrawska, 1, Jolanta Krolikowska,
2, B arbara Wysoczanska, 1), 7. 5. Italy ( Dorina Vaccaroni, 0, Anna Rita
Sparaci- a ri, 3, Susanna Batazzi, 3, Carola Mangia- r otti, 3), 9.
FIELD
HOCKEY

WOMEN Austria 2U.S.S.R. 0 India 4Poland 0 Zimbabwe 2Czechoslovakia 2
JUDO

209 pounds

Final
1. Angelo Parisi, France, def. 2. Dimi- t ar Zaprianov, Bulgaria. 3. Vladimir
Koc- m an, Czechoslovakia, def. Wojciech R eszko, Poland.
ROWING

MEN'S FINALS

Fours with coxswain
1. East Germany, (Dieter Wendisch, U llrich Diessner, Walter Diessner, Gott- f
ried Dohn, Andreas Gregor), 6:14.51; 2.  U .S.S.R., 6:19.05; 3. Poland, 6:22.52;
4.  S pain, 6:26.23; 5. Bulgaria, 6:28.13; 6.  S witzerland, 6:30.26.

Fours without coxswain
1. East Germany, (Jurgen Thiele, An- d reas Decker, Stefan Semmler, Siegfried B
rietzke), 6:08.17; 2. U.S.S.R., 6:11.81; 3.  B ritain, 6:16.58; 4.
Czechoslovakia, 6 :18.63; 5. Rumania, 6:19.45; 6. Switzer- l and, 6:26.46, 7.
France, 6:19.06, 8. Poland, 6 :22.31.

Pairs with coxswain
1. East Germany, (Harald Jahrling, F riedrich-Wilhelm Ulrich, Georg Spohr), 7
:02.54; 2. U.S.S.R., 7:03.35; 3. Yugosla- v ia, 7:04.92; 4. Rumania, 7:07.17; 5.
Bul- g aria, 7:09.21; 6. Czechoslovakia, 7:09.41; 7 . Italy, 7:18.87; 8. France,
7:21.27.

Pairs without coxswain
1. East Germany, (Bernd Landvoigt, J org Landvoigt), 6:48.01; 2. U.S.S.R., 6
:50.50; 3. Britain, 6:51.47; 4. Rumania, 6 :53.49; 5. Czechoslovakia, 7:01.54;
6.S weden, 7:02.52; 7. Ireland, 6:54.60; 8.  F rance, 6:55.22.

Single Sculls
1. Pertti Karppinen, Finland, 7:09.61; 2.  V asily Yakusha, U.S.S.R., 7:11.66;
3.  P eter Kersten, East Germany, 7:14.88; 4.  V ladek Lacina, Czechoslovakia,
7:17.57; 5 . Hans Svensson, Sweden, 7:19.38; 6.  H ugh Matheson, Britain,
7:20.28; 7. Ber- n ard Destraz, Switzerland, 7:19.90; 8.  K onstantinos
Kontomanolis, Greece, 7 :20.29.

Double Sculls
1. East Germany, (Joachim Dreifke, K laus Kroppelien), 6:24.33; 2. Yugosla- v
ia, 6:26.34; 3. Czechoslovakia, 6:29.07; 4.  B ritain, 6:31.13; 5. U.S.S.R.,
6:35.34; 6.  P oland, 6:39.66

Quadruple Sculls
1. East Germany, (Frank Dundr, Kar- s ten Bunk, Uwe Heppner, Martin Win- t er),
5:49.81; 2. U.S.S.R., 5:51.47; 3. Bul- g aria, 5:52.38; 4. France, 5:53.45; 5.
S pain, 6:01.19; 6. Yugoslavia, 6:10.76; 7.  P oland, 5:58.63; 8. Netherlands,
6:02.58.

Eights
1. East Germany, (Bernd Krauss, H ans-Peter Koppe, Ulrich Kons, Jorg F riedrich,
Jens Doberschutz, Ulrich Kar- n atz, Uwe Duhring, Bernd Hoing, Klaus- D ieter
Ludwig), 5:49.05; 2. Britain, 5 :51.92; 3. U.S.S.R., 5:52.66; 4. Czechoslo- v
akia, 5:53.73; 5. Australia, 5:56.74; 6.  B ulgaria, 6:04.05
SOCCER

Quarterfinals Czechoslovakia 3Cuba 0 U.S.S.R. 2Kuwait 1 Yugoslavia 3Algeria 0
SWIMMING

MEN

400-Meter Individual Medley

Final
1. Aleksandr Sidorenko, U.S.S.R., 4 :22.89. (Olympic record; old record, 4
:23.68, Rod Strachan, United States, 1 976). 2. Sergei Fesenko, U.S.S.R., 4
:23.43. 3. Zoltan Verraszto, Hungary, 4 :24.24. 4. Andras Hargitay, Hungary, 4
:24.48. 5. Djan Garrido Madruga, Brazil, 4 :26.81. 6. Miloslav Rolko,
Czechoslova- k ia, 4:26.99. 7. Leszek Gorski, Poland, 4 :28.89. 8. Daniel
Machek, Czechoslova- k ia, 4:29.86.

100-Meter Freestyle

Final
1. Jorg Woithe, East Germany, 50.40. 2.  P er Holmertz, Sweden, 50.91. 3. Per
Jo- h ansson, Sweden, 51.29. 4. Sergei Koplia- k ov, USSR, 51.34. 5. Raffaele
Franceschi, I taly, 51.69. 6. Sergei Krasyuk, USSR, 5 1.80. 7. Rene Ecuyer,
France, 52.01. 8.  G raeme Brewer, Australia, 52.22.

WOMEN

200-Meter Backstroke

Final
1. Rica Reinisch, East Germany, 2 :11.77 (World record; old record, 2:11.93, L
inda Jezek, United States, 1978). 2.  C ornelia Polit, East Germany, 2:13.75. 3.
B irgit Treiber, East Germany, 2:14.14. 4.  C armen Bunaciu, Rumania, 2:15.20.
5.  Y olande Van Der Straeten, Belgium, 2 :15.58. 6. Carine Verbauwen, Belgium,
2 :16.66. 7. Lisa Forrest, Australia, 2:16.75.  8 . Larisa Gorchakova, U.S.S.R.,
2:17.72.

400-Meter Freestyle Relay

Final
1. East Germany, (Barbara Krause, C aren Metschuck, Ines Diers, Sarina Hul- s
enbeck), 3:42.71; 2. Sweden, (Carina L jungdahl, Tina Gustafsson, Agneta Mar- t
ensson, Agneta Eriksson), 3:48.93; 3.  N etherlands, (Conny Van Bentum, Wilma V
an Velsen, Reggie De Jong, Annelies M aas), 3:49.51; 4. Britain, (Sharron D
avies, Kaye Lovatt, Jacquelene Will- m ott, June Croft), 3:51.71; 5, Australia,
( Lisa Curry, Karen Van De Graaf, Rose- m ary Brown, Michelle Pearson), 3:54.16;
6 . Mexico, (Isabel Reuss, Dagmar Erd- m an, Teresa Rivera, Hellen Plaschinski),
3 :55.41; 7. Bulgaria, (Dobrinka Mintche- v a, Rumiana Dobreva, Ani Kostova, S
toyanka Dangalakova), 3:56.34; 8.  S pain, (Natalia Mas, Margarita Armen- g ol,
Laura Flaque, Gloria Casado), 3 :58.73.

800-Meter Freestyle

Final
1, Michelle Ford, Australia, 8:28.90; 2, I nes Diers, East Germany, 8:32.55; 3,
H eike Dahne, East Germany, 8:33.48; 4, I rina Aksyonova, U.S.S.R., 8:38.05; 5,
O xana Komissarova, U.S.S.R., 8:42.04; 6, P ascale Verbauwen, Belgium, 8:44.84;
7, I nes Geissler, East Germany, 8:45.28. 8, Y elena Ivanova, U.S.S.R., 8:46.45.

DIVING

MEN'S

Platform Preliminaries
1. Falk Hoffmann, East Germany, 5 46.12. 2. Vladimir Aleinik, U.S.S.R., 5 39.07.
3. Thomas Knuths, East Germany, 5 21.01. 4, David Ambartsumyan, U .S.S.R.,
518.82. 5. Carlos Giron, Mexico, 5 15.37. 6. Dieter Waskow, East Germany, 5
15.16. 7, Niki Stajkovic, Austria, 493.89. 8, S ergei Nemtsanov, U.S.S.R.,
487.20.
TEAM
HANDBALL

WOMEN Championship Pool Czechoslovakia 23Congo 10 East Germany 19Hungary 9
U.S.S.R. 18Yugoslavia 9
TRACK AND
FIELD

MEN

110-Meter Hurdles

Semifinals

(first 4 competitors in each heat qualify)

Heat 1
1. Alejandro Casanas, Cuba, 13.44. 2.  A leksandr Puchkov, U.S.S.R., 13.50. 3.
Y uri Chervanev, U.S.S.R., 13.78. 4. Javier M oracho, Spain, 13.80. 5. Thomas
Dit- t rich, East Germany, 13.90. 6, Wilbert G reaves, Britain, 13.98. 7,
Borisav Pisic, Y ugoslavia, 14.16. 8, Andreas Schlisske, E ast Germany, 14.60.

Heat 2
1. Thomas Munkelt, East Germany, 1 3.49. 2. Andrei Prokofev, U.S.S.R., 13.59.  3
. Arto Bryggare, Finland, 13.78. 4. Jan P usty, Poland, 13.81. 5. Mark Holtom, B
ritain, 13.94. 6. Plamen Krastev, Bulgar- i a, 13.99. 7. Carlos Sala, Spain,
14.00. 8.  P etar Vukicevic, Yugoslavia, 14.12.

Final
1. Thomas Munkelt, East Germany, 1 3.39. 2. Alejandro Casanas, Cuba, 13.40.  3 .
Aleksandr Puchkov, U.S.S.R., 13.44. 4.  A ndrei Prokofev, U.S.S.R., 13.49. 5.
Jan P usty, Poland, 13.68. 6. Arto Bryggare, F inland, 13.76. 7. Javier Moracho,
Spain, 1 3.78. 8. Yuri Chervanev, U.S.S.R., 15.80.

Discus Throw

Qualifying

Group A
1. Imrich Bugar, Czechoslovakia, 213 f eet, 6 inches. 2. Viktor Rasshchupkin, U
.S.S.R., 212-6 1/2; 3. Luis Delis, Cuba, 2 10-7 1/2; 4. Igor Douguinets,
U.S.S.R., 207- 2 1/2; 5. Yuri Dumchev, U.S.S.R., 206-1 1/4; 6 . Kenth
Gardenkrans, 205-3 3/4; 7. Emil V ladimirov, Bulgaria, 205-0 1/2; 8. Wolf- g ang
Schmidt, East Germany, 204-11; 9.  M arkku Tuokko, Finland, 203-10 1/2.

Javelin Throw

Final
1. Dainis Kula, U.S.S.R., 299 feet, 2 3/8 i nches; 2. Aleksandr Makarov,
U.S.S.R., 2 94-1 1/8; 3. Wolfgang Hanisch, East Ger- m any, 284-5 7/8; 4. Kheino
Puuste, U .S.S.R., 282-5 1/2; 5. Antero Puranen, F inland, 279-3 1/8; 6. Pentti
Sinersaari, F inland, 276-8 1/4; 7. Detlef Fuhrmann, E ast Germany, 273-11 3/8;
8. Miklos Ne- m eth, Hungary, 270-3 7/8; 9. Aimo Aho, F inland, 264-4 3/8; 10.
Ferenc Paragi, Hun- g ary, 260-10 5/8; 11. Stefan Stoikov, Bul- g aria, 259-3
7/8; 12. Justin Arop, Uganda, 2 53-8 5/8.

200-Meter Dash
(Top 3 in heats & 5 fastest losers qualify)

Heat 1
1. Cameron Sharp, Britain, 21.51; 2.  T omas Gonzalez, Cuba, 21.64; 3. Pavel P
avlov, Bulgaria, 21.78; 4. Nicolaos Ange- l opoulos, Greece, 21.98; 5. Gregory
Illor- s on, Cameroon, 22.21; 6. Ruben Inacio, A ngola, 22.52; 7. Casimir
Pereira, Sey- c helles, 22.59.

Heat 2
1. Pietro Mennea, Italy, 21.26; 2. Ferenc K iss, Hungary, 21.34. 3. Olaf
Prenzler, E ast Germany, 21.35; 4. Michael Mcfar- l ane, Britain, 21.43; 5.
Nabil Nahri, Syria, 2 2.14; 6. Ahmed Seluma, Libya, 22.88.

Heat 3
1. Donald Quarrie, Jamaica, 20.87; 2.  J oseph Arame, France, 21.24; 3. Peter O
kodogbe, Nigeria, 21.42; 4. Altevir S.  A raujo Filho, Brazil, 21.49; 5. Cheikh
T ouradou Diouf, Senegal, 21.89; 6. Henk B rouwer, Netherlands, 21.9;. 7. Paul H
aba, Guinea, 22.70.

Heat 4
1. Marian Woronin, Poland, 21.63; 2. Ist- v an Nagy, Hungary, 21.80; 3. Gerardo
S uero Correa, Dominican Republic, 22.16.

Heat 5
1. Colin Bradford, Jamaica, 21.17; 2.  L eszek Dunecki, Poland, 21.30; 3. Petar
P etrov, Bulgaria, 21.59; 4. David Lukuba, T anzania, 21.76; 5. Pascal Aho,
Benin, 2 2.09; 6. Roland Dagher, Lebanon, 22.27; 7 . Walter During, Sierra
Leone, 23.12.

Heat 6
1. Andrew Bruce, Trinidad and Tobago, 2 1.36; 2. Allan Wells, Britain, 21.57; 3.
A leksandar Popovic, Yugoslavia, 21.65; 4.  H ammed Adio, Nigeria, 21.79; 5.
Subra- m anian Perumal, India, 22.39; 6. Rudolph G eorge, Sierra Leone, 23.20.

Heat 7
1. James Gilkes, Guyana, 21.07; 2.  F rantisek Brecka, Czechoslovakia, 21.49; 3
. Bernhard Hoff, East Germany, 21.53; 4.  B oubacar Diallo, Senegal, 21.56; 5.
Jo- s eph Letseka, Lesotho, 22.31; 6. Lucien J osiah, Botswana, 22.45.

Heat 8
1. Osvaldo Lara, Cuba, 21.06; 2. Christo- p her Brathwaite, Trinidad and Tobago,
2 1.13; 3. Nikolai Sidorov, U.S.S.R., 21.15; 4 . Vladimir Ivanov, Bulgaria,
21.28; 5. Al- s ton Sidney Muziyo, Zambia, 22.47; 6.  B esha Tuffa, Ethiopia,
23.18.

Heat 9
1. Silvio Leonard, Cuba, 20.95; 2. Ber- n ard Petitbois, France, 21.16; 3. Paulo
R oberto Correia, Brazil, 21.27; 4. Zenon L icznerski, Poland, 21.36; 5. Mwalim
Ali, T anzania, 21.83; 6. Sheku Boima, Sierra L eone, 22.93; 7. Sitthixay
Sacpraseuth, L aos, 24.28.

Quarterfinals

(first 4 in each heat qualify)

Heat 1
1. Don Quarrie, Jamaica, 20.89; 2.  M arian Woronin, Poland, 20.97; 3. Os- v
aldo Lara, Cuba, 21.01; 4. Ferenc Kiss, H ungary, 21.24; 5. Bernard Petitbois, F
rance, 21.32; 6. Michael Mcfarlane, Brit- a in, 21.33; 7. Aleksandar Popovic,
Yugo- s lavia, 21.66; 8. Petar Petrov, Bulgaria, 2 1.89.

Heat 2
1. Silvio Leonard, Cuba, 20.93; 2. Joseph A rame, France, 20.95; 3. Bernhard
Hoff, E ast Germany, 20.96; 4. Cameron Sharp, B ritain, 21.16; 5. Zenon
Licznerski, po- l and, 21.22; 6. Istvan Nagy, Hungary, 2 1.38; 7. Frantisek
Brecka, Czechoslova- k ia, 21.47; 8. Gerardo Suero Correa, Do- m inican
Republic, 21.75.

Heat 3
1. Allan Wells, Britain, 20.59; 2. James G ilkes, Guyana, 20.83; 3. Peter
Okodogbe, N igeria, 20.89; 4. Olaf Prenzler, East Ger- m any, 20.89; 5.
Christopher Brathwaite, T rinidad and Tobago, 21.02; 6. Colin Brad- f ord,
Jamaica, 21.04; 7. Altevir S. Araujo F ilho, Brazil, 21.22; 8. Pavel Pavlov,
Bul- g aria, 21.35.

Heat 4
1. Pietro Mennea, Italy, 20.60; 2. Nikolai S idorov, U.S.S.R., 20.83; 3. Leszek
Du- n ecki, Poland, 20.87; 4. Andrew Bruce, T rinidad and Tobago, 20.94; 5.
Vladimir I vanov, Bulgaria, 20.96; 6. Paulo Roberto C orreia, Brazil, 21.01; 7.
Boubacar Diallo, S enegal, 21.10; 8. Tomas Gonzalez, Cuba, 2 1.19.

400-meter run

Heat 1
1. David Jenkins, Britain, 46.67; 2.  K arel Kolar, Czechoslovakia, 47.26; 3.  F
rancis Demarthon, France, 47.43; 4.  E ddy de Leeuw, Belgium, 47.59; 5.  C
harles Dramiga, Uganda, 48.69; 6.  A sfaw Deble, Ethiopia, 49.77.

Heat 2
1. Bertland Cameron, Jamaica, 47.54; 2.  D idier Dubois, France, 47.57; 3.
Silver A yoo, Uganda, 47.78; 4. Charles Lupiya, Z ambia, 48.49; 5. Horia Toboc,
Rumania, 4 9.90; 6. Leopold Hounkanrin, Benin, 5 1.04; 7. Joseph Ramotshabe,
Botswana, 5 1.49.

Heat 3
1. Dele Udo, Nigeria, 46.48; 2. Joseph C oombs, Trinidad and Tobago, 46.55; 3.
R ichard Mitchell, Australia, 46.63; 4. Jens S medegaard Hansen, Denmark, 47.01;
5.  J immy Massallay, Sierra Leone, 49.68; 6.  E lmehdi Diab, Libya, 49.89; 7.
Pann K hemanith, Laos, 53.74.

Heat 4
1. Derrick Peynado, Jamaica, 47.37; 2.  A lfons Brijdenbach, Belgium, 47.72; 3.
A ndrzej Stepien, Poland, 47.99; 4. Glen- d on Cohen, Britain, 48.35; 5. Regis
Tran- q uille, Seychelles, 49.34; 6. Mohamed Dia- k ite, Guinea, 49.59.

Heat 5
1. Vladimir Markin, U.S.S.R., 46.88; 2.  M ichael Solomon, Trinidad and Tobago,
4 7.24; 3. Hope Ezeigbo, Nigeria, 47.4;. 4.  J acques Borlee, Belgium, 47.77; 5.
Mo- h ammad Elabed, Syria, 50.47; 6. Sahr K endor, Sierra Leone, 52.98.

Heat 6
1. Josip Alebic, Yugoslavia, 47.61; 2.  S tefano Malinverni, Italy, 47.63; 3.
Ian S tapleton, Jamaica, 47.97; 4. Hussain Ali N sayyif, Iraq, 48.03; 5. Harry
Schulting, N etherlands, 48.53; 6. William Akabi- D avis, Sierra Leone, 50.80.

Heat 7
1. Frank Schaffer, East Germany, 4 6.13; 2. Victor Burakov, U.S.S.R., 46.41; 3 .
Alberto Juantorena, Cuba, 46.69. 4. Ro- b erto Tozzi, Italy, 47.01. 5. Jerzy
Pietrzyk, P oland, 47.18. 6. Geraldo Jose Pegado, B razil, 48.71.

Heat 8
1. Nikolai Chernetsky, U.S.S.R., 47.04. 2.  M auro Zuliani, Italy, 47.16. 3.
Marcel K larenbeek, Netherlands, 47.37. 4. Alan B ell, Britain, 47.38. 5. Oddur
Sigurdsson, I celand, 47.39. 6. Isidoro Hornillos, Spain, 4 7.45.

Long Jump

(qualifying 25 feet, 11 inches)

Group A
1. (tie) Frank Paschek, East Germany; L utz Dombrowski, East Germany, 26 f eet,
9 3/4 inches. 3. Stanislaw Jaskulka, P oland, 26-5 3/4. 4. Valery Podluzhnyi, U
.S.S.R., 26-3 3/4. 5. Viktor Belsky, U .S.S.R., 26-3 1/2. 6. Antonio Corgos, S
pain, 26-1 1/2. 7. Laszlo Szalma, Hungary, 2 5-11 1/2. 8. Philippe Deroche,
France, 25- 1 1.

Group B
1. Rolf Bernhard, Switzerland, 26-1 7/8. 2.  K ayode Elegbede, Nigeria, 25-7
1/2. 3.  J ubobosaye Kio, Nigeria, 25-5 1/2. 4. Wil- l iam Rea, Austria, 25-4
3/8. 5. Jan Leitner, C zechoslovakia, 25-1 7/8. 6. Doudou N diaye, Senegal, 25-1
1/8. 7. Gary Honey, A ustralia, 24-4 3/4. 8. Yusuf Alli, Nigeria, 2 4-4 3/8.

10,000-Meter

Final
1. Miruts Yifter, Ethiopia, 27:42.7; 2.  K aarlo Maaninka, Finland, 27:44.3; 3.
M ohammed Kedir, Ethiopia, 27:44.7; 4.  T olossa Kotu, Ethiopia, 27:46.5; 5.
Lasse V iren, Finland, 27:50.5; 6. Jorg Peter, E ast Germany, 28:05.6; 7. Werner
Schild- h auer, East Germany, 28:11.0; 8. Enn Sel- l ik, U.S.S.R., 28:13.8.

WOMEN'S EVENTS

800-meter run

Final
1. Nadezhda Olizarenko, U.S.S.R., 1 m inute, 53.5 seconds. (world record, p
revious mark 1:54.9 set by Olizarenko in J une, 1980); 2. Olga Mineyeva,
U.S.S.R., 1 :54.9; 3. Tatyana Providokhina, U .S.S.R., 1:55.5; 4. Martina
Kampfert, E ast Germany, 1:56.3; 5. Hildegard Ull- r ich, East Germany, 1:57.2;
6. Jolanta Ja- n uchta, Poland, 1:58.3; 7. Nikolina C htereva, Bulgaria, 1:58.8;
8. Gabriella D orio, Italy, 1:59.2.

100-Meter Hurdles

(Top 4 in heats & 4 other fastest qualify)

Heat 1
1. Vera Komisova, U.S.S.R., 12.67; 2.  L ucyna Langer, Poland, 12.75; 3. Kerstin
C laus, East Germany, 12.77; 4. Laurence L ebeau, France, 13.18; 5. Xenia Siska,
H ungary, 13.23; 6. Yordanka Donkova, B ulgaria, 13.24; 7. Marisela Peralta, Do-
m inican Republic, 14.18.

Heat 2
1. Irina Litovchenko, U.S.S.R., 12.97. 2.  B ettine Gartz, East Germany, 13.06;
3.  Z ofia Bielczyk, Poland, 13.21; 4. Shirley S trong, Britain, 13.39; 5.
Daniela Valko- v a, Bulgaria, 13.66; 6. Penelope Gillies, A ustralia, 13.86

Heat 3
1. Grazyna Rabsztyn, Poland, 12.72; 2.  J ohanna Klier, East German, 13.03; 3.
T atyana Anisimova, U.S.S.R., 13.31; 4.  H elena Pihl, Sweden, 13.46; 5.
Laurence E lloy, France, 13.60; 6. Lorna Boothe, B ritain, 13.86; 7. Estella
Meheux, Sierra L eone, 15.61.

400 Meter Dash

Semifinals

(Top 4 in each heat qualify)

Heat 1
1. Marita Koch, East Germany, 50.57; 2.  G abriele Lowe, East Germany, 50.85; 3.
P irjo Haggman, Finland, 51.02; 4. Nina Z yuskova, U.S.S.R., 51.12; 5. Lyudmila
C hernova, U.S.S.R., 51.30; 6. Joslyn H oyte-Smith, Britain, 51.47; 7. Malgor- z
ata Dunecka, Poland, 51.93; 8. Rossitza S tamenova, Bulgaria, 52.96.

Heat 2
1. Christina Lathan, East Germany, 5 0.16; 2. Irina Nazarova, U.S.S.R., 50.18; 3
. Jarmila Kratochvilova, Czechoslova- k ia, 50.79; 4. Linsey Macdonald, Britain,
5 1.60; 5. Michelle Probert, Britain, 51.89; 6 . Ilona Pal, Hungary, 51.99; 7.
Grazyna O liszewska, Poland, 52.36; 8. Irena S zewinska, Poland, 53.13.
VOLLEYBALL

WOMEN Semifinals Peru 3Rumania 0 East Germany 3Bulgaria 2 Cuba 3Brazil 0
U.S.S.R. 3Hungary 0
WEIGHT
LIFTING

198-Pound Class

Total
1. Peter Baczako, Hungary, 832.2 lbs; 2.  R oumen Alexandrov, Bulgaria, 826.7;
3.  F rank Mantek, East Germany, 815.7; 4.  D alibor Rehak, Czechoslovakia,
804.6; 5.  W itold Walo, Poland, 793.6. 6. Lubomir S rsen, Czechoslovakia,
788.1; 7. Vasile G roapa, Rumania, 782.6; 8. Nicolaos Ilia- d is, Greece, 760.5.

WRESTLING

FREESTYLE

Preliminaries

106 pound

Round 1
Sergei Kornilaev, U.S.S.R., def. Jorge F rias, Mexico, (0.0-4.0). Roumen Yorda-
n ov, Bulgaria, def. Khaled Elali Elrifai, S yria, (0.0-4.0). Laszlo Biro,
Hungary, d ef. Van Cong Nguyen, Vietnam, (0.0- 4 .0). Singh Mahabir, India, def.
Gheorghe R asvan, Rumania. (0.0-0.3). Claudio Pol- l io, Italy, def. Jan
Falandys, Poland, (1.0- 3 .0). Mohammad Aktar, Afghanistan, d ef. Mohammed
Qassim Jabbar, Iraq, ( 0.0-4.0). Se Hong Jang, North Korea, def.  G ombying
Khishigbaatar, Mongolia, (0.0- 4 .0).

Round 2
Sergei Kornilaev, U.S.S.R., def. Khaled E lali Elrifai, Syria, (0.0-4.0). Jorge
Frias, M exico, def. Roumen Yordanov, Bulgar- i a, (1.0-3.0). Gheorghe Rasovan,
Ruma- n ia, def. Laszlo Biro, Hungary, (0.0-4.0).  S ingh Mahabir, India, def.
Van Cong N guyen, Viet-Nam, (0.0-4.0). Jan Falan- d ys, Poland, def. Mohammad
Aktar, Af- g hanistan, (0.0-4.0). Claudio Pollio, Italy, d ef. Gombying
Khishigbaatar, Mongolia, ( 1.0-3.0). Se Hong Jang, North Korea, def.  M ohammed
Qassim Jabbar, Iraq, (0.0- 4 .0).

137 pounds

Round 1
Magomedgasan Abushev, U.S.S.R., d ef. Augustine Atasie, Nigeria, (0.0-4.0).  U
lzibayar Nasanjargal, Mongolia, def.  A dnan Kudmani, Syria, (0.0-4.0). Mikho D
oukov, Bulgaria, def. Jan Szymanski, P oland, (0.0-4.0). Raul Cascaret, Cuba, d
ef. Zoltan Szalontai, Hungary, (0.0-4.0).  H uu Tinh Phi, Viet-Nam, def. Victor
Kede M anga, Cameroun, (0.0-4.0). Georges H adjiioannidis, Greece, def. Brian
Aspen, B ritain, (1.0-3.0).

Round 2
Magomedgasan Abushev, U.S.S.R., d ef. Aurel Suteu, Rumania, (0.0-4.0). Ulzi- b
ayar Nasanjargal, Mongolia, def.  A ugustine Atasie, Nigeria, (0.0-4.0). Jan S
zymanski, Poland, def. Adnan Kudmani, S yria, (0.0-4.0). Mikho Doukov, Bulgaria,
d ef. Raul Cascaret, Cuba, (1.0-3.0). Zoltan S zalontai, Hungary, def. Huu Tinh
Phi, V iet-Nam, (0.0-4.0). Georges Hadjiioanni- d is, Greece, def. Victor Kede
Manga, C ameroun, (0.0-4.0).
YACHTING

Fifth Race

TORNADO
1. Alexnader Welter, Lars Sigurd Bjork- s trom, Brazil; 2. Peter Due, Per Kjer-
g ard, Denmark; 3. Victor Potapov, Alex- a nder Zybin, U.S.S.R.; 4. Willem van
walt M eijer, Govert Brasser, Netherlands; 5.  P ekka Narko, Juha Siira,
Finland; 6.  G oran Marstrom, Jorgen Ragarsson, S weden.

Overall
1. Brazil, 11.4; 2. Denmark, 14.4; 3.  S weden, 22.7; 4. Netherlands, 26.0; 5.
Fin- l and, 28.0; 6. U.S.S.R., 29.4.

470 CLASS
1. Leon Wrobel, Tomasz Stocki, Poland; 2 . Henk Van Gent, Jan Van Sergej Hondel,
N etherlands; 3. Vladimir Ignatenkow, S ergei Schadnov, Soviet Union; 4. Fran- c
ois Kistler, Jean-Duc Dreyer, Switzer- l and. 5. Marcos Pinto Soares, Eduardo H
enrique Penido, Brazil; 6. Jorn Borow- s ki, Egbert Swensson, East Germany.

Overall
1. Brazil, 13.0; 2. Poland, 21.0; 3. Fin- l and (Jouko Lindgren, Georg
Tallberg), 2 6.7; 4, Spain (Gustavo Doreste, Alfredo R igau) 32.1; 5, East
Germany, 35.7 and N etherlands, 35.7.

FLYING DUTCHMAN
1. Alesandro Abascal, Miguel Noguer, S pain; 2. David Wilkins, James Wilkin- s
on, Ireland; 3. Jan Erik Vollebregt, S jord Vollebregt, Netherlands; 4. Wolf- g
ang Haase, Wolfgang Wenzel, East Ger- m any; 5. Reinaldo Conrad, Manfred K
aufmann, Brazil; 6. Jorgen Moller, J acob Moller, Denmark.

Overall
1. Spain, 11.0; 2. Ireland, 24.0; 3. Soviet U nion (Vladimir Leontiyev, Valery
Zuba- n ov), 24.7; 4. Hungary (Szabolcs Detre, Z solt Detre), 30.7; 5. East
Germany, 31.7; 6 , Netherlands, 36.7.

SOLING
1. Anasstasios Boudouris, Anasstasio G avrilis, Aristedes Rapanakis, Greece; 2.
P oul Jensen, Valdemar Bandolowski, E rik Hansen, Denmark; 3. Dieter Below, B
ernd Klenke, Michael Zachries, East G ermany; 4. Geert Bakker, Steve Bak- k er,
Dick Coster, Netherlands; 5. Boris B udnikov, Alexander Budnikov, Nikolai P
olyakov, U.S.S.R.; 6. Jean-Francois C orminboeuf, Jean-Claude Guignard, R obert
Perret, Switzerland.

Overall
1. East Germany, 15.4; 2. Greece, 17.4; 3 . Netherlands, 22.0; 4. Denmark, 23.0;
5.  S oviet Union. 6. Brazil (Vincente Brun, G astao Brun, Roberto Souza), 29.7.


STAR
1. Valentin Mankin, Alexander Muzys- c henko, U.S.S.R; 2. Hubert Raudaschl, K
arl Ferstl, Austria; 3. Boudewijn Bink- h orst, Jacob Vandenberg, Netherlands;
4.  G iorgio Gorla, Alfio Peraboni, Italy; 5.  P eter Sundelin, Hakan Lindstrom,
S weden; 6. Jens Hakon Christensen, Mor- t en Nielsen, Denmark.

Overall
1. U.S.S.R., 3.0; 2. Austria, 16.7; 3. Italy, 2 5.1; 4. Netherlands, 27.7. 5.
Sweden, 30.0; 6 , Denmark, 35.7.

FINN
1. Ilias Hadjipavlis, Greece; 2. Wolf- g ang Mayrhofer, Austria; 3. Esko Re- c
hardt, Finland; 4. Kent Carlson, S weden; 5. Andrei Balaschov, U.S.S.R.; 6 ,
Ryszard Skarbinski, Poland.

Overall
1. Finland, 21.7; 2. (tie) East Germany ( Jochen Schumann), 27.4; U.S.S.R.,
27.4; 4 . Austria, 237.7; 5. Sweden, 37.0; 6. Brazil ( Claudio Biekarck), 40.0.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 29, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words


SUB WITH AUTHOR'S CX

Books Of The Times
By John Leonard
A MODEL CHILDHOOD. By Christa Wolf.  Translated from the German by Ursule
Molinaro and Hedwig Rappolt. 407 pages. Farrar Straus & Giroux. $17.50.

HITLER insisted in the 1930's that ''Fuhrer'' be capitalized.  Indeed, all nouns
-''everything in the German language that can be seen and touched'' and heard
and smelled and tasted - were supposed to be capitalized. This insistence was
troublesome to intelligent school children like Nelly Jordan. Ought she to have
capitalized ''cloud''? What about ''rage''?

Nelly would have similar trouble later on when called upon to ''name'' emotions.
The emotions her teacher wanted her to name were courage, devotion and loyalty.
Joy, obedience and modesty were acceptable, poverty and fear were not. And
Nelly's particular emotion, ''pretending,'' didn't make sense, especially when
it was capitalized.

''A Model Childhood,'' however, is intended precisely as an account of how an
intelligent child during the Nazi years began to pretend, how she lost ''the
free association between emotions and events,'' how ''she cheated herself out of
her true feelings.'' The account, by the East German writer Christa Wolf, is
apparently autobiographical.  The author, who is in her 40's and who calls
herself ''You'' throughout, seeks to recover the child, Nelly, whom she
discarded, in order to fashion an unpretending ''I.''

She Had No Choice

The child had no choice but to pretend. She led a secret life of the emotions,
even as she joined the Hitler Youth, even as she danced attendance on the
''spider'' of the swastika. The ''You'' she grew into knows two things for sure:
''Perhaps the worst of it is how anybody seems to be able to get used to
anything.'' And: ''The horrible secret: not that one didn't dare, but that the
thought didn't occur to one. All attempts to explain stop at this fact.''

And yet she must explain. ''You,'' with her husband H.; her younger brother,
Lutz, and her teenaged daughter, Lenka, motors from the German Democratic
Republic in July 1971, back to her native town, which is now in Poland, to find
her past. Her husband, a shadowy but appealing figure is worried and ironic. Her
brother, a practical engineer, is suspicious of anything metaphysical; he is
resigned to common sense. Her daughter, an under achiever in school, is
ferociously self-absorbed, and asks most of the embarrassing questions, such as,
''Do you know an adult who is actually happy?''

''You'' will spend four years writing about those two days in July of 1971 and
the first 16 years of Nelly's life, as a student and a refugee, and how hard it
is to make literature out of the unknowable, to select and defend and deny, to
resist anecdote, to avoid punch lines. ''You'' broods over one of the several
definitions in a German dictionary of the word verfallen: ''irretrievably lost,
because in enslaved by one's own, deep-down consent.''

She concludes: ''Not everything can and should be said, let's get that clear.
Wherever else this word may still come to light, one shouldn't try to call
everything by its name, so as to give purity, awe and reverence a chance to
survive in the realm of the unspoken.'' If this seems too easy, she is willing
to confess: ''We can no longer tell exactly what we have experienced.'' And if a
reader replies, ''Could we ever?'' she is ready with another question: why, she
wonders, has the conviction that man should be guided by his knowledge, rather
than by his faith, thus far produced so little beauty?

On the other hand, faith has produced a number of monsters, spiders. Is faith a
kind of pretending? Lutz, the brother of ''You'' and the uncle of Lenka,
probably thinks so. According to Lutz, there is no room for the suffering soul
in a world of engineers. Which intuition doesn't make him a happy adult,
actually. On the third hand, maybe literature itself is pretend-engineering; on
certain subjects, any kind of communication is guilty, evasive, defensive.

What Right to Material?

''A Model Childhood'' takes huge risks. What right has Christa Wolf to her
material? She lost her childhood, not her family or her life.  Why should we
listen to her complain about her problems with her craft? Enormities have
deafened us. Who cares about her precious ''I,'' under the dead weight of tens
of millions? She moralizes lazily on the Americans in Vietnam and the junta in
Chile. About Stalin, there is a single, gingerly whisper: later, maybe, she
won't have to pretend that the only poet was Pablo Neruda. She isn't, after all,
the first person to have blinked at evil.

She succeeds because she tired of these questions before it occurred to a book
reviewer to ask them. She understands memory, as short-term and long-term, as
sealed vault, as electrical circuit, as a paradox of language, as dream and as a
process of canceling out.  The voices she hears are believable; the eyes that
she sees in the rear-view mirror - her husband's - are full of wary love. Others
have forgiven her; why can't she forgive herself? She won't, and that is why she
succeeds. She butts her head against ''the limits of the expressible,'' and is
concussed into a kind of blankness. She no longer pretends.

''A Model Childhood'' must be what it was like being young and German and
non-Jewish, in school and at summer camp, singing around the bonfires, waiting
for the parade, with a fractured personality.  It doesn't satisfy because there
are certain satisfactions that are beyond the power of literature to supply. But
it does manage to capitalize the noun ''rage.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 29, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

RESULTS OF YESTERDAY'S OLYMPIC COMPETITION;
Summaries of Moscow Olympics

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 2944 words


BASKETBALL

MEN'S SEMIFINALS

Group A

Group B Australia 93 India 75 Sweden 70 Poland 67

WOMEN'S SEMIFINALS Cuba 79 Italy 63 U.S.S.R. 120 Hungary 62
BOXING

Preliminary Bouts

126-Pound Class
Luis Pizarro, Puerto Rico, defeated Fitzroy Brown, Guyana, (points); Sidnei
Dalrovere, Brazil, defeated Leoul Nearaio, Ethiopia, (points); Krzysztof
Kosedowski, Poland, defeated Dejan Marovic, Yugoslavia, (points); Winfred
Kabunda, Zambia, defeated Barri McGuigan, Ireland (points); Rudi Fink, East
Germany, stopped Carlos Gonzalez, Mexico, 1st.

157-Pound Class
Leonidas Njunwa, Tanzania, defeated Imad Idriss, Syria, (disqualified 3d round,
2:58); Detlef Kastner, East Germ any, defeated Adeoye Adetunji, Nigeria,
(knockout 3d round, 1:23); Aleksandr Koshkin, U.S.S.R., defeated Salah Jassim
Beden, Iraq, (knockout 1st round, 2 :38); Wilson Kaoma, Zambia, defeated Jackson
Ramon Rivera, Venezuela (disqualification); Jan Franek, Czechoslovakia, defeated
Jeliu Stefanov, Bulgaria (disqualification); Armando Martinez, C uba, stopped
George Kabuto, Uganda, 1st; Francisco Carlos Jesus, Brazil, defeated Leo
Vainonen, Sweden.
CYCLING

Individual Road Race

Final
1, Sergei Soukhoroutchenkov, U.S.S.R., 4 .48:28; 2, Czeslaw Lang, Poland, 2:57
minutes behind; 3, Juri Barinov, U.S.S.R., same time; 4, Thomas Barth, East
Germany, 7:44 behind; 5, Tadeusz Wojtas, Poland, same time; 6, Anatoly Jarkin,
U.S.S.R., 8:27 behind.
DIVING

MEN

Platform

Final
1, Falk Hoffman, East Germany, 835.65 points; 2, Vladimir Aleinik, U.S.S.R., 8
19.70; 3, David Ambartsumyan, U.S.S.R., 817.44; 4, Carlos Giron, Mexico, 8
09.80; 5, Dieter Waskow, East Germany, 8 02.80; 6, Thomas Knuths, East Germany,
7 83.97; 7, Sergei Nemtsanov, U.S.S.R., 7 75.86; 8, Niki Stajkovic, Austria,
725.14.
FENCING

MEN'S

Epee Final
1, Johan Harmenberg, Sweden, 0.800; 2, Erno Kolczonay, Hungary, 0.600; 3,
Philippe Riboud, France, 0.600; 4, Rolf Edling, Sweden, 0.600; 5, Aleksandr
Mozhaev, U.S.S.R., 0.200; 6, Ioan Popa, Rumania, 0.200; 7, (tie), Boris
Lukomsky, U.S.S.R.; Jaroslav Jurka, Czechoslovakia.
FIELD HOCKEY

WOMEN'S
Austria 3 Poland 0 Czechoslovakia 2 India 1 Zimbabwe 2 U.S.S.R. 0
GYMNASTICS TEAM HANDBALL

MEN'S

Preliminary Pool Group A East Germany 24 Denmark 20 Hungary 26 Cuba 22 Poland 22
Spain 24

Group B Kuwait 17 Algeria 30
Rumania 18 Switzerland 16 U.S.S.R. 22 Yugoslavia 17
TRACK AND FIELD

MEN

Pole Vault

Qualifying
Tadeusz Slusarski, Poland, 17 feet, 8 1/2 inches; Jean-Michel Bellot, France,
17- 8 1/2; Thierry Vigneron, France, 17-8 1/2; Wladislaw Kozakiewicz, Poland,
17-8 1/2; Mariusz Klimczyk, Poland, 17-8 1/2; Miro Zalar, Sweden, 17-8 1/2;
Tapani Haapakoski, Finland, 17-8 1/2; Konstantin Volkov, U.S.S.R., 17-6 3/4;
Sergei Kulibaba, U.S.S.R., 17-6 3/4; Philippe Houvion, France, 17-6 3/4; Rauli
Pudas, Finland, 17- 6 3/4; Brian Hooper, Britain, 17-6 3/4.

Shot-Put

Qualifying

Group A
1, Vladimir Kiselyov, U.S.S.R., 20.72 meters (67 feet 11 3/8 inches); 2,
Aleksandr Baryshnikov, U.S.S.R., 20.58 (67-5 7/8); 3, Vladimir Milic,
Yugoslavia, 20.56 (67- 5 1/8); 4, Reijo Stahlberg, Finland, 20.53 (67-3 7/8); 5,
Anatoly Yaroch, U.S.S.R., 20.19 (66-2 3/4); 6, Udo Beyer, East Germany, 19.94
(65-4 3/4); 7. Hans-Jurgen Jacobi, East Germany, 19.92 (65-3 7/8); 8. Geoffrey
Capes, Britain, 19.75 (64-9 1/2).

Discus Throw

Final
1, Viktor Rashchupkin, U.S.S.R., 218 feet, 8 inches; 2, Imrich Bugar,
Czechoslovakia, 217-9 1/2; 3, Luis Delis, Cuba, 2 17-7; 4, Wolfgang Schmidt,
East Germany, 2 15-3 7/8; 5, Yuri Dumchev, U.S.S.R., 215-1 5/8; 6, Igor
Douguinets, U.S.S.R., 210-1 1/8; 7, Emil Vladimirov, Bulgaria, 207- 3 1/8; 8,
Velko Velev, Bulgaria, 206-9 7/8.

200-Meter Dash

Semifinals
(First four finishers in each heat qualify.)

Heat 1
1, Silvio Leonard, Cuba, 20.61 seconds; 2 , Bernhard Hoff, East Germany, 20.69;
3, Marian Woronin, Poland, 20.75; 4, Allan Wells, Britain, 20.75.

Heat 2
1, Pietro Mennea, Italy, 20.70; 2, Don Quarrie, Jamaica, 20.76; 3, Leszek
Dunecki, Poland, 20.82; 4, Osvaldo Lara, Cuba, 20.93.

5,000-Meter Run
(First six in each heat and six fastest losers qualify.)

Heat 1
1, Miruts Yifter, Ethiopia, 13 minutes, 44.4 seconds; 2, Hansjorg Kunze, East
Germany, 13:44.4; 3, Nicholas Rose, Britain, 13:44.7; 4, John Treacy, Ireland, 1
3:44.8; 5, Alex Hagelsteens, Belgium, 1 3:44.9; 6, Aleksandr Fedotkin, U.S.S.R.,
1 3:45.6; 7, David Fitzsimmons, Australia, 1 3:46.4; 8, Enrique Aquino, Mexico,
1 3:48.9.

Heat 2
1, Elhachemi Abdenouz, Algeria, 1 3:42.1; 2, Mohammed Kedir, Ethiopia, 1 3:42.7;
3, Valery Abramov, U.S.S.R., 13:42.9; 4, Emiel Puttemans, Belgium, 13:43.0; 5,
David Moorcroft, Britain, 1 3:43.0; 6, Jiri Sykora, Czechoslovakia, 1 3:43.1; 7,
Stephen Austin, Australia, 1 3:43.2; 8, Martti Vainio, Finland, 1 3:45.2; 9,
Zakaria Barie, Tanzania, 1 3:49.9.

Heat 3
1, Markus Ryffel, Switzerland, 13:45.0; 2 , Suleiman Nyambui, Tanzania, 13:45.4;
3 , Eamonn Coghlan, Ireland, 13:45.4; 4, Dietmar Millonig, Austria, 13:45.7; 5,
Yohannes Mohammed, Ethiopia, 13:45.8; 6, Kaarlo Maaninka, Finland, 13:45.8; 7,
Barry Smith, Britain, 13:46.3.

Long Jump

Final
1, Lutz Dombrowski, East Germany, 28 feet, 1/4 inch; 2, Frank Paschek, East
Germany, 26-11 1/8; 3, Valery Podluzhnyi, U .S.S.R., 26-9 7/8; 4, Laszlo Szalma,
Hungary, 26-7 7/8; 5, Stanislaw Jaskulka, Poland, 26-7 7/8; 6, Viktor Belsky,
U.S.S.R., 2 6-6 3/4; 7, Antonio Corgos, Spain, 26-6 1 /4; 8, Yordan Yanev,
Bulgaria, 26-3 1/2.

400-Meter Run

Semifinals
(First four finishers in each heat qualify.)

Heat 1
1, Alfons Brijdenbach, Belgium, 45.46 seconds; 2, Richard Mitchell, Australia, 4
5.48; 3, David Jenkins, Britain, 45.59; 4, Michael Solomon, Trinidad and Tobago,
4 5.61.

Heat 2
1, Frank Schaffer, East Germany, 45.47; 2, Viktor Markin, U.S.S.R., 45.60; 3,
Alberto Juantorena, Cuba, 45.95; 4, Joseph Coombs, Trinidad and Tobago, 45.96.

200-Meter Dash

Final
1, Pietro Mennea, Italy, 20.19 seconds; 2, Allan Wells, Britain, 20.21; 3,
Donald Quarrie, Jamaica, 20.29; 4, Silvio Leonard, Cuba, 20.30; 5, Bernhard
Hoff, East Germany, 20.50; 6, Leszek Dunecki, Poland, 20.68; 7, Marian Woronin,
Poland, 2 0.81; 8, Osvaldo Lara, Cuba, 21.19.

3,000-Meter Steeplechase

Semifinal
(First four finishers in each heat and four fastest losers qualify.)

Heat 1
1, Filbert Bayi, Tanzania, 8 minutes, 16.2 seconds; 2, Eshetu Tura, Ethiopia,
8:16.2; 3, Boguslaw Maminski, Poland, 8 :18.8; 4, Francisco Sanchez, Spain, 8
:19.0; 5, Anatoly Dimov, U.S.S.R., 8:24.9; 6, Lahcene Babaci, Algeria, 8:25.5.

Heat 2
1, Bronislaw Malinowski, Poland, 8 :21.2; 2, Domingo Ramon, Spain, 8:22.0; 3,
Vasile Bichea, Rumania, 8:24.3; 4, Tommy Ekblom, Finland, 8:24.3; 5, Gius eppe
Gerbi, Italy, 8:27.2; 6, Dusan Moravcik, Czechoslovakia, 8:28.0.

WOMEN

100-Meter Dash

Semifinal
(First four finishers in each heat qualify.)

Heat 1
1, Vera Komisova, U.S.S.R., 12.78 seco nds; 2, Lucyna Langer, Poland, 12.91; 3,
Bettine Gartz, East Germany, 13.04; 4.  Zofia Bielczyk, Poland, 13.09.

Heat 2
1, Grazyna Rabsztyn, Poland, 12.64; 2, Johanna Klier, East Germany, 12.77; 3,
Irina Litovchenko, U.S.S.R., 12.84; 4, Kerstin Claus, East Germany, 12.99.

100-Meter Hurdles

Final
1, Vera Komisova, U.S.S.R., 12.56; 2, J ohanna Klier, East Germany, 12.63; 3,
Lucyna Langer, Poland, 12.65; 4, Kerstin Claus, East Germany, 12.66; 5, Grazyna
Rabsztyn, Poland, 12.74; 6, Irina Litovchenko, U.S.S.R., 12.84; 7, Bettine
Gartz, East Germany, 12.93; 8, Zofia Bielczyk, Poland, 13.08.

400-Meter Run

Final
1, Marita Koch, East Germany, 48.88 seconds; 2, Jarmila Kratochvilova,
Czechoslovakia, 49.46; 3, Christina Lathan, East Germany, 49.66; 4, Irina
Nazarova, U.S.S.R., 50.07; 5, Nina Zyuskova, U.S.S.R., 50.17; 6, Gabriele Lowe,
East Germany, 51.33; 7, Pirjo Haggman, Finland, 51.35; 8, Lindsey MacDonald,
Britain, 52.40.

200-Meter Dash
(First five finishers in each heat and first fastest losers qualify.)

Heat 1
1, Kathryn Smallwood, Britain, 22.95 seconds; 2, Lyudmila Maslakova, U.S.S.R.,
23.24; 3, Liliana Panayotova, Bulgaria, 23.29; 4, Jacqueline Rusey, Jamaica,
23.35; 5, Els Vader, Netherlands, 2 3.67.

Heat 2
1, Marlene Ottey, Jamaica, 22.82; 2, Barbel Wockel, East Germany, 22.86; 3,
Beverley Goddard, Britain, 22.97; 4, Chantal Rega, France, 23.29; 5, Galina E
ntcheva, Bulgaria, 23.37.

Heat 3
1, Natalya Bochina, U.S.S.R., 22.26; 2, Romy Muller, East Germany, 22.55; 3,
Sonia Lannaman, Britain, 22.84; 4, Linda Haglund, Sweden, 22.90; 5, Denise Boyd,
Australia, 22.91; 6, Raymonde Naigre, France, 23.10.
VOLLEYBALL

MEN'S Preliminaries Pool Group A U.S.S.R. 3 Cuba 0 Bulgaria 3 Italy 1

Group B Brazil 3 Poland 2 Yugoslavia 3 Libya 0
WATER POLO

Final Group D Hungary 7 Cuba 5 U.S.S.R. 7 Netherlands 3 Yugoslavia 7 Spain 6

Group E Rumania 10 Bulgaria 6
WEIGHT LIFTING

220-Pound Class

Final
1, Ata Zaremba, Czechoslovakia, 395.0 ( 870.8 pounds); 2, Igor Nikitin,
U.S.S.R., 3 92.5 (865.3 ); 3, Alberto Blanco, Vuba, 385.0 (848.7 ); 4, Michael
Hennig, East G ermany, 382.5 (843.2); 5, Janos Solyomvari, Hungary, 380.0 (837.7
); 6, Manfred Funke, East Germany, 377.5 (832.2); 7, Anton Baraniak,
Czechoslovakia, 375.0 ( 826.7). 8, Laszlo Varga, Hungary, 367.5 ( 810.1).
WRESTLING

FREESTYLE

115-Pound Class

Round 1
Nanzadying Burgedaa, Mongolia, defeated Ahmad Dahrouj, Syria, (0.0-4.0); A
natoly Beloglazov, U.S.S.R., defeated H artmut Reich, East Germany, (0.5-3.5);
Mohamed Hachaichi, Algeria, defeated Kim Thieng Nguyen, Vietnam, (1.0-3.0); Koce
Efremov, Yugoslavia, defeated Aynutdin, Afghanistan, (0.0-4.0); Nermedin
Selimov, Bulgaria, defeated Mark Anthony Dunbar, Britain, (0.0-4.0); Kumar
Ashok, India, defeated Dok Ryong Jang, Korea D.P.R, (1.0-3.0); Wladyslaw Stecyk,
Poland, defeated Petre Ciarnau, Rumania, (0.0-4.0); Lajos Szabo, Hungary,
defeated Luis Ocana, Cuba, (0.0- 4 .0).

Round 2
Anatoly Beloglazov, U.S.S.R., defeated Nanzadying Burgedaa, Mongolia; Hartmut
Reich, East Germany, defeated Ahmad Dahrouj, Syria; Koce Efremov, Yugoslavia,
defeated Mohamed Hachaichi, Algeria; Aynutdin, Afghanistan, defeated Kim Thieng
Nguyen, Vietnam; Dok Ryong Jang, North Korea, defeated Mark Anthony Dunbar,
Britain; Nermedin Selimov, Bulgaria, defeated Kumar Ashok, India; Wladyslaw
Stecyk, Poland, defeated Luis Ocana, Cuba; Lajos Szabo, Hungary, defeated Petre
Ciarnau, Rumania.

163-Pound Class

Round 1
Khojawahid Zahedi, Afghanistan, defeated Bani Merje Fawaz, Syria, (0.0- 4 .0);
Singh Rajander, India, defeated Reinhold Steingraber, East Germany, ( 1.0-3.0);
Valentin Raitchev, Bulgaria, defeated. Bartl Brotzner, Austria, (0.0- 4 .0);
Riccardo Niccolini, Italy, defeated Marin Pircalabu, Rumania, (0.0-4.0);
Jamtsying Davaajav, Mongolia, defeated Isaie Tonye, Cameroun, (0.0-4.0); Ryszard
Scigalski, Poland, defeated Ibrahim Khalil Jum'a, Iraq, (0.0-4.0); Pavel
Pinigin, U.S.S.R., defeated Rudolf Marro, Switzerland, (0.0-4.0); Istvan Feher,
Hungary, defeated Fitzloyd Dean Walker, Britain, (0.0-4.0).

Round 2
Reinhold Steingraber, East Germany, defeated Khojawahid Zahedi, Afghanistan;
Singh Rajander, India, defeated Bani Merje Fawaz, Syria; Valentin Raitchev,
Bulgaria, defeated Riccardo Niccolini, Italy; Marin Pircalabu, Rumania, defeated
Bartl Brotzner, Austria; Ryszard Scigalski, Poland, defeated Isaie Tonye,
Cameroon; Jamtsying Davaajav, Mongolia, defeated Ibrahim Khalil Jum'a, Iraq;
Pavel Pinigin, U.S.S.R., defeated Fitzloyd Dean Walker, Britain; Dan Karabin,
Czechoslovakia, defeated Rudolf Marro, Switzerland; Istvan Feher, Hungary,
defeated Kiro Ristov, Yugoslavia.

220-Pound Class

Round 1
Julius Strnisko, Czechoslovakia, defeated Satpal Singh, India, (0.0-4.0); Harald
Buttner, East Germany, defeated Saleh Elsaid, Syria, (0.0-4.0); Vasile Puscasu,
Rumania, defeated Frank Andersson, Sweden, (0.0-4.0); Barbaro Morgan, Cuba,
defeated Khorloo Bayanmunk, Mongolia, (0.0-4.0); Ilya Mate, U.S.S.R., defeated
Santiago Morales, Spain, (0.0- 4 .0); Ambroise Sarr, Senegal, defeated Bourcard
Bineli, Cameroon, (0.0-4.0); Slavtcho Tchervenkov, Bulgaria, defeated Antal
Bodo, Hungary, (0.0-4.0).

Round 2
Tomasz Busse, Poland, defeated Satpal Singh, India; Julius Strnisko,
Czechoslovakia, defeated Saleh Elsaid, Syria; Harald Buttner, East Germany,
defeated Vasile Puscasu, Rumania; Ilya Mate, U.S.S.R., defeated Barbaro Morgan,
Cuba; Khorloo Bayanmunk, Mongolia, defeated Santiago Morales, Spain; Slavtcho
Tchervenkov, Bulgaria, defeated Bourcard Bineli, Cameroon; Antal Bodo, Hungary,
defeated Ambroise Sarr, Senegal.

106-Pound Class

Round 3
Roumen Yordanov, Bulgaria, defeated Sergei Kornilaev, U.S.S.R., (1.0-3.0);
Laszlo Biro, Hungary, defeated Jorge Frias, Mexico, (1.0-3.0); Jan Falandys,
Poland, defeated Gheorghe Rasovan, Rumania, ( 0.0-4.0); Singh Mahabir, India,
defeated Claudio Pollio, Italy, (0.5-3.5); Se Hong Jang, Korea D.P.R, defeated
Mohammad Aktar, Afghanistan, (0.0-4.0).

Round 4
Sergei Kornilaev, U.S.S.R., defeated Laszlo Biro, Hungary; Jan Falandys, Poland,
defeated Singh Mahabir, India; Claudio Pollio, Italy, defeated Se Hong J ang,
North Korea.

137 Pound Class

Round 3
Aurel Suteu, Rumania, defeated Brian Aspen, Britain, (0.5-3.5); Magomedgasan
Abushev, U.S.S.R., defeated Ulzibayar Nasanjargal, Mongolia, (1.0-3.0); Raul
Cascaret, Cuba, defeated Jan Szymanski, Poland, (0.0-4.0); Mikho Doukov,
Bulgaria, defeated Zoltan Szalontai, Hungary, ( 1.0-3.0); Georges
Hadjiioannidis, Greece, defeated Huu Tinh Phi, Vietnam, ( 0.0-4.0).

Round 4
Aurel Suteu, Rumania, defeated Ulzibayar Nasanjargal, Mongolia; Magomedgasan
Abushev, U.S.S.R., defeated Mikho D oukov, Bulgaria; Raul Cascaret, Cuba,
defeated Georges Hadjiioannidis, Greece.

198-Pound Class

Round 4
Ivan Ghinov, Bulgaria, defeated Ion Ivanov, Rumania, (1.0-3.0); Sanasar
Oganesyan, U.S.S.R., defeated Uwe Neupert, East Germany, (1.0-3.0); Aleksander
Cichon, Poland, defeated Christophe Andanson, France, (0.5-3.5); Dashdorj
Tserentogtokh, Mongolia, defeated Mick Pikos, Australia, (0.0-4.0).

Round 5
Uwe Neupert, East Germany, defeated Ivan Ghinov, Bulgaria; Sanasar Oganesyan,
U.S.S.R., defeated Dashdorj Tserentogtokh, Mongolia.
YACHTING

SIXTH RACE

TORNADO CLASS
1, Alexander Welter, Lars Bjorkstrom, B razil; 2, Goran Marstrom, Jorgen
Ragnarsson, Sweden; 3, Victor Potapov, Alexander Zybin, Soviet Union; 4, Pekka
Narko, Juha Sirra, Finland; 5, Peter Due, Per Kjergard, Denmark; 6, Willem van
Walt Meijer, Govert Brasser, Netherlands.

Overall
1, Brazil, 11.4; 2, Denmark, 24.7; 3, Sweden, 25.7; 4, U.S.S.R., 35.1. 5,
Finland 3 6.0; 6, Netherlands, 36.0.

FLYING DUTCHMAN CLASS
1, Alesandro Abascal, Miguel Noguer, Spain; 2, David Wilkins, James Wilkinson,
Ireland; 3, Wolfgang Haase, Wolfgang Wenzel, East Germany; 4, Jorgen Moller,
Jacob Moller, Denmark; 5, Jan Erik Vollebergt, Sjord Vollebergt, Netherlands; 6,
Reinaldo Conrad, Manfred Kaufmann, Brazil.

Overall
1, Spain, 11.0; 2, Ireland, 27.0; 3, East Germany, 37.4; 4, U.S.S.R. (Vladimir
Leontyev, Valery Zubanov). 37.7; 5, Hungary (Szabolcs Detre, Zsolt Detre), 45.7;
6 , Netherlands, 46.7.

SOLING CLASS
1, Poul Jensen, Valdemar Bandolowski, Erik Hansen, Denmark; 2, Boris Budinov,
Aleksandr Budinov, Nikolai Polyakov, U.S.S.R; 3, Vincente Brun, Gastao B run,
Roberto Souza, Brazil; 4, Anastassios Boudouris, Anastassios Gavrilis, Aristedes
Rapanakis, Greece; 5, Geert Bakker, Steve Bakker, Dick Coster, Netherlands; 6,
Dieter Below, Bernd Klenke, Michael Zachries, East Germany.

Overall
1, Denmark, 23.0; 2, Greece, 25.4; 3, East Germany, 27.4; 4, U.S.S.R., 27.4; 5,
Netherlands, 32.0. 6, Brazil, 35.4.

470 CLASS
1, Jorn Borowski, Egbert Swensson, East Germany; 2, Ernesto Treves, Silvio
Necchi, Italy; 3, Henk Van Gent, Jan Van Den Hondel, Netherlands; 4, Gustavo
Doreste, Alfredo Rigau, Spain; 5, Lars Bengtsson, Stefan Bengtsson, Sweden; 6,
Vladimir Ignatenko, Sergei Schadanov, U .S.S.R.

Overall
1, Brazil (Marcos Soares, Eduardo P enido) 24.7; 2, East Germany, 35.7; 3,
Poland (Leon Wrobel, Tomasz Stocki), 3 6.0; 4, Spain, 40.1; 5, Finland (Jouko
Lindgren, Georg Tallberg), 40.7; 6, Netherlands, 41.4.

FINN CLASS
1, Esko Rechardt, Finland; 2, Wolfgang Mayrhofer, Austria; 3, Kent Carlson,
Sweden; 4, Mark Neeleman, Netherlands; 5, Claudio Biekarck, Brazil; 6, Minski
Fabris, Yugoslavia.

Overall
1, Finland, 21.7; 2, Austria, 30.7; 3, East Germany, (Jochen Schumann) 40.4; 4,
Sweden, 42.4; 5, U.S.S.R. (Andrei Balaschov), 47.4; 6, Brazil, 50.0.

STAR, CLASS
1, Hubert Raudaschl, Karl Ferstl, Austria; 2, Boudewijn Binkhorst, Jacob
Vandenberg, Netherlands; 3, Antonio Gorosteegui, Jose Maria Benavides, Spain; 4,
Jens Hakon Christensen, Morten Nielsen, Denmark; 5, Valentin Mankin, Aleksandr
Musyschenko, U.S.S.R.; 6, Peter Sundelin, Hakan Lindstrom, Sweden.

Overall
1, U.S.S.R., 13.0; 2, Austria, 16.7; 3, Italy (Giorgio Gorla, Alfio Peraboni), 2
8.0; 4, Netherlands, 33.0; 5, Sweden, 38.0; 6 , Denmark, 43.7.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 30, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE ROLL CALL VOTE IN THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY;
In Favor (112)

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 242 words


Afghani- stan Albania Algeria Angola Argentina Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Benin
Bhutan Bolivia Botswana Brazil Bulgaria Burundi Byelorussia Cambodia Cameroon
Cape Verde Chad Chile China Colombia Congo Costa Rica Cuba Cyprus Czechoslo-
vakia Djibouti Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Germany, East
Ghana Greece Grenada Guinea Guinea- Bissau Guyana Hungary India Indonesia
Iran Iraq Ivory Coast Jamaica Jordan Kenya Kuwait Laos Lebanon Lesotho Libya
Madagas- car Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Mongolia
Morocco Mozam- bique Nepal Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Oman Pakistan Panama Peru
Philippines Poland Qatar Rumania Rwanda St. Lucia Sao Tome & Principe Saudi
Arabia Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Somalia Soviet
Union Spain
Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Syria Tanzania Thailand Togo Trinidad & Tobago Tunisia
Turkey Uganda Ukraine U. Arab Emirates Upper Volta
Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Yemen Yemen, Southern Yugoslavia Zaire Zambia

Against (7)
Australia Canada Dominican Republic Guatemala Israel Norway United States

Abstentions (24)
Austria Bahamas Belgium Britain Burma Denmark Fiji Finland France Germany, West
Haiti Honduras Iceland Ireland Italy Japan Liberia Luxem- bourg Nether- lands
New Zealand Paraguay Portugal Samoa Sweden

Absent or Not Voting (9)
Central Af.  Republic Comoros Dominica Equatorial Guinea Malawi Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands South Africa Swaziland

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 30, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

By Jerry Rubin;
GUESS WHO'S COMING TO WALL STREET

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


I accepted a position on Wall Street this week. That might strike some people as
surprising. I was one of a small group of streettheater Yippies who stormed the
New York Stock Exchange 13 years ago and threw dollar bills from the visitors'
gallery. The floor brokers stopped trading and rushed after the falling dollars.
The Stock Exchange soon installed bulletproof glass between the gallery and the
brokers on the floor, making them safe again from the antics of the
anticapitalistic comics of the 1960's.

A lot happened in the next 13 years. Our nationwide campaign to build public
opposition to the Vietnam War succeeded, and the war ended. Yet sadly, the war
in Asia continues without American military involvement. In the United States,
the radical dream of transforming the system from the outside floundered, then
virtually disappeared, although we did reform parts of the system. My friends
from that period have gone in thousands of apparently unconnected directions.

We dropped the dollar bills on Wall Street to call attention to a system that we
felt had too often separated money and ethics, creating enormous wealth amid
mass poverty. Today I have many of the same criticisms and same values, and the
economic situation is even more disastrous in 1980 than it was in 1968.

But I know that I can be more effective today wearing a suit and tie and working
on Wall Street than I can be dancing outside the walls of power.

Politics and rebellion distinguished the 60's. The search for the self
characterized the spirit of the 70's. Money and financial interest will capture
the passion of the 80's.

Women today are gaining power by entering the executive marketplace. They are
discovering the authority and self-esteem that come with financial independence.
Black leaders, too, say the top item on the agenda for black people in the 80's
will be, as Andrew Young recently put it, to ''integrate the money.''

As the 80's dawned, I found myself becoming bored with the mobility and personal
freedom that I had cherished for the last 20 years. I felt separated from power.
Raising money for projects in the last few years, I have learned that the
individual who signs the check has the ultimate power. Money is power. If I am
going to have any effect on my society in the next 40 years, I must develop the
power that only control of money can bring.

I am personally weary of being stereotyped as an image frozen in the painted
faces of the 60's. I do not reject that period or those experiences. If I had my
life to live over, I would do it again with the same passion and idealism and, I
hope, sense of humor. But 1980 is not 1968. I approach my new life with the same
excitement, passion and idealism I felt 20 years ago. My journey from being a
Chicago Seven defendant to working on Wall Street may be unique, but it is also
reminiscent of the thousands of people of my generation who want to be effective
in the 80's and 90's by joining - and also changing - the same system they once
had visions of supplanting.

When I began looking for a job on Wall Street, I expected much discouragement.
In fact, one headhunter said it was highly unlikely that the staid institutions
of Wall Street would take the chance of welcoming Jerry Rubin. Yet I received a
job offer in the first week of my job search.

In my job, I will be a securities analyst investigating new companies of the
future, including those producing solar and other alternative-energy sources. My
task will be to find, analyze and develop financing and marketing plans for
those entrepreneurial nonconglomerate companies that our society deperately
needs.

As a radical activist, I could effectively criticize the domination of the
financial world by huge organizations primarily through my writing and speaking.
As a financial planner, I can effectively change that reality by discovering
promising independent companies and finding the financing for the socially aware
risk takers who will become tomorrow's titans.

The challenge for American capitalism in the 80's is to bring the
entrepreneurial spirit back to America. The large organizations have discouraged
people's expression and ambition. America needs a revitalization of the
small-business spirit. Depressed areas especially need an enormous investment of
capital. Individual entrepreneurship can create the new work ethic that is so
desperately needed in America. To stimulate that ethic, America needs creative
financing -and I intend to work to create it.

Today, a person cannot survive the financial challenges of recession and
inflation without financial knowledge. One of the reasons that the rich become
richer and the poor poorer in America is that the wealthy can afford the
financial information supplied by lawyers and accountants. The average person is
unaware of his financial rights and opportunities. We need to democratize
information about money because information is power.

Welcome, Wall Street, here I come! Let's make millions of dollars together
supporting the little companies engaged in social and environmental positivity.
Let's rescue Americn capitalism from overemphasis on the huge organization.
Let's make capitalism work for everyone.
Jerry Rubin, who now works at John Muir & Co., is the author of ''Do It!'' and
co-author, with Mimi Leonard, of the forthcoming, ''The War Between The
Sheets.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jerry Rubin

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 31, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EVANGELIST CALLS FOR RESTORATION OF PRAYER IN U.S. PUBLIC SCHOOLS

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 442 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 30


A television evangelist warned Congress today that ''this nation faces the
judgment of Almighty God'' if lawmakers fail to restore prayer to the public
schools.

The Rev. James Robinson, a Southern Baptist from Texas, made his appeal for a
law permitting states to promote prayer in the public schools as he and others
testified before a subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee that is
considering the issue.

Among those present in the crowded hearing room was William J.  Murray who, as a
teen-ager 17 years ago, was a plaintiff in a suit involved in the Supreme
Court's historic opinion ruling out formal Bible reading and recitation of the
Lord's Prayer in the nation's public schools.

Mr. Murray, the son of Madalyn Murray O'Hair, one of the nation's leading
atheists, has said he is now a Christian and realizes that the suit brought in
Baltimore in 1963 was a mistake.

''If it were within my personal power to help return this nation to its rightful
place by placing God back in the classroom, I would do so,'' he said recently.

Today, in a statement to the subcommittee, he said he strongly supported a
Senate-passed bill that would deny the Supreme Court any jurisdiction over any
state law, ordinance, rule or regulation involving voluntary prayers in public
schools.

Also voicing strong support today for the bill was William R.  Bright, a founder
of the Campus Crusade for Christ.  The Supreme Court rulings against prayer in
public schools, he said, represented ''the darkest hour in the history of our
nation.''

'Afraid for Our Nation'

He said that the ''plagues which followed the Court's decision banning school
prayer included the assassinations of President Kennedy, Senator Robert F.
Kennedy and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., acceleration of the Vietnam
War, escalation of crime, disintegration of families, racial conflict, teen-age
pregnancies and venereal disease.

''I am afraid for our nation,'' he added. ''I fear His indignation, His
chastening and His judgement.'' Representative Philip M. Crane of Illinois, an
unsuccessful candidate this year for the Republican Presidential nomination,
also urged the subcommittee to approve the bill, saying that ''prayer sets a
tone for the day.''

Much of the testimony today pointed up the sharp divisions between leaders of
established religious groups and evangalical preachers and their followers.

Representatives of the National Council of Churches expressed their strong
opposition to the bill yesterday, terming it unconstitutional and an injustice
to children who come from families belonging to minority religions or to no
religious groups at all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM-SOVIET SPACE TEAM DOWN; POLITICAL IMPACT IS CALLED EXTENSIVE

BYLINE: By ANTHONY AUSTIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 391 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 31


A Vietnamese astronaut and his Soviet commander returned to earth today after a
week in space in the sixth of a series of ''international partnership'' space
missions primarily designed, according to Western scientific experts here, for
their political impact around the world.

Tass, the official Soviet press agency, reported that Lieut. Col.  Pham Tuan of
Vietnam and Lieut. Col. Viktor V. Gorbatko of the Soviet Union, who were
launched into space July 23 and who linked up with the Soviet orbiting station
Salyut 6 the next day, landed in their Soyuz 36 spacecraft near Dzhezkazghan in
the Soviet central Asian republic of Kazakhstan.

Tass said the two astronauts carried out a series of ''technological
medical-biological research projects and experiments'' with Leonid Popov and
Valery Ryumin, two Soviet astronauts who have been in the Salyut station since
April 9.

Light on Scientific Significance

But Western scientific experts here said the latest mission of the Soviet
Intercosmos program appeared, like the five earlier flights, to be light on
scientific significance and important mainly for its psychological effect,
particularly in Asia and other third-world countries.

So far, a Czech, an East German, a Pole, a Bulgarian and an Hungarian have been
sent into orbit under the Intercosmos program.  The Soviet Union is reported to
be training a Cuban, a Rumanian and a Mongolian for similar flights and is
scheduled to do the same for two French astronauts.

Thus, by including astronauts of other nations, the Soviet space program may be
seen as playing host to the world while the United States struggles to get its
space-shuttle project off the ground.  This, in the opinion of Western experts
here, may well give the Soviet Union the appearance of recapturing the lead in
space that it grabbed with the Sputnik satellites and lost with the United
States' first manned moon landing.

Of all the Intercosmos flights thus far, the latest one with the Vietnamese
astronaut, a fighter pilot credited with shooting down an American B-52 bomber
in the Vietnam War, is viewed here as being the most important politically
because it is bound to have an impact on people's minds throughout Asia. It is
also clear that the Soviet Union sought to enhance the propaganda value of the
flight by timing it with the Moscow Olympics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of cosmonauts

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

by Tom Buckley;
How Marvin went to war for 'Big Red One.'

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words


ALTHOUGH he served as a Marine in the battles of Kwajalein, Eniwetok and Saipan
in World War II and was wounded in action, Lee Marvin didn't base his
characterization as the laconic sergeant in ''The Big Red One'' on his own
experiences but on those of his father.

''He was a 50-year-old first sergeant in an antiaircraft battalion that fought
across Europe while I was in the South Pacific,'' he said the other day. ''I
never got to be a sergeant. Hell, it took me twoand-a-half years to make private
first class, and my company commander tried to take that away from me. When I
told him he couldn't - and I was right - he got so sore he gave me a week on
bread and water.''

While Mr. Marvin may have been thinking of his father, Samuel Fuller, the
writer-director, was relying on his own combat experience with the First
Infantry Division, from whose insignia the title of the movie derives. ''The Big
Red One'' follows an infantry squad from its landing in North Africa to its
return to England and then in its battles across Europe from Normandy to
Czechoslovakia.

Except for brief footage in Ireland, Mr. Marvin said, the film was made in
Israel, often with Israeli troops looking on and commenting derisively on the
obsolete World War II equipment.

''I don't think any of the kids in the cast had ever been in the armed forces,''
he went on, ''but by the time Sam and I finished giving them their basic
training, they were doing fine. In fact, a couple of them volunteered to go out
with the Israelis on patrol.''

''The Big Red One'' is Mr. Marvin's 44th feature in a film career that began
with a bit part in ''You're in the Navy Now'' in 1951 and has included such
well-regarded films as ''Eight Iron Men,'' ''The Big Heat,'' ''The Caine
Mutiny,'' ''The Wild One,'' ''Bad Day at Black Rock,'' ''Not as a Stranger,''
''Raintree County, ''The Comancheros,'' ''The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance,
''Cat Ballou,'' ''The Dirty Dozen'' and the film adaptation of Eugene O'Neill's
''The Iceman Cometh,'' in which he played Hickey, the lead role.

''Almost all of them except 'Caine Mutiny' and 'Iceman' have been action
adventures,'' he said. ''I wish I'd had a chance to do more dramatic acting, but
I haven't given up. I've been trying for 15 years to do a movie version of Saul
Bellow's 'Henderson the Rain King.' I think he's a lot like me. But it's the
only book Bellow still owns the rights to, and he won't sell. I've also got to
admit it would be pretty hard to finance.''

Mr. Marvin was born in New York and spent his early years on East 78th Street
and West 92d Street, before his father, an advertising man, took a job in
Florida and moved the family south. He didn't get interested in performing until
after World War II, when he was taking it easy in his family's summer home at
Woodstock, N.Y., and was recruited to play in the summer theater there. He went
on to study at the American Theater Wing, landed a role in ''Billy Budd'' on
Broadway and got a contract from 20th Century-Fox.

If you think Lee Marvin has made a lot of pictures, consider Joseph Biroc, the
director of photography of the summer's sleeper success, ''Airplane!'' A hale
and hearty 76 years old, he began as a laboratory worker at the old Pathe studio
in Jersey City in 1918, worked on the ''Perils of Pauline'' serials at Fort Lee,
N.J., and was an assistant camera man on Rudolph Valentino's last film, ''The
Son of the Sheik.''

Since 1946, when he became a cinematographer, he has arranged the lighting and
headed the camera crew on more than 100 theatrical films and countless
television films and series episodes.

Although Mr. Biroc was old enough to be the grandfather of the three directors,
the producer and the leads of ''Airplane!,'' he said he got along with them all
very well. ''They only had made one picture, 'Kentucky Fried Movie,' before they
did 'Airplane!' But they knew what they were doing,'' he said. ''I'm not just
talking. I'll prove it to you by telling you that they got at least a third of
the shots in the picture in one take, and very few directors, even experienced
ones, can do that. We shot most of it at the Culver City Studios. I worked there
in 1920, when it was called the Thomas Ince Studios.''

In the 1920's and 30's, camera operators were generally under contract to
studios, just as were performers, producers and directors. ''I was at R.K.O. for
20 years,'' Mr. Biroc said. ''It took me a long time to get to be a
cinematographer because you could only get promoted when somebody retired or
quit or something and there was a vacancy.''

His first film in the top job was ''It's a Wonderful Life'' for Frank Capra,
whom he had known for 20 years. Among his other credits are ''The Devil at Four
O'Clock,'' ''The F.B.I. Story,'' ''Toys in the Attic'' and ''The Towering
Inferno,'' for which he shared an Academy Award with Fred J. Koenekamp.

''I was supposed to do the movie, but Steve McQueen always uses Fred, so I said,
'O.K., I'll direct the action and special-effects stuff.' It was O.K. with me.
After all these years, I don't have any ego problems.''

Since completing ''Airplane!'' he has filmed ''Hammett'' for Francis Ford
Coppola and is preparing ''All the Marbles'' for Robert Aldrich, with whom he
has worked on many films.

''The Special Edition of 'Close Encounters of the Third Kind,' '' which takes
the ending of the original film a step further and has other added scenes and
special effects, goes into release today. For one thing, it will show what
Richard Dreyfuss sees when he steps inside the spaceship.

Dennis Christopher, who did so well in ''Breaking Away,'' and Brooke Adams, best
known for ''Days of Heaven'' and the remake of ''The Invasion of the Body
Snatchers,'' will star in ''Don't Cry, It's Only Thunder,'' a drama about an
Army medic who helps out at a Saigon orphanage. It was written by Paul Hensler,
based on his own experiences as an Army medic. Filming is scheduled to start
next month in the Philippines, which also stood in for Vietnam in ''Apocalypse
Now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo Lee Marvin

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 1, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHUNG SHAKESPEARE,A FEMININST VIEW

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1297 words


LITERARY criticism might seem something of a departure for the author of those
two successful feminist novels, ''The Women's Room'' and ''The Bleeding Heart,''
but Marilyn French, as some will recall, began her career as a scholar. Her
first book, which grew out of her doctoral thesis in English at Harvard
University, was a study of James Joyce, and she has now completed a second
volume of criticism - a study of Shakespeare's plays, which will be published by
Summit Books in the fall.

Ideology has never been exactly subdued in Miss French's novels, and it is
evident again in her approach to Shakespeare, who, it seems, is always being
subjected to one kind of literary analysis or another. In ''Shakespeare's
Division of Experience,'' Miss French examines the plays in light of what she
calls ''gender principles'' - that is, qualities that are essentially feminine
(such as compassion, fluidity, creativity) or masculine (power, authority,
rationality).

''Shakespeare thought of men and women not as similar members of a single
species, but as very different creatures,'' she explained the other day. ''And
because he was the most influential author in the English language, his plays
have perpetuated many of those values.  He is partly responsible for what we
think men and women are supposed to be today.''

Clearly, Shakespeare possessed a remarkable degree of appreciation for the
feminine: in contrast to the many male characters in his plays who fall prey to
ambition or pride or romantic delusions, his female characters tend to be strong
exemplars of the powers of nature and imagination. In fact, one of the points
Miss French hopes to make in her book is that ''throughout his work, Shakespeare
was urging males to incorporate the feminine principle -that 'Macbeth' is about
what happens when you kill the feminine principle, that 'Othello' is about what
happens when you mistrust it.''

It is also Miss French's contention, however, that while Shakespeare's male
characters were encouraged to develop the feminine aspects of their nature, his
women characters were too often placed on pedestals of narrow virtue. ''They're
divine - but as images for women to live up to, they're terrible,'' she says.
''Who wants to be Hermione and lock herself away for years waiting for her
husband to come to his senses? His women can't move into power or sex, or they
become fiends. They can only sit around being nurturing and loving and nothing
else. Cleopatra is the one exception - she is allowed to be everything. All the
other works had been leading up to that: Shakespeare spent his life trying to
harmonize the moral qualities he associated with the two genders, and in that
play he goes beyond his own divisions.''

As for Miss French, she will apparently continue to dwell on the divisions
between the sexes. Her next critical work, she says, will trace the development
of ''gender principles'' in the literature of the 18th through the 20th
centuries.

When William Styron's novel ''Sophie's Choice'' was published last year, it
received extravagant praise from many of the country's foremost critics. Enough
to satisfy any publisher, right? Apparently not the ones in the mass-market
paperback business. For Bantam Books, which purchased the rights to the
hard-cover best seller, it was precisely those literary qualities that created
the most problems.

As Stuart Applebaum, Bantam's director of publicity, said: ''Its gorgeous prose,
its complex characters - these were things that made some of our distributors
and retail bookbuyers worry that it would not appeal to the mass audience, that
readers would think, 'It's summer, and I don't want to burden my head with it.'
We decided that to lick the problem, we had to bring the book to life.''

What Bantam's editors decided to do was devote special attention to the book's
cover design. Five artists were commissioned to do treatments, and a collagelike
illustration by John Thompson - depicting the novel's characters as ''sensual,
full-bodied and intelligent,'' to use Mr. Applebaum's words - was finally
selected. A copy line that reads, ''A novel for everyone,'' was also added.

That same populist approach was used in Bantam's promotion campaign - a campaign
focusing on the opinions not of critics, but of ''ordinary people in the
street.'' One advertisement, featuring a woman identified only as Mary
Caulfield, reads: ''Mary's Choice: what kind of book is 'Sophie's Choice?' It's
the kind of book that if you read on the bus, you may miss your stop.''

This week ''Sophie's Choice'' is No. 1 on The New York Times Book Review's
mass-market-paperback best-seller list - a fact that Mr.  Applebaum attributes
to successful promotion. ''The cover design is 80 percent of the success of a
paperback book,'' he says. ''So much of the market is impulse buying, and so
it's important that you have something that leaps out at the customer's eye.''
He paused, then went on, ''Of course, the book also works as reading material.''

The Harvard Crimson, the second oldest college daily in the country and by most
accounts, the best, celebrated its 100th anniversary in 1973. There was a
banquet at the Harvard Club, with speeches, a panel on freedom of the press and,
of course, the exchange of stories - the time Walter Lippman dropped out of the
Crimson Comp (competition) because he couldn't take the strain; the time
Cleveland Amory's board doused the offices of their rival publication, the
Lampoon, with white lime, and so on.

Somehow, in all the excitement, plans for a book of collected Crimson articles
never quite came together. So in 1976, Greg Lawless, an editor on the 1975
board, decided to start assembling his own collection - a collection that will
be published in the fall by Houghton Mifflin as ''The Harvard Crimson
Anthology.''

After spending nearly two years in Harvard's Lamont Library, reading thousands
of pages of Crimson stories on microfilm, Mr.  Lawless began the selection
process. ''At first I wanted to go for big names,'' he said, ''but I realized
that a lot of the things these people wrote when they were starting out were not
exactly what you'd call fascinating. I decided I'd go with what interested me.''
Among the ''Crimeds'' whose work ended up on the editing-room floor were
Cleveland Amory, Caspar Weinberger, James Fallows, Donald Graham, Daniel
Ellsberg, Kenneth Auchincloss, Otto Fuerbringer and David Rockefeller.

The writers represented in the anthology, though, are just as illustrious. There
is John Kenneth Galbraith writing a letter to editors on parietals (''no effort
need be made or should be made to protect individuals from the consequences of
their own errors, indiscretions or passion''); George Santayana, then a Harvard
junior, speculating about ''King Lear'' (''what a marvelous harmony of
discords!''), and Franklin D. Roosevelt discussing the importance of varsity
sports (''During the next few days the thoughts of most of us will center on
little besides football'').

There are also editorials that trace the changing concerns of Harvard students,
from an 1873 piece debating whether or not ''women are physically unfit for
study'' to the famous 1969 one calling for a National Liberation Front victory
in Vietnam. Thus, as Anthony Lewis, another Crimson alumnus, writes in his
introduction, ''the microscopic world of Harvard, as The Crimson described and
criticized it over the years, gives insights into the society.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Marilyn French

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 2, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI TOUTS IT'S ASTRONAUT AS A BENEFIT OF MOSCOW TIES

BYLINE: By JAMES P. STERBA

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 543 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Aug. 1


The way Hanoi is telling it, Moscow's success in putting a Vietnamese into space
is about the best thing to happen to the third world since miracle rice.

Vietnam's first spaceman, Lieut. Col. Pham Tuan, returned yesterday from an
eight-day visit to a Soviet space station with a Russian colleague. Bursting
with pride as well as propaganda, the Hanoi radio and the Vietnam News Agency
have trumpeted the trip to Asian neighbors as an example of what friendship with
the Russians can bring.

The United States shared its space triumphs with third-world allies by passing
out moon rocks. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented one of the first samples
to President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam a decade ago. But in terms of
national pride, taking a third-world friend along for the ride may reap bigger
rewards for the Soviet Union. At any rate, that is what Hanoi is saying.

In a message to the Soviet leaders, the leaders in Hanoi called the space flight
''an excellent demonstration of the Soviet Union's great and effective
assistance to Vietnam,'' which ''proves the superiority of the socialist
system.''

Cosmonaut Lauds 'Heroic Vietnam'

After touching down in the steppe region of Kazakhstan, the Soviet commander,
Viktor Gorbatko, stepped out of the space capsule with Colonel Tuan and
declared: ''I am proud of having flown together with the first cosmonaut of
Asia, and it is no other Asian country than heroic Vietnam.''

Colonel Tuan used part of his week in space to beam television broadcasts to
Vietnamese audiences that were translated and relayed to other Asian countries.
In one broadcast he declared: ''I was deeply moved each time I flew over Vietnam
and saw our beautiful homeland. From outer space I wish to send my greetings to
our beloved motherland and to thank Vietnam and the Communist Party of Vietnam
for having trained me and given me wings to fly into space.''

He went on to note Vietnam's long struggle for independence and reunification
and its ''great victories,'' adding: ''Yet, so far, the Vietnamese people have
not been able to enjoy genuine peace due to the war threats made by the U.S.
imperialists and the Chinese expansionists against the peoples of Vietnam, Laos
and Kampuchea.'' Kampuchea is the traditional name for Cambodia.

Awards From Moscow and Hanoi

Colonel Tuan's flight was the sixth of a series in which Soviet cosmonauts have
taken along a man from an allied country. Colonel Tuan was awarded the Order of
Lenin and the title of Hero of the Soviet Union by Moscow; Hanoi awarded him the
title ''hero of labor'' and presented him the Ho Chi Minh Order, first class.

According to the Vietnamese Army newspaper, Quan Doi, on Dec. 27, 1972, Pham
Tuan, then a MIG-21 night pilot in the North Vietnamese Air Force, became the
first Vietnamese pilot to shoot down a United States B-52 bomber. He did so, the
paper said, after remembering Prime Minister Pham Van Dong's pep talk to his
unit to shoot down more B-52's in order to ''completely smash Nixon's strategic
blitz, thus destroying his plot to negotiate from a position of strength.''

Another Hanoi newspaper, Nhan Dan, portrayed the space flight and the Moscow
Olympics as examples of Soviet-Vietnamese friendship and cooperation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Soviet and Vietnamese astronauts

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 2, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
News Summary;
SATURDAY, AUGUST 2, 1980

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 893 words


International
Egypt is expected to lodge a protest with Prime Minister Menachem Begin of
Israel over the new law formalizing Israeli annexation of East Jerusalem.
According to Egyptian officials, President Anwar el-Sadat will send a written
message to Mr. Begin. The Under Secretary of Foreign Affairs said, however, that
the autonomy talks scheduled to resume today or Monday in Alexandria would not
be suspended and Egypt would not recall its Ambassador from Israel.  (Page 1,
Column 1.)
No foreign aid appropriation for 1981 appears likely until well into the new
fiscal year. This would be the second consecutive year that the aid program has
operated without an appropriation, since Congress never enacted such legislation
for fiscal year 1980, which ends September 30. (3:5-6.)
Vietnam's first astronaut returned from an eight-day trip to a Soviet space
station, where he accompanied a Russian cosmonaut. The cooperative venture has
been trumpeted by the Hanoi radio and the Vietnam News Agency as an example of
what friendship with the Soviets can bring. (3:1.)
A separatist mood is gaining strength in the western Canadian province of
Alberta, where there is anger and frustration despite boom times. What is new
for Canada's uneasy federation is the intensity of the anger that has developed
since Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau and Premier Peter Lougheed failed to
agree on a price for Alberta's oil and gas. (2:1.)
A search for the harbor of Caesarea, constructed by Herod in 22 B.C., is
underway by teams of divers and archaeologists. Caesarea, named for Caesar
Augustus, served for about 500 years as the Roman Government's capital in
Palestine. The project is under the direction of Avner Raban, a top Israeli
expert on ancient harbors. (2:3-6.)
National
The move for an ''open'' convention will be opposed by President Carter, who
called the efforts to release delegates to the Democratic National Convention
from their pledges to vote for certain candidates a ''travesty'' of the
nomination process. Mr. Carter also said he would fight to keep his brother's
problems from impeding his re-election bid. (1:6.)
Billy Carter received a copy of a cable transmitted to the President by the
State Department after his brother's 1978 visit to Libya, along with a
complimentary note from President Carter for having done ''a good job,'' the
White House confirmed. Earlier in the week President Carter had said that he did
not recall giving the cable to his brother. (1:5.)
In July unemployment did not change significantly, according to figures released
by the Labor Department, leading some economists and Government officials to
speculate that the economy may be on the verge of bouncing back from the
recession. The jobless rate has hovered at 7.7 to 7.8 for three months. (1:2.)
Automatic seat belts or airbags will not be mandatory in automobiles until 1983,
a delay of one year, if a compromise bill agreed to by a conference committee is
accepted by the two houses of Congress. The bill would require five major
automobile manufacturers to include passive restraint systems in their smaller
cars, starting with the 1983 model year. (l:1-3.)
The business affairs of Ronald Reagan, should he be elected President in
November, will be managed as they have been since 1966 rather than in compliance
with the blind-trust requirements of the Federal Election Commission for those
who prefer to avoid annual disclosures of their holdings. (8:1-2.)
Metropolitan
President Carter still has the support of a majority of the Democratic National
Convention delegates from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, a telephone
survey disclosed. Most favor the rule binding them to vote for Mr. Carter and
say they would stand firmly behind him even if they were freed of their
commitments. (1:3-4.)
A major investigation into corruption among New York City marshals and
auctioneers has led to convictions and guilty pleas involving 20 persons. Edward
R. Korman, the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York,
reported the overall results of the Federalcity inquiry after a jury in Brooklyn
found four of the marshals guilty of racketeering, corruption and mail-fraud.
(1:4-5.)
Security at the Democratic convention, scheduled to begin here August 11, will
be the responsibility of 3,000 police officers, 50 horses and 6 bomb-detecting
dogs, according to Police Department officials.  An estimated 500 Secret Service
agents will also be on duty in Madison Square Garden and at 25 delegation hotels
in Manhattan.  (23:5-6.)
A court ruling prohibiting cohabitation by unmarried couples as a grounds for
eviction may be challenged by New York City landlords.  Earlier this week, in
what was the first legal decision under the four-year-old marital-status
provision of the state and city humanrights laws, Judge Elliott Wilk in Civil
Court held that the laws forbid landlords from evicting tenants simply because
they are not married to each other. (25:1.)
A threat to ''bludgeon to death'' Sharon Worrell, the Mayor of Florence, N.J.,
is being investigated by state criminal justice authorities. The alleged threat,
which came during a closed-door Town Board meeting, was reportedly made by an
operator of a landfill locked in a dispute with the township over a dumping
agreement.  (24:3-5.)

Business Digest, Page 27

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 467 words


AROUND THE WORLD;
Waldheim Trip Seeks Start Of Thai-Cambodian Talks

HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 2 (Reuters) - Kurt Waldheim, Secretary General of the
United Nations, arrived today in an effort to start talks between Thailand and
the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom Penh, United Nations officials said.

They said United Nations negotiators would attempt to arrange a dialogue without
forcing Thailand to recognize the Government in Phnom Penh.

Mr. Waldheim, the officials said, will work within the framework of a United
Nations resolution adopted last year calling for the withdrawal of Vietnamese
forces from Cambodia and the establishment of a neutral government there. Mr.
Waldheim, who is leading a sixmember negotiating team, is scheduled to go to
Bangkok Monday.

Saudi-Kuwait Halt in Loans To World Bank Reported

KUWAIT, Aug. 2 (UPI) - Saudi Arabia and Kuwait have frozen multimillion-dollar
loans to the World Bank to protest the denial of observer status to the
Palestine Liberation Organization at a forthcoming World Bank and International
Monetary Fund meeting, the Kuwaiti Finance Minister, Abdel-Rahman Salem
al-Atiqi, was quoted as saying today.

The Kuwaiti newspaper that quoted Mr. Atiqi, Al Qabas, did not specify the
amounts of the loans. A Saudi report said yesterday that Saudi Arabia had frozen
a $420 million loan and Kuwait had frozen a $70 million loan.

In Washington, where the meeting is scheduled next month, a World Bank spokesman
said the bank had received no word that Saudi Arabia or Kuwait had canceled
loans.

South Korea Dismisses 8,667 Public Employees

SEOUL, South Korea, Aug. 2 (UPI) -The Government has purged 8,667 people,
including teachers, public servants, employees of stateconnected organizations
and others on public payrolls in less than a month, it was disclosed today.

Officials said purge of public employees called a ''social purification drive''
had ended. Private businesses and the news media were reportedly starting their
own dismissals.

Meanwhile, a military court in Seoul sentenced 17 people, including 12 students,
4 journalists and another civilian, to prison terms of up to three years for
circulating rumors, staging demonstrations and other offenses.

President of Mexico Visits Cuban Agricultural Projects

HAVANA, Aug. 2 (Reuters) - President Jose Lopez Portillo of Mexico spent the
night on a small island off Cuba after a day visiting agricultural projects on
the mainland as the guest of its Communist Government.

President Lopez Portillo, who arrived Thursday for a four-day official visit,
was cheered by hundreds of thousands as he drove in a motorcade through Havana
with President Fidel Castro. The visit ends tomorrow with the expected signing
of 11 agreements on aspects of Cuban-Mexican cooperation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICS LIKELY TO DOMINATE URBAN LEAGUE MEETING

BYLINE: By SHEILA RULE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 656 words


As they have at other blacks' meetings in this election year, Presidential
candidates and political issues appear likely to dominate the National Urban
League's 70th annual conference, which begins here today. But missing will be
the leadership of the league's president, Vernon E. Jordan Jr., who in the past
had been able to bring national attention to the attitudes and promises of
politicians as they related to minorities.

Mr. Jordan remains hospitalized as a result of the gunshot wound he suffered in
May, and this year's conference will be the first he has missed since he took
over as leader of the organization in 1972. In his absence, other officials of
the league have continued to speak out on issues of importance to black
Americans. But their activities have failed to gain the national attention
usually drawn by Mr.  Jordan's statements.

''If he were here, we obviously would have gotten a greater hearing on what was
being said,'' said the league's executive vice president, John E. Jacob, who, as
spokesman for the organization in Mr.  Jordan's absence, will deliver the
conference's keynote address tonight.

Leadership Is Missed

Mr. Jacob said that the organization's operational structure continued to run
smoothly. There has been concern within the league over possible harm to the
reputation of Mr. Jordan and the organization because of the circumstances
surrounding the shooting.  He was in the company of a white woman, Martha C.
Coleman, a member of the board of directors of the Urban League of Fort Wayne,
Ind., when he was shot outside a Marriott Inn in that city. His assailant has
not been arrested.

''The country misses his leadership,'' Mr. Jacob continued. ''No one can just
step in and replace Vernon Jordan.'' Mr. Jordan was the first nationally
prominent black leader to criticize publicly what he and others perceived as
President Carter's disregard for blacks, who gave him more than 90 percent of
their votes in the 1976 election. Mr. Carter is scheduled to address the
conference, as are the other major Presidential candidates - Senator Edward M.
Kennedy of Massachusetts; Ronald Reagan, the Republican nominee, and
Representative John B. Anderson of Illinois, the independent candidate.

15,000 People Expected

The league's four-day meeting, which every 10 years is held in New York City, is
expected to attract more than 15,000 people. Also scheduled to address the
delegates are Shirley M. Hufstedler, United States Secretary of Education;
Emmett J. Rice, of the Federal Reserve System's board of governors; Donald F.
McHenry, chief United States delegate to the United Nations; Lane Kirkland,
president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.; Charles L. Brown, chairman of American Telephone
and Telegraph Company, and New York State's two Senators, Jacob K. Javits and
Daniel Patrick Moynihan.

Workshops and other conference activities will stress such issues as disease
prevention, education, crime, employment, minority business development, energy
and problems of the Vietnam veteran.

A national poll of blacks released by the league yesterday found that
unemployment among black heads of household ''was at depression levels even
before the current recession.''

The study, representing the initial findings of the organization's Black Pulse
Survey conducted last fall and winter, said that the actual unemployment rate
for black household heads in the last quarter of 1979 was 24 percent, three
times the Labor Department's figure for that group. While the Labor Department's
statistics counted only those actively seeking employment, the league's findings
included the so-called ''discouraged worker'' who had given up looking for a
job.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MORE BUCKS, MORE BANG?

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Secretaries of Defense traditionally remain aloof from partisan skirmishing, but
Harold Brown broke tradition last week and fired a bristling broadside at Ronald
Reagan's military spending plans. It probably won't be Mr. Brown's last
appearance on the stump. For, along with inflation and other economic issues,
how best to strengthen defense will be among the more vigorously debated
questions in the campaign.

Mr. Reagan and his supporters will be firing away at the White House,
complaining that a military buildup is at least four years overdue, that under
President Carter the United States has fallen behind the Soviet Union. The
Republican platform pledges: ''We will build toward a sustained defense
expenditure sufficient to close the gap with the Soviets, and ultimately reach
the position of military superiority that the American people demand.''

Anderson Would Limit Outlays

John B. Anderson would hold down military spending. The independent candidate
has opposed big, expensive weapons programs, such as the new mobile strategic
missile, the MX, and has contended that instead of deploying American military
forces in the Persian Gulf region, this country should reduce its reliance on
oil from that area.

Pentagon calculations show that, after inflation is factored out, post-World War
II military spending peaked during the Korean War, dropped in the early 1960's,
rose again to another peak during the Vietnam War, and fell again during the
mid-1970's. President Ford led the turn-up, with President Carter leveling it
off during his first two years in office, then turning it up again this year.
Motivated to a large degree by pleas from the Joint Chiefs of Staff and by
events in Iran and Afghanistan, Mr. Carter has projected a real growth from
$153.8 billion this year to $192.2 billion in military spending in 1985.

Although defense spending seems certain to grow either in a second Carter term
or a first Reagan Administration - if the candidates keep their promises and
Congress cooperates - it also seems certain that pumping billions more into the
Pentagon pipeline might help some but not all the military's problems.

Higher salaries and other benefits might help overcome a number of serious
manpower difficulties. Pay in the military has lagged 15 to 20 percent behind
inflation, according to some studies. Droves of expensively trained and
experienced noncommissioned officers and technicians have been leaving the
all-volunteer forces for betterpaying civilian jobs. Some estimates put the cost
of bringing military pay up to civilian levels at $6 billion a year.

Larger outlays for operations and training could sharpen the armed services'
fighting skills. Spending more on fuel, for instance, would permit more flying
hours, more steaming time for ships, more maneuvers in the field for ground
forces. Keeping the military fueled and armed isn't cheap. When the price of jet
fuel goes up one cent a gallon, the Air Force's budget must go up $36 million a
year to keep pace. A missile for an infantryman's Dragon antitank weapon, the
successor to the bazooka of World War II and Korean War days, costs $4,400 a
round. A Phoenix missile fired from a fighter at a target simulating an enemy
bomber costs $385,700.

Some weapons could be procured at a slightly faster rate. The production of F-16
jet fighters, at $9.5 million a copy, could go from the current rate of 15 a
month to 45 a month within two years, according to General Dynamics, the maker.
Other weapons take even more time, whatever the urgency of the order because
fewer assembly lines are producing weapons these days; many United States
companies have gotten out of the munitions business.

The Ingalls Shipyard of Litton Industries, which this year is building two
sophisticated Aegis cruisers, each costing about $900 million, could schedule
construction of six ships within a relatively short time. But each takes nearly
three years to build.

The Army's new main battle tank, which costs about $1 million, is currently
rolling off assembly lines in Lima, Ohio, at the rate of 110 a year. Present
plans call for increasing production to 120 a month after five years as tooling
is completed and productivity increases. That could be increased to 150 a month
by adding another shift to the plant. But going beyond that would take an
enormous investment.

Speeding up deployment of the controversial new MX missile would be no easy
matter either. So far, development of the weapon has been held back less by a
lack of funds and technical difficulties than by opposition from
environmentalists, problems in acquiring the vast tracts of land required for
deploying the missile and an array of political complications.

Even if those obstacles could be cleared away, only one year could be shaved off
the MX's construction and deployment schedule.  Missiles take time to assemble
and tons of concrete can't be poured and hardened overnight. The Air Force plans
to test fire the MX in 1983, have 10 missiles operational in 1986 and the other
190 deployed among 4,600 underground shelters by the end of 1989.

Even less could be done to accelerate the building and deployment of a new
long-range strategic bomber, such as the B-1, a project that was cancelled by
President Carter and that some on Capitol Hill would like to revive. Putting
B-1's in the air would take a minimum of five years. The rugged air transport
called CX, which the Administration has proposed for the new Rapid Deployment
Force, will also take at least five years to deploy. Both a new manned bomber
and the CX have been endorsed by the Republican platform.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph on defense spending, 1967-1985 photo of F-16
airplane

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHERE RE WE GOING?;
by James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 877 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 2


Henry Steele Commager, the historian, observed recently that the decline in
American leadership was not a phenomenon singular to politics, but that it
afflicted almost every segment of our increasingly anonymous society.

Where are the national leaders in the military, in banking, in industry and
transportation, in education and religion, he asked.  ''Politics and
politicians,'' he concluded, ''reflect the society they represent ...
increasingly, our political leaders have abandoned Madison for Madison Avenue''

It's probably a bum idea to make big splashy generalizations at a time when the
country is moaning about Billy Carter and the choice of Jimmy Carter or Ronald
Reagan for President. But back of all this summer political madness, there is
this troubling thought that these characters are not the cause but the symbols
of a much deeper national problem.

You can hardly pick up a paper these days without wondering what's wrong. The
question is in the headlines: Chrysler Loses $536.1 Million In Second Quarter
... Dollar Drops Again on Foreign Exchanges ... U. S. Productivity Lags Beyind
Japan and West Germany ...  Educators Decry Absenteeism, Violence in Schools ...
Arms Race Now Costing World Over $600 Billion A Year ... ''Chrysler's Red Ink
Pales Beside Steel Firm Mark,'' says the Wall Street Journal, noting that U. S.
Steel reported a net loss of $561.7 million in the last quarter of 1979.

Meanwhile, the Carter Administration and the Congress are not really attending
to the nation's business, but are concentrating on the election, and babbling on
about Billy, a good ol' boy failure trying to make a quick buck, who seems
almost determined to make his brother fail as well.

It would be hard to deny that these recent years have been a time of
disappointment in the working of elected governments, and not only in the United
States. Both in the conduct of domestic and foreign affairs, and in the
nomination and election of Presidents, there is a feeling here that personal and
local interests have overwhelmed the interest of the nation and of this
civilization that depends on America's principals and power.

There is a crisis between the functions of the American people and the functions
of the American Government. The people have acquired the power to nominate
Presidents and to determine foreign policy they know very little about. The
Governments they elect have in the process lost the authority needed to govern.

It's an illusion to think that the problems that face the American nation at
home and abroad will somehow be resolved by the election of either Carter or
Reagan. They're not the answers but the victims of the problems of the modern
world of complicated economics and murderous weapons.

The issue is beyond them. It cannot be resolved by Carter or Reagan or Kennedy
or Anderson, or none of the above. It is not a personal or a party or even
ideological but a national problem of the utmost seriousness. It requires, not
confrontation, but cooperation between the political parties, between management
and labor on prices and wages, and between them all, not on their special
interests, but on the general interest of the nation and the civilized world
that is now in such deep trouble.

Nothing is likely to be done about this fundamental question in this election.
After all this silly Billy-business, we are going to have to choose between
Carter and Reagan. The chances are that the American people will choose Reagan,
being a sporting people, on the ground that if Jimmy Carter or Billy Martin ends
up in the second division, you get yourself a new manager, even if he's worse
than the one before, because this will give at least the appearance of a new
beginning.

But the major problems will remain. That old pug-nosed historian, Commager, is
probably right. The crisis of leadership is not merely political but general in
America. It cannot be resolved by just another guy or another party. The future
of the country is too important to be left to the personal manipulations of its
politicians.

In short, the crisis requires a reappraisal of the national condition, even a
redefinition of the national philosophy, a realization of the need for
cooperation rather than confrontation between the White House and the Congress,
between management and labor, between the races and the sexes, the rich and the
poor, at home and abroad.

In the 20 years since 1960 we have had five Presidents. Kennedy was murdered.
Johnson was destroyed by the Vietnam War. Nixon was run out of Washington. Ford
held us together for a time but was rejected in the election of 1976. And now we
are savaging Jimmy Carter, who has the lowest popularity rating in the history
of the polls, and mocking his potential successor, Ronald Reagan.

It is no wonder, then, that even our allies are asking whether we are really a
serious country, and why Commager is suggesting that the crisis of leadership
lies, not merely in Washington but in the nation as a whole.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS THE CHURCHES ARE AT ODDS OVER YET ANOTHER SCHOOL PRAYER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words


BILL

By MARJORIE HUNTER

WASHINGTON - Like the revival of an old play, the issue of prayer in public
schools returned to the Congressional stage last week.  Featuring a new cast and
a slightly rewritten script, it was drawing bigger audiences than ever.

Advocates of school prayers, encouraged by the inclusion of a proprayer plank in
the Republican platform and riding the new wave of politically involved
evangelism, were trying to force a vote on the issue in the House of
Representatives this summer, perhaps even this month. But House opponents of the
school-prayer bill passed last year by the Senate tried to slow the momentum by
opening public hearings on the matter.

Centerstage before the House judiciary subcommittee is a bill, drafted by
Senator Jesse Helms, Republican from North Carolina, that would abolish the
jurisdiction of the United States Supreme Court and lower Federal courts over
state laws dealing with ''voluntary prayers in public schools.'' After two days
of hearings last week, it seemed clear that:

* Few, if any, members of the subcommittee are inclined to support the Helms
bill. Many have expressed particular concern over the measure's
constitutionality.

* There is a growing schism between leaders of traditional church denominations,
such as Lutherans, Episcopalians, Methodists and Presbyterians, who oppose
school prayer and its tendency to muddy the waters separating church and state,
and evangelical groups that preach moral conservatism and want the gospel to
echo down school halls.

Since 1962 and 1963, when the Supreme Court outlawed schoolsponsored prayers and
Bible readings, those favoring these practices have pressed for a constitutional
amendment permitting them. The move for such an amendment has failed in Congress
five times. The Helms measure has a better chance of passage - eventually. But
it is equally certain that if enacted into law, it will not survive a test of
its constitutionality in the Supreme Court.

The Justice Department, while allowing that the Constitution gives Congress the
power to create exceptions to the Supreme Court's appellate jurisdiction, says
these exceptions are limited by the ''supremacy clause,'' Article VI, clause 2:
''This constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in
pursuance thereof ... shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in
every state shall be bound thereby, anything in the constitution or laws of any
state to the contrary notwithstanding.'' Even supporters of the Helms bill
concede that, if passed, it would be subject to review by a High Court which,
many constitutional experts believe, would find it unconstitutional.

Legal technicalities and issues of constitutionality, however, did not deter the
witnesses at last week's hearings. ''The important question,'' William R.
Bright, founder and president of the Campus Crusade for Christ, said, ''is 'Are
we going to bring God back to our schools?' '' Blaming the court's ban on school
prayers for a wide range of social evils - crime, racial conflict, drug abuse,
political assassinations, the Vietnam war, sexual promiscuity and the demise of
American family life - Mr. Bright warned that ''worse troubles lie dead ahead of
us'' if prayers are not returned to educational institutions.

Other witnesses, evangelicals all - including members of the Moral Majority, the
Roundtable of Issues and Answers and several television and radio evangelists -
also contended that the nation's ''moral decay'' stems in large part from lack
of school prayers. They insisted that the majority of Americans want ''voluntary
prayers'' in the public schools. They pointed to the most recent Gallup Poll
indicating that 76 per cent favor such a change, and cited as further support
for their position the decline in church attendance among more traditional
denominations and the growth in membership in their own institutions.

Leaders of the nation's mainline churches steadfastly oppose the Helms bill,
terming it both unconstitutional and not in the interest of furthering true
religion. Speaking before the subcommittee last week, the Rev. M. William Howard
of New York City, president of the 40-million-member National Council of
Churches, which comprises 32 denominations, referred to prayer as ''too
important, too sacred, too intimate to be scheduled or administered by
Government.'' Religious education, he said, is the responsibility of the family
and religious institutions.

Mr. Howard noted that the Supreme Court has not forbidden voluntary, silent
prayers or meditation in classrooms. ''Any child can pray to God, anytime,
anywhere, in school or out,'' he said.  Indeed, many states permit such
interludes in the school day, with no challenges from the courts. And he labeled
as ''simplistic'' the notion among his evangelical brethren that ''putting God
back into the public schools'' would cure social ills. ''These may be laudable
goals,'' he said, ''but it is a farce to suppose that they can be achieved by
the recitation of a two-minute prayer at the beginning of the public-school
day.''

Both evangelist and traditionalist positions concerning school prayers will be
repeated during the two days of hearings scheduled later this month, after
Congress returns from its recess. What little variation there is this year will
come from the procedural, not substantive, side of the matter, in particular
from Representative Philip M. Crane, Republican of Illinois.

Angered by what he believes is the judiciary subcommittee's ''thinly veiled
attempt to let the proponents ... blow off steam,'' Representative Crane is
continuing his crusade for Congressmen's signatures on a petition to bring the
measure to the House floor for a vote. The Crane petition has about 175 of the
necessary 218 signatures.

Given the press of Congressional business, however, it is unlikely that the
Helms bill, or any other dealing with school prayer, will be voted on this year.
This would leave both the Senate and House to begin the play again, the curtain
going up when the new Congress convenes in January.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of praying child

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LYNDON'S LAST YEARS

BYLINE: By Merle Miller; This article is an excerpt from Merle Miller's
forthcoming book, ''Lyndon: An Oral Biography,'' to be published later this
month by G.P. Putnam's. Copyright c 1980 by Merle Miller.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6421 words


It has now been 11 years since Lyndon Baines Johnson, his family and staff flew
in Air Force One from Washington back to Texas, where he spent the rest of his
life. He had been a turbulent and controversial President, plagued by the war in
Vietnam, admired by many for his vision of a Great Society. His post-Presidency,
the subject of the following excerpt, was not what could be described as
restful. He ran his somewhat smaller fiefdom in Austin much the way he ran the
country, with fierce if sometimes erratic attention to every detail.

The oral biography, which covers the former President's early years through his
death in January 1973, was five years in preparation.  There were 180 personal
interviews, and some 276 oral histories at the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library
were consulted. ''It was,'' says the author, whose oral history of Harry S.
Truman, ''Plain Speaking,'' was published in 1974, ''a long journey exploring
the history of Lyndon Johnson; it was like exploring a continent, maybe two
continents, and a couple of ocean beds as well.'' To no one's surprise, the
retirement did not begin well. During the first weeks, Lyndon, as always, made
the most of his displeasures, liberally sharing them with anyone who was within
hearing distance.  He was never one to suffer in silence.

Thank God it didn't last long.  Elizabeth Goldschmidt, a friend: ''We went to
the ranch -it was the Easter following his departure from Washington in 1969.
Bird urged us to come, I think because she was trying desperately to find ways
to pull Johnson out of what was clearly a depression. And he absolutely refused
to discuss anything that was less than 25 years old.

''We talked about things from our youth, and he remembered so-andso. But nothing
relating to the Presidency.  ''Bird was obviously frantic about his state of
mind, and at dinner she said, in her bright, chipper way, 'Let's go look at some
movies from our days in the White House.' And Johnson said, 'Oh, they don't want
to see that old stuff. That's all past and done with.' She said, 'No, I think
they'd like it,' and we said O.K. So we went up to the hangar that they'd made
into a little auditorium and the projectionist said, 'What year should we take?'
She said brightly, 'Oh, let's take the last year.' And he promptly went to
sleep; he refused to look.''

Then - nobody seems to remember exactly where or when or why - the gloom ended,
and he started doing all the things he had never had time for.

Lady Bird Johnson, his wife: ''You know, Lyndon rushed all his life. From the
time we got married in '34 until he left Washington in '69, he was always in a
rush. These last years, there were no pressing demands. We were sort of living
on our own time.''

Lyndon: ''One of the things I enjoyed most was being able to go to bed after the
10 o'clock news at night and sleep until daylight the next morning. I don't
remember ever having an experience like that in the five years I was in the
White House''

Luci Baines Johnson, his younger daughter: ''I was very, very worried. I
thought, 35 years in public service and this is going to be like putting him in
a tomb. But he discovered play. That was a word that was not in his vocabulary.
He didn't understand it. And he discovered his grandchildren and it was a
delightful time.''

Furthermore, his sense of humor had come back.  John Dodds, a book editor: ''One
day during the post-Presidency, he and Doris Kearns (Johnson's biographer) were
out in the boat. It was a magic afternoon - the sky was blue, the water was
blue, the boat was magnificent -and they were roaring along, and he turned to
her and said, 'I sure do miss the Middle East!' '' Tom Johnson, a longtime
Johnson aide and friend: ''I felt an obligation or a sense of loyalty and went
to Texas with him. I expected him to be very unhappy. I felt for him - a man who
had been a leader of the free world, in public life for more than 30 years, was
going to have a helluva transition.

''But it was not as difficult as I expected. What he did was to go to work. He
went to work on the ranch. He started running that ranch the way he had run the
Presidency - involved in every piece of it.  Then he became chief executive
officer of the Texas Broadcasting Company. And it wasn't only television. It was
Muzak and Photo Processing and Capitol Cable and everything else.

''He became his own ranch foreman. Dale Malechek reported to him; Jesse Kellam
of the television station reported to him. He became chief of staff of his
office staff, and I reported to him on that.

''He was very involved with Frank Erwin on the building of the library -choosing
the location, choosing the architect. And then, of course, the memoirs - he
would spend hours recording and more hours editing them.

''At times I found him depressed, but that was because the pain was such a
constant problem. He was suffering from angina, and he chewed on those
nitroglycerin pills occasionally. He knew he wasn't in good health.'' Nixon and
Johnson had parted on cordial terms and the new President took some pains to
keep his predecessor informed on matters of state, especially the progress, or
lack of it, on Vietnam. Every week a briefing would arrive by plane from
Washington. Occasionally, Nixon would dispatch a cabinet member or similar
luminary to fill Johnson in personally. When Henry Kissinger came to call, it
was obvious that Johnson had not entirely abandoned his way with people's names.

Coates Redmon, a friend from the White House years: ''In December 1969, I ran
into Henry Kissinger in Cambridge, and he said, 'Oh, Coates, I want to tell you
something mar-ve-lous. I've just been down to the L.B.J. Ranch. I was called
down to give him a foreign-policy briefing, and I went, and, Coates, he's
crazy!' ''I said, 'Johnson's crazy like a fox. He knows what he's doing.' Henry
said, 'No, Coates, he's crazy.' I said, 'In what way is he crazy?'

''And he said, 'Well, first I got down there, and he called me ''Dr.
Kie-sing-er.'' Kie-sing-er! Like I was (Kurt Kiesinger) the prime minister of
West Germany. He thought I was Kie-sing-er!' I said, 'No, he didn't, Henry, he
was putting you on.' And he said, 'No, Coates, he thought I was Kie-sing-er. And
then he got me all mixed up and called me Dr. Schle-sing-er. He didn't know who
I was - he was all mixed up. Then he went up to a picnic table and he said,
''Henry, do you know what that is?'' And I felt I should say, ''No, sir,''
because I knew how crazy he was. So I said I didn't know what it was, and he
said, ''That is a picnic table, Henry.'' '

''I said, 'He's putting you on, Henry!' '' 'No, Coates, he's crazy.' '' Dale
Malechek, foreman at the L.B.J. Ranch: ''I never worked for a harder man in my
life, but he was the best. If you did the work, he'd stand behind you, and if
you didn't, you had hell to pay.''

James Jones, special assistant to the President: ''We visited there one time and
his ranch foreman, Dale Malechek, said, 'Gee, I hope he runs again for
President. There I was at 6 in the morning, milking the cows - somebody had
given him some dairy cows; it was a new operation - and lo and behold, there's
the President standing there in his pajamas and his house shoes, saying, ''How
are the dairy cows?'' and ''Do the fences need to be fixed?'' ' ''

One of Lyndon's retirement projects, begun while he was still President, was the
building of a model nursing home in Austin.  Larry Temple, special counsel to
the President: ''In late '68, not long before the election, he called me and he
said, 'Goddamn it, Larry, there are a lot of people in this country who aren't
getting the proper care. They keep telling me that everybody is doing as good a
job as they can. It's a goddamn lie. They're not. Everybody's not doing it, and
those that are doing it are doing it because they can make money out of it.'

'' 'We treat old people like we treat animals,' he said. 'Just put them in a
cage somewhere until they die.' '' Lyndon had told Temple he wanted to do
something in Austin that would be a model for taking care of old people all over
the country, and that Temple should call Frank Erwin, who was then chairman of
the Board of Regents at the University of Texas in Austin. Erwin said the
university could contribute some money to the project, and Lyndon said that
H.E.W. had a few spare millions that could be used as a pilot program where old
people would have, according to Temple, ''what was, for lack of a better
description, a combination apartment and hospital.''

Temple: ''Frank Erwin said that he would suggest that we name it, for the
President's mother, The Rebekah Baines Johnson Home.  ''I wrote a memo to the
President about that. And he said, 'Goddamn you, Frank's got no judgment, no
sense. Why should you tie my poor mother into that and tie me into that?
Somebody will catch this. The New York Times will write it up that I was
spending a bunch of Federal money for a memorial to my mother. You tell Frank
that we're going to do the project, but tell him to forget that he ever
mentioned my mother in connection with it.'

''We got to working on it, but we weren't able to finish it by the time he went
out of office. Then, when the Nixon people came in, they started to leak stories
that there was going to be an investigation of H.E.W. and the nursing home. Jack
Anderson had something in his column about it, and when it got really hot there
were some people who said we ought to give up the whole thing.

''The President said, 'Hell, no. We're going to forget all about those attacks.
That's the reason these things don't get done because somebody puts on a little
heat. If all of you are afraid and want to cut and run, you just do it. Transfer
it to me. I'll be the nonprofit organization that gets it built.'

''He went to Nixon in 1971 or 1972 and said, 'Somebody is screwing with my
program. I haven't asked for much, but this is something that I started,
something that's good, that's worthwhile, and I won't benefit from it except for
the enjoyment of seeing something worthwhile done. You tell your folks there
isn't any stealing; nobody's getting anything out of this except old folks.'

''This was direct to Nixon. And it got the dogs called off.  ''After it was
completed, we got the Catholic diocese as sponsor and they helped put up some of
the money and we were going to name it the Bishop Somebody Rest Home.

''So somebody sent Johnson a memo, and he called me on the phone and said,
'Larry, what are they doing to me? You and Frank Erwin promised me that they
would name it after my mother. All these years I have relied upon that, that it
would be named for my mother.' I said, 'Mr. President, I thought you didn't want
it named after your mother.' He said, 'Where did you get a silly idea like that?
Why, sure I want it named after my mother. It would be a great honor to have it
named after her. You promised me it would be named after my mother, and I
counted on it, and now they aren't going to.'

''Anyway, if you look out there on the freeway you'll see a series of lights.
That's The Rebekah Baines Johnson Center.  Although Lyndon considered himself
totally out of politics and refused to give interviews to reporters - which fed
the rumors that he was massively depressed - on April 7, 1970, in Washington, he
sat down to a five-hour lunch with reporters and editors from The Washington
Post. In March he had gotten angina and been hospitalized in San Antonio, and,
according to the national correspondent, Richard Harwood, ''He came in looking
less tall, less bulky than I had remembered him. His hair was almost completely
white and was growing long in the back.''

Haynes Johnson, a Washington Post reporter: ''He was somewhat subdued when he
came into the room. He was on a diet of 850 calories a day, he said, and was
getting back his strength gradual-ly. There had been quite a bit of pain this
time.''

Richard Harwood, a Washington Post correspondent: ''As he talked, he seemed to
take on another appearance: The pallor and signs of sickness went away and all
of a sudden you were sitting with a vigorous, commanding, strong man whose mind
was so clear, so well organized, so quick that you suddenly became aware of the
power of that personality, of the ability to dominate and persuade and
overwhelm.

''What came through above all was not his 'complexity' but the simplicity of his
passions and loves and hates and the singleness of his mind and mental
processes. People were loyal or disloyal, brave or cowardly, constant or
inconstant, petty or grand; they loved their country or they were sunshine
patriots. The war had obviously left him baffled about the attitudes of his
country and had hurt him because it obscured the great works of the Great
Society, a cause in which he still believed.''

When the entire afternoon passed and he did not return, Lady Bird sent over an
anxious note, which was delivered by a maid, asking him to please come rest.

Haynes Johnson: ''L.B.J. said, 'I want you to know, no matter how we differ
about things, I feel that I am at the table of friends, and I want to thank you
for letting me come and visit with you.' He got up and left after shaking hands
with each person present.''

Harwood: ''There were some bitter-end Johnson critics around the table, but they
didn't have the heart or desire to sock it to him.  They sat there, drinking it
all in, and when it was over some had tears in their eyes and they all stood up
and gave him their applause.''

Haynes Johnson: ''We thought we might never see his likes again.  And perhaps we
were right.'' In the winter of 1968, Johnson's birthplace had been officially
transferred to the National Park Service. Lyndon was very proud of the
birthplace home and since it was so near the ranch he couldn't resist any
opportunity to conduct a personal tour or to sell some copies of his memoirs.
He'd ride over in his convertible, with the top down, waving to people. ''You
all come on in.'' And he would take them on a tour, pointing out ''that was my
crib,'' and ''that's my mother's this and my mother's that.'' According to
Yolanda Boozer, an associate from the Senate days through the post-Presidency,
whenever she couldn't find him for a meeting, she would call the birthplace and
sure enough someone would say, ''He's been here all morning,'' or ''He's just
leaving; he's been here for two hours, and we've done a booming business selling
books.''

Yolanda Boozer: ''I soon became aware that one of my duties was selling 'The
Vantage Point' at the birthplace, and every day I would have to give him an
account of how many copies were sold. He would stop at the birthplace himself
and shake hands with people and say, 'Aren't ya gonna buy one of my books? Now,
if you do, I'll sign it right here - give me a pen!' And he'd start signing -
and before we knew it there was a crowd and a line of people.'' Into the L.B.J.
Library and the establishment of the L.B.J. School of Public Affairs on the
campus of the University of Texas at Austin went Lyndon's hopes for posterity.
''It's all here,'' he said at the dedication of the library in May 1971, ''the
story of our time - with the bark off. There is no record of a mistake, nothing
critical, ugly or unpleasant that is not included in the files here. We have
papers from my four years of public service in one place for friend and foe to
judge, to approve or disapprove.'' There were, too, his hopes for giving his
fellow Texans the kind of intellectual opportunities then seemingly only enjoyed
by Harvard intellectuals and other Ivy Leaguers.

The library is the national repository of every slip of paper, every document
having to do with Lyndon's long public life; Lyndon himself said there were 31
million of them. The building, known locally as the ''mausoleum,'' is
architecturally forbidding, certainly uninspired from the outside. Inside, the
documents are in folders and the folders are in red boxes, five stories of them
encased behind glass.

Dedication day, May 22, 1971, was a typical May day in Texas, alternately clear
and threatening, very windy. The spray from the outdoor fountain, which normally
shoots up into the air 50 to 60 feet, became uncontrollable when the wind gauge
failed to operate, resulting in a number of distinguished and disgruntled guests
getting their feet wet, among them Hubert H. Humphrey, Edmund S. Muskie, Barry
Goldwater, C. Douglas Dillon and members of the Johnson cabinet.

Yes, Nixon came, but so did the demonstrators, some 2,000 strong, 60 Vietnam
veterans in the vanguard. They were not allowed too close - the whole area was
blocked off by the Secret Service - but their chants, ''No More War'' and
''Johnson's War,'' could at times be heard with a kind of Greek-chorus effect to
Nixon's speech, accepting the library for the country.

The library had a helicopter landing pad on its roof, and Lyndon would often fly
there from the ranch. Someone pointed out that while Lyndon Johnson was not
exiled royalty, he tended to live as if he were.

As with the birthplace, he was avidly interested in the numbers of tourists
visiting the library, and he would seize opportunities to get people there.

Harry Middleton, a Johnson speechwriter, now director of the L.B.J. Library:
''One day at a football game at the stadium, which is just across the street
from the library, Johnson said, 'Ask the announcer to announce over the
public-address system that after the game people should come to the library for
some cool water and to go to the can.' ''

Harry didn't think much of the suggestion - the library had all of one public
water fountain and one public bathroom for each sex - though Lyndon would
probably get a few books sold and be able to show off a few memorabilia before
the riot started.

But even without football-game attendances, the library prospered.  By its fifth
anniversary, attendance had passed the three-million mark, averaging more than
2,000 visitors a day. Not a bad memorial at that.

Warren Woodward, staff member and friend: ''His craggy face was kind and mellow
in those days. His hair was long; it swept back and curled on the ends like that
of an elder statesman in the Andy Jackson vein. The lines in his face were deep,
but in all, Lyndon Johnson appeared less strange than in those horrendous days
at the end of his term.  Outside the gaze of the public eye, he aged gracefully.
But he aged quickly, too.''

Woodward accompanied Lyndon in the spring of 1972 to Tennessee for Gov. Buford
Ellington's funeral, after which Lyndon and Bird went on to Charlottesville,
Va., to visit Lynda (their elder daughter) and her family. There, Lyndon
suffered another heart attack.  Ted Gittinger, a member of the staff of the
L.B.J. Library: ''There is a persistent story that Lyndon, at Char-lottesville
in '72, got up from bed and said, 'Bird, I'm goin' home to die - you can come if
you want to,' or words to that effect. It was a typical Lyndon remark.''

Leo Janos, a writer: ''Convinced he was dying, he browbeat Lady Bird and his
doctors into allowing him to fly home to Texas. So, late in the night of his
third day of intensive care, a desperately sick L.B.J. was rushed to the airport
and ferried back to Brooke Army Medical Center in San Antonio. The departure was
so sudden that the Charlottesville hospital director, hearing a rumor that
Johnson might try to leave, rushed to the hospital, only to find L.B.J.'s empty
wheelchair in the parking lot.

''Miraculously, he survived, but the remaining seven months of his life became a
sad and pain-wracked ordeal. 'I'm hurting real bad,' he confided to friends. The
chest pains hit him nearly every afternoon - a series of sharp, jolting pains
that left him scared and breathless. A portable oxygen tank stood next to his
bed and Johnson periodically interrupted what he was doing to lie down and put
on the mask to gulp air.''

Despite the pain, Lyndon had hoped - said he had hoped, anyway - to attend the
1972 Democratic Convention in July in Miami Beach, ''if only to stand up and
take a bow.'' But the Democratic National Committee chairman, Larry O'Brien,
among others, sent word that his attendance would be unwise. There would be
demonstrations and possibly violence. Lyndon had wanted Ed Muskie as the
Presidential candidate, but when the nominee turned out to be his persistent
critic, Senator George McGovern, Johnson loyally said he would support him.

Moreover, in his role as elder statesman, Lyndon was not above dispensing advice
to Presidential candidates. McGovern listened but seemed not to have heard.

Liz Carpenter, Mrs. Johnson's staff director and press secretary: ''I was in the
plane with McGovern, flying into Texas, and we got Johnson on the phone and he
said to McGovern, 'I would quit attacking Nixon on Vietnam. Everybody knows that
it's behind us.  But,' he said, 'I would go after him on the Big Rich.' He said,
'The Republicans always sell you out to Wall Street, and this is the worst bunch
of all.'

''It was the most critical thing I ever heard Johnson say about Nixon. And
McGovern hung up the telephone and did exactly what he was planning to do, which
was to go on about the war.''

Nevertheless, McGovern did make a little-known pilgrimage to the ranch.
McGovern: ''We arrived there about 10:30 in the morning, and visited with him
and Lady Bird under a big live oak tree.  ''He started off by asking me if I got
his telegram congratulating me on the nomination and I told him I had and
appreciated it. He said, 'Well, I want you to know, I'm for you. I know there
are people around here saying that they think they can please me by opposing
George McGovern, but,' he said, 'they're not talking for me. I'm for you. I've
always supported the Democratic nominee and I'm going to support you.' And he
made that point in a dozen different ways.

''Then he said, 'Now, on the war. I think you're crazy as hell, and you think
I'm crazy as hell; so let's just not talk about that.  Let's talk about America
and about this election.' And then he proceeded to tell me what he thought I
needed to do to correct certain suspicions about me in the minds of the American
people. He said, 'I would tell the people of this country that America has been
good to me. That when I was a poor boy growing up in South Dakota, my father and
mother had no money, but they did give me the opportunity to go to school. That
my state had given me the opportunity to serve in the House and Senate of the
United States. That I was proud and privileged to serve the country in wartime
as a bomber pilot in World War II and that I wanted to serve the nation as
President.'

''He said, 'Tell 'em some of the homespun, down-to-earth background of yours. It
doesn't hurt to let people know you're proud of this country.' I thought it was
very good advice and I wish I'd done more of it.

''Along about 1:30, as we were finishing lunch, I could tell he was in some
physical pain. So I asked him how he was feeling and he said, 'Well, every day I
start out pretty well, but then by afternoon these damn pains start bothering
me, and at 4 o'clock, I'm pretty well through. I go lay down.' So we stayed
maybe another hour, and he stayed with us till we left. He struck me as a man
who really knew he had something terribly wrong with him, although he didn't
seem to be distressed about it.''

It is impossible to believe that Lyndon Johnson felt any enthusiasm for Richard
Nixon, who had defeated Lyndon's old friend Helen Gahagan Douglas in a campaign
of monumental ugliness. and whom Sam Rayburn thought was the worst man he had
ever served with. But he did nothing for McGovern except write one letter to a
local weekly newspaper endorsing him.

Thomas G. Corcoran, lawyer and Washington lobbyist: ''He thought McGovern was
the most inept politician, inept Presidential candidate, anyway, in all of
history.''

Those who heard Lyndon's remarks - always private - about McGovern, said they
were often the same as what he had said about King Olav of Norway after a state
dinner, ''He is the dumbest king I have ever met. I didn't know they made kings
that dumb.''

Lyndon was not at all surprised in November, when, despite Watergate, Nixon won
the election; he did express amazement - quite often - that a Democratic
candidate could carry only one state. Even in 1936, Alf Landon of Kansas, who
was a Republican, had carried two.  To be sure, Lyndon's weakness grew every
day. But he did use his waning energies for speaking out about what he still
cared for, had always cared for.

He accepted an invitation to speak on Sept. 16, 1972, at the 75th anniversary of
the Scott and White Memorial Hospital and Clinic in Temple, Tex. And he
immediately got in touch with his close friend and adviser Horace Busby.

Horace Busby: ''He called me in Washington and asked if I would come down and
work with him on what he wanted to say. 'I would like to get some things off my
chest,' he explained.

''When I arrived at the ranch, he almost seemed to be waiting at the door. I was
hardly inside before he picked up a favorite cap and headed outside, saying,
'Come on, we need to take a long ride.'

''The ride continued through the morning and into early afternoon.  Reluctantly,
it appeared, he said he had to return to the house. 'If I don't get my oxygen
and my sleep,' he explained, 'I begin to feel it in my chest.' At his request, I
followed him on into the bedroom.  He changed into pajamas, spent a few minutes
adjusting the oxygen controls, and finally slipped under the covers. Holding the
oxygen mask in one hand, he began 'dictating' what he wanted to say, gesturing
as he did so with the other hand.

'' 'This country isn't over the hill,' he said. 'We aren't on the skids. This is
a just country. It's a beautiful country. All this moaning and complaining isn't
true, isn't right and it isn't leadership.'

''When I sat down at the typewriter, I knew I had received two messages that
morning - one was Lyndon Johnson's message about the country, the other was a
distinct message about himself. The message about himself composed the first
lines of the text of the speech.

'' 'With the coming of September each year, we are reminded, as the song says,
that the days are dwindling down to a precious few. By the calendar, we know
that soon the green leaves of summer will begin to brown; the chill winds of
winter will begin to blow and - before we are ready for the end to come - the
year will be gone.'

''When we were alone in the office he read the first lines aloud for still
another time.  '' 'That's just right,' he said. 'That's just the way I wanted
it.' '' In October 1972, the final negotiations for the sale of the television
station to The Times Mirror Company were completed.  Leonard Marks, a Johnson
lawyer: ''He kept pressuring that he wanted to sell the television station, and
I kept urging him not to do it. He asked me what it was worth, and I told him.
It was a very desirable property and I'm sure that there were clients of ours
who would be willing to buy it. He said, 'No, don't you do anything about it. I
have to make up my mind.' Then one day he called me and told me that he had been
in discussion with The Los Angeles Times Mirror. He personally handled this. He
told me that the president of The L.A.  Times and his lawyer were coming to
Austin. So I went to Austin and we spent a couple of days on negotiations. He
handled it masterfully, God - if he hadn't been President, he'd have been the
biggest tycoon this world has ever seen. He'd have rivaled the head of the
largest corporation. He'd have made the largest fortune.

''He didn't look good that October. He was suffering, you could tell. He was
speaking at a slower pace. We were worried because he stayed up too late, but
you weren't going to tell him that.''

On Dec. 31, Lyndon called Horace Busby and, among other things, talked about his
plans for the coming year.  Busby: ''He wanted, he said, 'to get really active
this year.' '' 'After the inauguration,' he explained, 'we'll have four years
behind us, and I think I can speak up a little more. I've got some programs up
there that are kicking around, and I'd like to go more places and see more
people again.'

''While he did not always take kindly to inquiries about his health, I ventured
a question anyway, asking how he had been feeling.  '' 'Just fair,' he replied.
'I'm trying to get in better shape so the doctors will let me go to Mexico next
month and rest up in the sun. But it's not good.' ''

The month before he died, he attended, against the advice of Lady Bird, three
funerals.  Lady Bird: ''He was very upset by going to funerals, but he made
himself go. I kept telling him sometimes that he didn't have to go, but he
really felt that he should. And each one was a particularly harrowing
experience. One was the memorial service for Rep. Hale Boggs, who had
disappeared and no doubt died months before. That, as I recall, was probably in
December.

''Another was in a way the most tragic of all. A whole busload of young
schoolchildren were going to some church affair in South Austin. They were
killed and they had a mass funeral service and a mass burial. He went to that,
and that's one that I felt sure he could skip.''

But Johnson had a special closeness to the people in South Austin.  Horace Busby
talks about how Austin's proud old family elite in the North ''resented him
politically and were contemptuous of him socially ... but across the river, in
the modest homes of South Austin, where the 'little people' lived, he always had
the votes.

'' 'These people,' he said, with sudden intensity, 'are my people.  When nobody
else was with me, they stood by me. When they hurt, I hurt. Nothing,' he
repeated the word twice more, 'is ever going to keep me away from them in times
like they're going through.' ''

Lady Bird: ''The third funeral was President Truman's, of course.  Those three,
each one a very real, harrowing emotional experience in its different way.''

Frank Erwin: ''Just a couple of weeks before he died, he invited me to bring my
two boys out to the ranch. He insisted on going around with us, helping select
the horses.

''He'd made peace with himself and pretty much got everything done. He'd gotten
his book written; the library was operating; he'd gotten his fiscal affairs in
order and sold the television station. He'd gone over it very intelligently. He
balanced his gifts of his land against the profit of the television station. He
itemized his taxes.  I mean he was on top of everything.''

Marks: ''About two weeks before his death, I came down to Austin to a meeting of
the L.B.J. Library. Frank Stanton (then vice chairman of CBS) was along. We were
going back in Frank's plane. L.B.J. said he wouldn't drive out to the airport
with us, which he customarily did.  The helicopter was going to pick him up and
take him to the ranch. It was about two weeks before his death. L.B.J. took me
aside and led me out toward the hall, and he said, 'You know, I want to thank
you so much for all you've done for me and the family. Over the years, you've
been so loyal and so faithful and so good. Frequently, we take these things for
granted and we never say what we mean. I just want you to know I'm very
grateful.' Gave me the shivers and I said, 'Why are you telling me this? You've
got a long way to travel.' He said, 'No, I used to feel that way, but I don't
any more.' It was his way of saying goodbye. And he did it with a couple of
other people, I since learned.'' Lyndon Baines Johnson died at 3:50 P.M. on Jan.
22, 1973. A few minutes before his death he called the ranch switchboard from
his bedroom. He asked for Mike Howard, one of the Secret Service men.  Howard
was momentarily unavailable, but the switchboard operator reached two other
agents, Ed Nowland and Harry Harris. They rushed to the bedroom with a portable
oxygen unit. Lyndon was lying on the floor beside the bed and appeared to be
dead. They tried to revive him, Nowland with mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. He
was unsuccessful; when Howard reached the bedroom at 3:55 and tried external
heart massage, that, too, was unsuccessful.

At 4:05 Mrs. Johnson was reached in a car near the library, and as soon as
possible she took a helicopter from the library to San Antonio. At 4:19, the
body was placed aboard a family plane, a Beech King Air, and flown to San
Antonio International Airport, where the President was pronounced dead. From
there, the body was flown to the Brooke Army Medical Center. Mrs. Johnson
arrived at 4:45; later she returned to the apartment above the television
station in Austin, where she spent the night. In The Washington Post Haynes
Johnson wrote: ''Perhaps the most poignant aspect of Lyndon Johnson's death is
that this most public man, who was in his element when surrounded by cheering
crowds, died alone, calling for help. His wife, who had stood by him in every
crisis and on whom he relied so much, was away. His daughters, grandchildren,
cronies and friends whom he loved to regale with his inimitable stories, were
absent.''

The day and night after his death, he lay in state at the library, where about
20,000 people filed past the flag-draped casket. People were still arriving the
next morning when the body was removed and flown to Washington and taken from
the airport to the Capitol rotunda.

Dorothy McCardle, a columnist for The Washington Post: ''Leonard Marks had just
come down from the Hill. He said that Mrs. Johnson had said that the thing
Lyndon hated most was to be by himself. So we all decided to keep watch beside
his casket.''

The next morning the casket was moved to the National City Christian Church at 8
o'clock. The pastor, Dr. G.R. Davis, conducted the service. Leontyne Price, at
her request, sang ''Take My Hand, Precious Lord'' and ''Onward, Christian
Soldiers.''

Nancy Dickerson, NBC news correspondent: ''The day of the funeral was perfect -
cold but brilliantly sunny. Lady Bird was dignified, proud and splendid.
President Nixon led the official mourners, and members of the establishment,
including some of the hypocrites who had maligned him in life, were there in
full force. In death they could not tarnish the moment which belonged to those
loyalists who had stood by him through the years and knew how hard he had tried,
especially on Vietnam. The day belonged to those who understood that although
victory had eluded him and events had proved him wrong, he had given more than
they could ask of themselves ... no man could have tried harder.'' The body was
returned to Austin late on the afternoon of the 25th and was taken in a
motorcade to the ranch, where before several hundred people Father Wunibald
Schneider, the priest at the little church in nearby Stonewall, gave the eulogy.
He quoted from Lyndon Johnson's favorite book in the Bible, Ecclesiastes.

Bill Porterfield, a journalist and author: ''The matriarch of the Johnson clan
was Aunt Jessie Hermine Johnson Hatcher, at 88 the ninth and last surviving
child of Grandfather Sam Ealy Johnson Sr. There was never any question about
Aunt Jessie's attendance at the gravesite services. The doughty old girl would
be there to see her Lyndon off. The prayer was that she would not catch her
death of cold.

''The 21-cannon salute fell short by two. A howitzer misfired twice.  ''Aunt
Jessie Hatcher, two weeks to the day, caught a cold and it went into pneumonia.
They buried her in the same cemetery.'' Luci: ''I remember a black man hobbled
up. He was 92 years old. I tried to comfort him by telling him my father loved
him and his people. 'Ma'am, you don't have to tell me he loved me. He showed he
loved me. A tree would have had to fall over me to keep me from being here
today.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Lyndon Baines Johnson

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOSING THE MIDDLE EAST

BYLINE: By JAMES MARKHAM; James Markham is Madrid correspondent of The New York
Times and covered the Lebanese civil war.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1140 words


ROPES OF SAND America's Failure in the Middle East.  By Wilbur Crane Eveland.
382 pp. New York: W.W. Norton & Co. $14.95.

THE Central Intelligence Agency, understandably, would like only its most loyal
and lofty former employees to publish their memoirs.  The Agency's power to
censor was strengthened early this year by the Supreme Court's ruling that Frank
Snepp had ''deliberately and surreptitiously'' violated his secrecy agreement
with the C.I.A. by writing ''Decent Interval,'' an account of the last months of
the Thieu regime in Vietnam and the bungled American evacuation from Saigon.

All institutions and bureaucracies like to keep their failures and outright
disasters secret. But the C.I.A.'s approach to its spooksturned-authors may be
hastening the emergence of a new genre of nonfiction - the more-or-less true spy
story - and guaranteeing free advance publicity to new entries in the field when
word gets out that Langley's censors are unsettled. It is intriguing to guess
what in particular might have upset the C.I.A. in ''Ropes of Sand'' by Wilbur
Crane Eveland, whose status as a high-ranking freelance agent in the Middle East
seems to have ended around 1960. The Agency briefly delayed publication of the
book by invoking a secrecy clause that was apparently too secret to disclose to
the man who signed it. The C.I.A. then backed off when it found that galley
proofs of ''Ropes of Sand'' were already in circulation; legal action against
Mr. Eveland - and more free publicity - could still conceivably follow.

Mr. Eveland got into the spy business, by his account, rather by accident. At
the end of World War II, he studied Arabic with the modest ambition of becoming
a military attache; he was eventually seconded to the young C.I.A. and gained
direct access to its boss, Allen Dulles. Based mainly in Beirut, Mr. Eveland
roamed the Arab East on disparate missions; he was put in charge of plotting
what appears to have been an extremely amateurish and completely unsuccessful
coup in Syria in 1956, which he recounts with selfdeprecating hilarity, and he
was involved in purchasing the easy loyalties of President Camille Chamoun and
other friends of the free world in Lebanon's elections a year later. Our agent
also seems to have spent an enormous amount of time on the slow-moving airplanes
of those days, shuttling between Washington, London, Beirut and other Arab
capitals as new crises erupted.

Mr. Eveland met all the main actors - from the Soviet double-agent Kim Philby to
John Foster Dulles. We see the Shah of Iran fleeing his country, only to be
returned by a C.I.A.-sponsored coup in 1953 - for which the British perhaps
deserve more credit than they are claiming these days. There is an amusing and
elusive safe-house encounter in Cairo with Nasser, whom the C.I.A. first
supported and later, it seems, contemplated assassinating. As the United States
and Britain erect a tier of anti-Soviet states across the region, the Shah's
incipient military juggernaut gets off to an unpromising start: Iranian crews
pour green paint into the crankcases of 100 Sherman tanks.

When the Suez crisis is about to explode, Mr. Eveland joins a marvelous meeting
with King Saud in Riyadh. Robert Anderson, a special envoy of President
Eisenhower, informs the Saudi monarch that the oil that has enriched his kingdom
could swiftly become a thing of the past. ''King Saud seemed not to have
followed Anderson's remarks, but then a troubled look suggested that at least
one basic point had gotten through - here was Robert Anderson, a Texan, talking
as if oil weren't indispensable. All those Cadillacs and palaces might turn into
mirages again.'' Saud huddles with his princes and asks through his interpreter
just what it was that might replace oil.  ''Fully prepared, Anderson uttered the
words 'nuclear energy.' '' As the Americans depart, Prince Faisal tells them
courteously that he thinks they're bluffing. That was in 1956. In 1973, Faisal,
as King of Saudi Arabia, orchestrated the crippling Arab oil boycott.

There may be some yellowing C.I.A. or state secrets here and there in Mr.
Eveland's pages, but there are many more plain embarrassments. The dry, modest
narrative catches nicely an arrogant, uninformed and naive wheeler-dealerism in
the United States' - and the West's - involvement with a complicated part of the
world whose importance has grown hugely since the 1950's. Throughout the
anecdotes and autobiography, Mr. Eveland weaves an argument: that by failing to
exploit its power in the Middle East to forge a lasting peace between Israel and
its neighbors, the United States opened the Arab East to Soviet penetration and
alienated Arab sympathies for a long time to come. Mr. Eveland notes that after
his tragicomic coup attempt in Damascus in 1956, young Syrian military leaders
invited the K.G.B. to help them reorganize their intelligence network.

Like other books of the genre, this is one man's recollection and reconstruction
of a netherworld where the big picture - if it exists at all - belongs to a
select few. ''It all seemed like a jigsaw puzzle,'' Mr. Eveland remarks at one
point, ''and matching up the pieces was more than I could do.'' The eerie,
partial insights of Smiley's People crop up more than once. Mr. Eveland was a
bystander to the momentous Middle East Wars of 1967 and 1973 and the emergence
of the Palestinian movement. He asserts, tantalizingly, that the C.I.A. Athens
station ''supplied some support'' for the Christian militias in the 1975-76
Lebanese civil war and then encouraged Israel to ship them ''large quantities of
surplus and captured weapons.'' The Israelis' relationship with Mr. Eveland's
friend Camille Chamoun is now well established, but an American role in the
Lebanese bloodletting is here just a sentence, an assertion: we have no telling
anecdotes or accounts of hare-brained or ingenious schemes. Mr. Eveland was no
longer there.

Somewhere, perhaps, another Wilbur Crane Eveland or Frank Snepp is weighing
conscience, duty, patriotism and financial gain - seated before a typewriter,
filling in the gaps, bringing the story up to date. Should he be allowed to tell
it?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION A DRAFT BOARD VETERAN REMEMBERS

BYLINE: By PEDRO E. GUERRERO

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 18, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words


THE chairman and I did not agree. He greeted me at the start of each meeting of
Connecticut Draft Board 17 by asking me when I was going to resign. I served on
the board for five years, from 1968 to 1974, and I don't recall a single
controversial case on which he and I agreed.

We always started deliberations on the C.O.'s - conscientious objectors -with
his ''no'' vote to guide us. But he won a few and I won a few and that kept
matters lively on the first Monday of every month.

There were seven members of the board, which had jurisdiction over Norwalk,
Darien, Wilton and New Canaan. Most of the youths who came before us had an idea
that we were a bunch of flag-waving hawks, in league not only with the Pentagon,
but also with the barbers of America, who weren't doing too well at the time.

I had entertained a similar notion before I was appointed to the board, and I
was surprised not to find a room full of grim old men wearing flag lapel pins.
But the men with whom I shared those Monday nights were not vultures, they were
as decent and sincere a group as I have ever known. Our feelings about Vietnam
differed: A few, as it turned out, shared my outrage. No one felt comfortable
about our involvement in the ''conflict,'' but some defended it on the ground of
patriotism, our chairman among them.

The hallway outside the dingy suite of offices we occupied over a record store
in a rundown section of South Norwalk was crowded on draft board-night. There
were not enough seats for the men waiting to see us.

Some leaned forlornly on the peeling wall, others squatted dejectedly on the
brown linoleum floor. Their faces were anxious, defiant, scared, and frequently,
full of hate. They waited while our secretary read us the mail. A lot of it was
routine, such as directives from the national office: ''Card-burners will be
immediately drafted.'' Some of it was from avengers, rejected girlfriends who
turned in the names of their draft-dodging former boyfriends, busybody neighbors
who informed us that John Doe had nothing better to do than wait until Richard
Roe went off to work so that he and Mrs. Roe could spend the morning doing -
''Well, you can imagine.''

We ignored this intelligence, as we were authorized neither to investigate nor
pass it on to anyone. But I must admit that, being human, we listened with
interest. The mail from Canada, most of which was signed, was less interesting.
One postcard was addressed simply to ''The Pimps for LBJ, Norwalk, Conn.'' On
the other side it said, ''Having a wonderful time. Glad you are there.'' I
wondered how the post office knew it was for us.

Meanwhile, the young men in the hall listened nervously to the rock music
reverberating from the record store downstairs, which stayed open late.
Sometimes they came alone, but more often they came with their parents,
brothers, sisters, girlfriends, roommates, clergymen, lawyers and doctors. They
brought witnesses of all kinds, and they carried references, Xeroxed copies of
school and medical records, and letters.

I cannot forget those letters, for we read them by the yard, letters from
powerful men on expensive corporate stationery, letters scrawled with a blunt
pencil on cheap ruled paper, letters written on scented bond by a cultivated
hand. And then there was the youth who came, unbelievably, with a letter from
Gen. Lewis B. Hershey, asking, like any other ordinary mortal, that an exception
be made.

If a young man had no objection to serving his country in the armed forces, he
was routinely drafted, and we saw neither hide nor hair of him. We did not even
go to the station to bid him goodbye the way they do in old World War II movies.
But if a man did not want to go, as we said then, there were many ways for him
to avoid service. He could apply for a hardship, dependency, occupational or
student deferment, or he could ask to be excused on the ground of conscientious
objection.

The board was unanimous on most of the deferments. But the C.O.'s were another
story, because they took us into fields of guaranteed disagreement, religion and
philosophy. Sometimes we debated far into the night, and our debates were often
bitter, leaving in their wake slammed doors, threats to resign, and hard
feelings. Although we were lectured by visiting Selective Service brass on how
to debunk religious arguments, the Government guidelines were fuzzy, and so,
often, were the 19-year-olds who tried to find the words to state their ideas
about a higher power.

But it was to the very young and to the very inarticulate that we gave the most
time. It was always easier to listen to them than to wade through the pages and
pages of pompous diatribe submitted by college seniors whose time was about up.

Sometimes a father would come in as a witness for his son. Often he would be an
executive of a giant corporation, a man whose power over his army of employees
was awesome, a tired businessman who had labored hard for his casual tweeds.
Freshly shaved and resplendent in his school tie, he would solemnly attest to
his son's claim that a loving atmosphere and early religious instruction was the
foundation of his philosophical being and therefore his objection to serving in
any war.

And often the son of this man would be a bearded youth in faded jeans and
embroidered denim shirt with hair halfway down his back - a youth who was not,
in any way that we could see, ''a chip off the old block.'' And yet here they
would be, united before us and our dusty old flag, the father and the son.

Other fathers seemed to have been dealt a body blow by their sons and the war.
You could see the pain in their lined faces: These men did not honestly know how
they felt. They were confused and torn.  More than one came in to testify for
his son and then proceeded to tell us how he disagreed with the boy, how he
personally believed the Army would make a man out of him. ''By God!'' these men
would shout, ''I did my part!'' But then, with a glance at their sons, they
would say, ''But I can attest to his sincerity.''

Those Monday nights ended very late, and I would drive home to my silent house
on a country road 10,000 miles from the front. But our town was divided by the
war, and I was a dove on the draft board, and life was no longer peaceful in the
two-acre zone. Crank calls interrupted meals and summoned us in from the garden.
The children stood at the bus stop waving at neighbors who no longer waved back
as they roared by in their big cars. There were venomous looks, houses to which
we were no longer welcome, and on one horrible spring afternoon there was a
package in the mailbox containing a dead bird.  But that was a long time ago,
and no one has rolled down his car window to call me a communist in years.

We were decommissioned in 1974. After the last meeting, the chairman and I stood
outside the office. It was very early in the morning and he and I were the only
ones left to say our goodbyes.

''You didn't resign,'' he said.  ''No,'' I said. ''You wouldn't have enjoyed
life without me.'' ''Take care.'' ''You too.'' We shook hands. We never saw each
other again.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Pedro E. Guerrero, a photographer specializing in architecture and fine arts,
lives in New Canaan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'IF I CAN'T HAVEMY WAY...'

BYLINE: By SOLOMON ARBEITER

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 22, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words


THERE is an American tradition - or is it myth? - of unity in the face of
adversity. No matter what our political differences, sectional disputes, class
antagonisms or racial differences, it is believed that Americans would always
come together to confront a common enemy.

However, this national aphorism has come into question of late, perhaps being
superseded by the more-recent American attitude of ''me first.''

The ''Me Generation'' arose in the 1970's. Bred on disillusion with the
hypocrisy of Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard M.  Nixon and nurtured by
a materialistic society, many people opted for a life focused on their own
satisfaction. This was not necessarily a selfish trait, but seemed to consist
primarily of focusing on those activities that would improve or benefit oneself.

Jogging emerged as a national mania, a nonteam sport for the sole purpose of
self-improvement. Books on personal health, selfimprovement courses, taking
control of one's life, changing careers and shifting gears -these became the
hallmark of the decade.

And they apparently have affected our national psyche as we enter the 1980's,
only now in a negative and socially fragmenting manner.  The symptoms of the
''Not Me'' decade are evidenced most clearly in the reaction of various groups
in our nation to President Carter's call for American action in the Iranian and
Afghanistan crises.

As a first order of business, almost all of the groups who were called upon for
some sacrifice, some limitation of self-interest, disputed the President as to
whether there was a real or contrived crisis in the Iran/Afghanistan area.

Secondly, they felt it most unfair and prejudicial that they had been asked to
sacrifice. Who was this man, the President, to ask them to forgo their
individual self-interest? The list of protesters reads like a cross-section of
grass-roots America.

Included in this ''Not Me'' decade listing are:

- America's Olympic Athletes: President Carter's recommendation that the United
States boycott the Olympic Games in Moscow this summer has kindled enthusiasm in
the hearts of ''America's best'' young people similar to that which a recruiter
for the Ku Klux Klan could inspire at a N.A.A.C.P. convention. There is not
merely disbelief that ''they'' could be asked to forgo the Moscow competition,
but downright resentment that the request should even have been made.

Have our young athletes not given enough? Have they not practiced for years,
given up countless hours and days in pools and track to qualify for this moment?
And this boycott won't get the Russians out of Afghanistan.

The President just doesn't understand them!

- America's Farmers: The curtailment of grain sales to the Russians brought
anguished cries of protest from the American heartland. Why were the nation's
farmers, the honest tillers of our soil, being singled out for financial loss?
They had planted and produced one of the largest corn and wheat crops in our
history.

And now a major market had been denied them - and all for no purpose, since the
Russians could buy their grain elsewhere. This act would have no effect on the
Afghanistan invasion and would only punish hardworking farmers.

The President didn't understand them!

- America's Young Adults: The President's recommendation that America
reinstitute registration for the draft, about two light years shy of actual
conscription, brought howls of protest from young people of both sexes. Not only
would the draft be of no military value (after all, what do 18- and 19-year-olds
know about nuclear missiles?), but it might be misconstrued by the Russians as
an aggressive act, thereby forcing them to assist the Governments of Pakistan
and Iran by placing hundreds of thousands of Red Army troops at their disposal
in their capital cities.

This was the wrong way to conduct foreign policy, which would be served far
better if the elderly were sent to protect the Persian Gulf oilfields.

The President just doesn't understand them!

- Various Businessmen: When particular items (computer main frames, advanced
technology, etc.) were embargoed, the business community was very quick to point
out that these items were available elsewhere and that the Russians would not
suffer any loss. The West Germans or French would step in rapidly and the
Russians would never notice.

Dr. Armand Hammer, the Charlie McCarthy to Russia's Edgar Bergen, explained that
the U.S.S.R. really was aiding good government and social tranquillity in
Afghanistan and desired better trade with America. The tariff prohibitions would
merely delay improved relations with Russia.

The President just didn't understand!  The listing of groups seeking to gain
their own interest in this matter could be extended. However, the essential
element of the responses is that each group is attempting to substitute its own
priorities for those of our elected leaders.

While there is no doubt a very useful role for all citizens to play in
criticizing our President, much of what has occurred subsequent to the invasion
of Afghanistan goes far beyond legitimate protest. It is, if viewed in
conjunction with the attempt of single-interest pressure groups to influence our
electoral system, an attempt to preempt the legitimate powers of elected
officials.

This appears to be a political extension of the ''Me Generation'' attitude to
events of the 80's: ''If I can't have it done my way, I will not cooperate in
the process.''

While America has had groups protesting governmental decisions in the past
(beginning with the Whisky Rebellion under Washington and extending to the
Vietnam protests), the extent and number of group protests may be leading to a
Balkanization of our political processes.

Political parties function best when group interests are subsumed as part of a
greater whole. It is to be hoped that the ''Me Generation'' will become
sufficiently aware of ''Us'' to prevent the coming decade from being called the
''Anarchical 80's.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Solomon Arbeiter is a resident of Leonia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


AROUND THE WORLD;
Rebels Blow Up 2 Bridges On Island of Espiritu Santo

VILA, Vanuatu, Aug. 3 (Reuters) - Rebels on the island of Espiritu Santo, part
of the newly independent Pacific archipelago of Vanuatu, blew up two bridges
this weekend, an official said today.

The attacks on roads outside the main town of Luganville demonstrated that
followers of Jimmy Stevens, the separatist leader, were still active, despite
earlier reports that the rebellion had been ended, the official said.

A joint force of 200 British marines and French paratroops landed on Espiritu
Santo 10 days ago in an attempt to end the rebellion before independence was
given Wednesday to the island group formerly known as the New Hebrides.

Zimbabwe Orders Welcome For Mozambique President

SALISBURY, Zimbabwe, Aug. 3 (AP) - The Government has ordered all Salisbury
residents to line the capital's streets for the arrival tomorrow of President
Samora M. Machel of Mozambique.

President Machel, an early supporter of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe, is the
first head of state to make an official visit to Zimbabwe.

Leaders of the white minority asserted that directives ordering students out of
classes to cheer the visiting Marxist leader were illegal.

Report Says Refugee Camps Are Shelled in Lebanon

BEIRUT, Lebanon, Aug. 3 (AP) - The state radio said today that Israeli and
Lebanese Christian artillerymen had shelled the southern Lebanese port city of
Tyre and adjacent Palestinian refugee camps.  Israel denied the report.

The reported shelling came after the explosion of a land mine killed two people
in the Christian enclave in the village of Diben along the southern Lebanese
border with Israel, the report said.

Typhoon in Vietnam Causes Flooding and Food Shortage

BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 3 (AP) - A typhoon has caused widespread damage in
central and northern Vietnam, leaving 164,500 people homeless and flooding large
areas of agricultural land, the Vietnam News Agency reported today.

The storm struck large parts of the Red River delta and other areas on July
23-24, the news agency said. The report said the typhoon flooded nearly 1.2
million acres of land, destroyed 15,800 buildings and brought food shortages to
more than three million people.

Tunisia Proclaims Release Of Last Political Prisoners

TUNIS, Aug. 3 (Reuters) - President Habib Bourguiba said today that there were
no longer any political prisoners in Tunisia's jails after the release on Friday
of two union members sentenced to jail terms after riots in January 1978.

President Bourguiba, speaking on his 77th birthday, said he did not count as
political prisoners a group of 18 men held since last January's guerrilla attack
in the mining town of Gafsa. Tunisia accused Libya of organizing the assault, a
charge denied in Tripoli.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Green Light for Gun Traffic

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 506 words


We noted during New York's recent debate over state handgun controls that
Federal controls would be the most effective answer to the national tragedy of
threats and death from concealable weapons.  Federal controls to date have been
sadly inadequate. And now Congress is considering a bill to weaken them further.

Senator James McClure, Republican of Idaho, and Representative Harold Volkmer,
Democrat of Missouri, last fall proposed a law that would seriously undercut the
1968 Federal Gun Control Act. The measure - which has now gathered 53 sponsors
in the Senate and 157 in the House - would make it easier to merchandise
firearms across state lines, and harder to convict those accused of Federal gun
violations. The law should be moving exactly the other way.

The McClure-Volkmer bill would let persons other than Federally licensed
manufacturers, importers or dealers make interstate gun transfers so long as
they did not violate any state or local law at the guns' destination. It would
also require prosecutors to prove that an accused violator had knowingly broken
the law, thus eliminating the traditional presumption that gun dealers know
what's illegal. The measure would limit the use of trial evidence by the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to lift or suspend dealers' licenses. And,
people convicted of nonviolent Federal felonies could, as they cannot now,
legally own guns.

Some members of Congress who generally favor stricter gun controls have been
drawn to this legislation. Why? Because the gun lobby's capacity to finance the
campaigns of friendly Congressmen, and to punish those who favor controls, is
undiminished. Beyond that, the lobby has apparently persuaded some legislators
that the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms has been abusing citizens'
civil rights. Proponents of the new bill are attracting support by publicizing a
1976 case in which the bureau had David Moorhead, a Vietnam veteran and
gunsmith, prosecuted for owning a machine gun.  The ''machine gun'' was actually
an M-14 rifle that Mr. Moorhead kept as a collector's item and which was merely
capable of being converted into a fully automatic weapon. The case was thrown
out of court.

The bureau erred in the Moorhead case. And there have been other mistakes. But
lately G.R. Dickerson, who became director of the bureau last year, has been
improving supervision of overzealous agents. He recently assured Congress that
the agency had redirected its energies from individual violations toward major
interstate trafficking in illegal guns.

The Times not long ago reported how one New York City ''businessman'' makes
$100,000 a year selling illegal guns. He reported how he easily purchased
weapons in other states to sell in New York. For Congress to contemplate
weakening the Federal laws about such traffic would be perverse.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

What Olympics?

BYLINE: George Vecsey

SECTION: Section C; Page 4, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 866 words


OUT of sight, out of mind, the 1980 Olympics came and went, without inflaming
the people of North America. With the United States boycotting the Olympics,
there was no massive 152 1/2 hours of television that the National Broadcasting
Company had planned. And without television, the Olympics reverted to the
distant amateur event they were before this television age.

As this journalist spent two weeks wandering around North America, few people
seemed to be talking about the Coe-Ovett duels or the maneuvering of judges as
Nadia Comaneci struggled to retain her titles.

The apathy in North America - the Olympics had become ''Spartakiad II,'' as one
NBC official called the Eastern European-dominated Games - served to remind
everybody of the huge influence of television in public perception of many
events, certainly including sports.

One need only go back four years, to the Montreal Olympics, when television
fostered a two-week breed of Olympic Junkies, hooked to every twitch and flex by
Sugar Ray or Nadia Baby. Many Junkies had become addicted four years earlier by
the competition as well as the tragedy at the Munich Games.

It is as if television coverage has created certain events (political
conventions, Watergate hearings, Monday Night Football), made them real in the
public consciousness, in ways that not even the most informative, profound news
article, column or broadcast can.

It is one thing to write or speak about an event; it is quite another to
actually present that event to 170 million people - the figure NBC estimated
would watch the 1980 Olympics at one time or another.

''This would have been the greatest sports event in television history,'' said
Arthur A. Watson, the president of NBC sports, who had geared up an operation of
650 people to produce the $87-million investment, only to see it fall apart
after the Soviet move into Afghanistan.

As it was, NBC presented a minute or two on its nightly news show (a huge amount
of time in that medium), and presented chunks of major events on its weekend
sports programs.

But the silent yawn during the televised United States Olympic trials told NBC
officials that the public does not follow the amateur sports that make up an
Olympics, unless they are presented in quadrennial setting of the Games
themselves, with plenty of stars and stripes flapping in the breeze.

''I'm amazed by how few calls and letters we have gotten, either complaining
about lack of coverage or saying we had too much,'' Mr.  Watson says.

This year the only controversy was whether athletes should be made the focal
point for foreign policy. The feeling here is that the Olympics - while hardly
vital to world peace, and barely relevant to Americans' playing and viewing
patterns - are just important enough to justify the American gesture.

It is a shame that a few hundred Americans missed the main chance in their lives
to perform in an Olympics, but if one wants to talk about sacrifice, more than
40,000 Americans died in Vietnam for much less reason than a few athletes stayed
home in 1980.

Barring some other international incident in 1984, the Olympics will come back
stronger than ever in Los Angeles. They must.  Nationalism and television's
growing appetite will guarantee it.

Just the other day, while sitting in the stands at a baseball game, I heard one
fan tell another: ''I got up early this morning and had nothing else to do, so I
watched a girls' basketball game and some wrestling on the new sports channel.
Pretty interesting.''

As cable television proliferates, some people will watch anything.  Thousands of
masochistic Red Sox fans live and die with their darlings in pubs and living
rooms in Manhattan, but the main reason the Red Sox are so appealing on a cable
channel is that the familiar framework of a league game in cozy Fenway Park is
still basically unviolated by television.

Television does make inroads on sports. A month ago the baseball All-Star Game
started at 5:30 P.M. in Los Angeles, with batters standing in the shadows and
right fielders squinting into a deadly sun, so that prime-time viewers in the
East would not doze off during commercials in the late innings. It will be
necessary to watch that television does not change starting times for the 1984
Los Angeles Olympics.

Television also affects football and basketball when a team is mounting an
attack only to have the game halted for that commercialized interruption known
as ''the TV timeout.''

But television often gives more than it destroys. It has made going to a
professional football game totally unnecessary. Why brave the awful traffic
jams, the loutish mobs or the brutal weather when you can actually see who made
the key block on instant replay from 17 different angles?

All the devices would have been utilized in the past two weeks from Moscow.
Newspaper reporters often gave excellent reports of the competition, the color
and the political realities in a nation so inextricably linked to the rest of
the world. But millions of sports fans, ever more conditioned to games on the
tube, would undoubtedly agree with Arthur Watson of NBC, who said last week:
''It's like it's not happening at all.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Top Vietnamese Leader Confers with Waldheim

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 3


Le Duan, head of the Vietnamese Communist Party, met today with Secretary
General Kurt Waldheim of the United Nations, apparently to show support for Mr.
Waldheim's efforts to reduce tension between Cambodia and Thailand.

United Nations officials said that the unscheduled 10-minute meeting between Mr.
Duan, Vietnam's most powerful leader, and Mr.  Waldheim, contrasting with the
low-key welcome given the Secretary General on his arrival in Hanoi yesterday,
was a positive step in the search for a settlement to the Cambodian crisis.

Mr. Waldheim told journalists he had made some progress in talks aimed at easing
the situation, which deteriorated seriously after a brief Vietnamese military
incursion from Cambodia into Thai territory early last month. The Secretary
General is faced with conflicting proposals for establishment of a demilitarized
zone between Thailand and Cambodia.

Thailand, together with its non-Communist partners in the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, wants to have the United Nations supervise a zone
inside Cambodia as the first step toward a political solution. Vietnam wants a
zone along the border, with some kind of international guarantee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Mozambique Leader Hailed, By Crowds in zimbabwe

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 592 words

DATELINE: SALISBURY, Zimbabwe, Aug. 4


President Samora M. Machel of Mozambique, who supplied bases and guns to the
guerrillas who came to power in Zimbabwe, arrived here today to a tumultuous
welcome from thousands.

On landing at the Salisbury airport and later during the dedication of a
boulevard renamed for him, President Machel was pressed by blacks thanking him
for supporting their war against white minority rule. Crowds danced in the
streets and waved small Mozambican flags.  Few whites joined the festivities.

The faces of his bodyguards appeared troubled, but police failed to push back
the wildly cheering crowds reaching out to touch the man whose support for black
rule in Zimbabwe led the former Rhodesian Government to retaliate harshly
against Mozambique.

Britain Orders Arrest of 4 In Scuttling of an Oil Tanker

LONDON, Aug. 4, (Reuters) - Warrants were granted today for the arrest of four
men, including a Texas businessman, who were accused of being involved in the
scuttling of a tanker off the Senegalese coast after its cargo of oil had been
sold to South Africa.

The London Guildhall Court gave Scotland Yard warrants to seize the men on
charges of conspiracy to defraud the Shell International trading company and
various Lloyd's insurance underwriters between December 1979 and January 1980, a
police spokesman said.

The four men were identified as Frederick Soudan, a businessman from Houston;
Dimitrios Georgoulis, the Greek captain of the Liberianregistered tanker, the
Salem; Anton Reidel, a Rotterdam company director, and Johannes Jurgen Locks, a
Frankfurt businessman.

Six People Are Murdered In Latest Turkish Violence

ANKARA, Turkey, Aug. 4 (AP) - Six people were killed in Turkish violence,
including three workers shot to death in the central city of Kayseri, the police
reported today.

The killings followed an outburst of terrorist slayings across Turkey last week
that left more than 100 people dead.  Turkish Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel
met with martial law commanders and key Cabinet members yesterday for eight
hours in a regular monthly review of domestic security.

----

Special to the New York Times

ATHENS, Aug. 4 - The assassination here of a Turkish diplomat last week has led
Greek officials to express concern that Armenian, Kurdish and Cypriot terrorists
might be using Greece as a base for action against Turkish targets.

Foreign Ministry officials said that although Greece had shown sympathy for the
Armenian cause it would strongly resist any attempts to make Greece a stage for
for anti-Turkish terrorist action.

Waldheim Has Thai Talks On Conflict With Vietnam

BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 4 (Reuters) - Secretary General Kurt Waldheim of the
United Nations said today that there had been little progress on resolving any
of the issues involved in easing the tension between Thailand and Vietnam over
Cambodia.

Mr. Waldheim said that Foreign Minister Siddhi Savetsila, in talks lasting more
than two and a half hours, had put forward the Thai views in a frank manner, a
diplomatic formula that usually indicates blunt talking.

''The meeting was constructive and very helpful, but it was only the first
round,'' he said. The Secretary General is also due to have discussions with
Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda.

Mr. Waldheim arrived here this morning from a two-day visit to Hanoi after which
he said some progress had been made on easing the tension along the
Thai-Cambodian border.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 5, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS WHERE TIME GOES

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: SLOWLY PRAGUE, Aug. 4


On the eve of the Democratic convention in 1968, the Soviet Army poured into
Czechoslovakia. Harassed by the night sticks and occasional tear-gas grenades of
the late Mayor Daley's police, masses of American dissidents in Chicago roared
protest at what was happening there and lettered signs saying ''This is worse
than Prague.'' The difference mattered less to them than the dissidence.

Twelve years later, the U.S. has emerged from its Vietnam debacle.  Its youth is
cool, if not indifferent, to a democratic but miserable political choice.
Prague, in the meantime, has sunk into an anesthetized gloom.

''We can eat and sleep all right, but that is not enough, do you understand?''
an unknown woman came up to say when she recognized a foreigner. ''Too bad about
1968.''

The mood here is profoundly depressed. Even the handful of stubborn Czech
dissidents have lost hope for reform. As one said, most people are only looking
now for personal tranquillity and survival within a system they don't think can
be changed; they worry about the longer future, about the country's economic
decline and their children's prospects.

Czechoslovakia was an advanced country in prewar Europe, and the only one which
came out of Nazi occupation with a better industrial base than before. There was
little destruction and the Germans had moved factories eastward to escape Allied
bombing.

Now, the question of black humor is whether ''we will catch up with (much lower)
Soviet living standards by the year 2000, or the target will be reached
sooner.'' As elsewhere in the East bloc, people don't work very hard at their
primary jobs and there is a ''parallel economy'' based on connections, bribery
and barter.

Surprisingly, American cigarettes have become the lubricant for the consumer
service trade, as they were in Germany and Italy after defeat and collapse.
There isn't any visible reason for a cigarette economy here now, except that
people don't believe anything will function normally.

The regime is rigid. ''Reform'' is a dirty word, because it led to the
effervescence of the ''Prague Spring'' and then the arrival of Soviet tanks,
although the authorities know that without changes in the tightly centralized
economic controls the country will slump further and further down. So, they urge
timorous ''improvements in working methods'' and nobody pays any attention.

It all has a curious effect. Western diplomats say Czechoslovakia is now the
most Stalinist of the East bloc, though it was originally the most democratic
and the only one which went Communist (in 1948) without the actual presence of
the Red Army.

Its foreign trade is becoming increasingly integrated in the Eastern system,
unlike others, and instead of being rewarded with extra indulgence from Moscow
it must bear the extra burden of foreign currency costs for an overly ambitious
nuclear energy program to help its allies. (Anti-nuclear protest is
unthinkable.) Officials worry that Poland may divert the coal exports, which
Czechoslovakia needs, to earn more Western money, and they admit that the
machinery they ship to Poland in return is often outdated and noncompetitive.

After World War II, Moscow tried to establish a monolithic bloc, imitative of
everything Soviet from army uniforms to posters, mausoleums and purge trials.
Now it is merely a military and political power tool holding down old
diversities. National customs and temperaments are surging upward. Poland,
Hungary, Rumania are markedly different from each other and increasingly
different from Russia once again.

But the Czechs, who whisper that they have lost the old pan-Slav affection bred
by centuries of Austro-Hungarian rule and pretend they can't understand Russian
which is compulsory in every school, seem to feel they are being helplessly
absorbed by the system.  Nobody expects anything to happen except more and more
of the dreary same.

In the 12 years that have gone by, Prague has settled down to grumpy survival.
The soot-blackened monuments of medieval splendor are there, a reminder of
better, and worse, days. But apart from the grandly marbled new subway,
perfectly clean and innocent of any individual's mark, contemporary building
looks tacky and run-down.  Scaffolding lines the second-story level in many
streets, not because repairs are going on but to protect pedestrians from tiles
and stones that aren't being fixed and might fall.

A great deal has changed in the U.S. in this time. The Chicago protestors, who
scarcely knew and cared less about a faraway country's troubles, achieved some
of what they sought. As some feared and others hoped, they were co-opted.
Political reforms were made, some digested, some regretted, and the need for
more correction is obvious as the Democrats convene again. Looking from here,
the right to change, and complain, and change some more is the definition of
hope.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 6, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 681 words


AROUND THE NATION;
Carrier Borrows 50 Sailors To Leave for Mediterranean

NORFOLK, Va., Aug. 5 (AP) - The aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy had to borrow
about 50 sailors from other ships to fill key positions before leaving for a
Mediterranean cruise, Navy officials say.

Although the extra personnel represent a small percentage of the ship's
personnel, Navy sources, who did not want to be identified, said the borrowed
sailors were in such key positions that performance would have been marginal
without them.

Representative Paul S. Trible Jr., a Virginia Republican who is a member of the
House Armed Sevices Committee, has said that the Kennedy is one of three ships
judged not combat-ready by the Navy because of personnel shortages.

The Norfolk-based Kennedy left yesterday for several days of training off the
Virginia capes before heading east for the Mediterranean. Navy officials said
the cruise would last at least six months.

Judge Backs Garwood Plea To See Some Nixon Papers

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Aug. 5 (UPI) - A military judge at a pretrial hearing today
granted a request by an attorney for Robert R. Garwood to see some papers of
former President Richard M. Nixon.

Attorneys for the 34-year-old marine private, charged with desertion and
collaboration with the enemy in Vietnam,

National news appears on pages A10-19; political news

on pages A16-19.
want to inspect the documents to prove their contention that Mr.  Nixon granted
blanket amnesty to returning American prisoners of war in 1973. They contend
that Private Garwood should be entitled to the same amnesty.

Col. R.E. Switzer instructed the prosecution to try to obtain Presidential
papers, now in Washington's National Archives, that pertain to Mr. Nixon's
discussions of policies toward the returning American prisoners of war suspected
of collaboration. Colonel Switzer said he would subpoena the documents if the
prosecutors were unable to obtain them on their own.

Deaths at Mental Hospitals In Massachusetts Disclosed

BOSTON, Aug. 5 (AP) - A state Senate committee reported today that it had
learned of more than 20 unexplained deaths and disappearances in state mental
facilities.

The committee's preliminary report said that testimony had ''revealed widespread
violations of state law and regulations as well as major deficiencies in
treatment planning, patient care and staff supervision.''

A committee aide said that of the deaths reported to the panel ''more than 20
were were not explained to our satisfaction.'' A response to the report was not
immediately available from the Mental Health Department.

One case described in the report involved a 30-year-old man who died while in
restraint at the Solomon Mental Health Center in Lowell on Aug. 24, 1979. For
four hours before his death, the committee found, the man was tied by his hands
and feet face down on a bed in an unventilated room. The cause of death was
listed as pulmonary congestion and edema.

Campus Loses Court Test Of Ban of Religious Uses

ST. LOUIS, Aug. 5 (UPI) - A Federal appeals court has ruled that a university
may not prohibit a student group from using campus facilities for religious
purposes.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit heard an appeal of a
Federal District Court ruling that upheld such a ban at the University of
Missouri. Eleven members of a student group called Cornerstone brought the suit.

In 1977 the university refused to allow Cornerstone to use campus facilities
because the group was said to violate regulations forbidding the use of
university buildings for religious purposes.

The three-judge appeals panel said ''religious speech, like other speech, is
protected by the First Amendment.'' It added that allowing the religious
meetings would no more ''commit the university, its administration or its
faculty to religious goals than they are now committed to the goals of the
Students for a Democratic Society, the Young Socialist Alliance, or the Young
Democrats for the Women's Union,'' all groups that are permitted to meet on
campus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 6, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WALDHEIM FAILS TO SMOOTH THAI-VIETNAMESE RELATIONS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Aug. 5


Secretary General Kurt Waldheim of the United Nations ended a visit to Hanoi and
Bangkok tonight. During the four days of his trip, he did not bridge the gap
between Vietnam and Thailand that was opened by Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia
at the end of 1978 and deepened by its raid into three Thai border villages in
June. But in an interview before his departure for London, Mr.  Waldheim said
that the two countries had indicated their willingness to talk to each other.

Except for these courtesies, however, United Nations officials accompanying the
Secretary General said that the two countries were too suspicious of each other
to make possible anything better than a long-drawn-out process of gradual
reduction of the tension between them.

Each side rejected the positions put forward by the other. Vietnam advanced the
stand taken last month in a conference of the foreign ministers of Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos, proposing establishment of a demilitarized zone on both sides
of the Thai-Cambodian border under international control and cessation of the
flow of international relief aid from the Thai side to soldiers of the regime of
former Prime Minister Pol Pot and other combatants against the Vietnamese
occupation forces.

Thais Won't Pull Troops Back

In his talks with the Thai Prime Minister, Prem Tinsulanonda, and Foreign
Minister Siddhi Savetsila, Mr. Waldheim was emphatically told that Thailand
would consider any agreement in which it had to withdraw troops from its border
as an infringement of its sovereignty.

The Thai position expressed to the Secretary General was that the heart of the
divergence lay in Vietnam's refusal to accept a resolution adopted by the United
Nations General Assembly last November demanding the withdrawal of the 200,000
Vietnamese troops in Cambodia.

The Thai leaders advanced a proposal agreed on last week by Bangkok's allies in
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Indonesia, the Philippines,
Malaysia and Singapore. This calls for the establishment of demilitarized zones
under United Nations supervision inside Cambodia to assure the safety and
feeding of the tens of thousands of refugees who now live precariously astride
the border.

The Vietnamese leaders who conferred with Mr. Waldheim Sunday and yesterday - Le
Duan, secretary general of the Communist Party, Prime Minister Pham Van Dong and
Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach - rejected this.

The Vietnamese leadership impressed Mr. Waldheim, according to his associates,
with their determination to reject any formula that put in doubt the legitimacy
of the Phnom Penh regime of President Heng Samrin, who was brought to power by
Vietnamese troops, and its sovereignty over all Cambodian territory.

Little Mention of the U.S.

Vietnamese officials made clear that they considered Thailand to be actively
supporting the Pol Pot resistance forces under China's direction. Their concern
struck the visitors as being solely concentrated on Peking. Although in its
public statements Hanoi always includes the United States as cooperating with
China in support of Mr. Pol Pot, the United States reportedly was hardly
mentioned during the two days of talks in Hanoi.

Neither side, according to officials close to Mr. Waldheim, indicated the
minimum flexibility necessary for negotiation. The officials derived
encouragement only from both foreign ministers' assurances that they were ready
to meet in New York, where they will attend the General Assembly session next
month, and Vietnam's readiness to accept Mr. Waldheim as an honest broker
despite its rejection of the United Nations resolution that gives him that
mandate.

The unexpected appearance of Mr. Duan, Hanoi's principal leader, who hardly ever
meets non-Communist visitors, at a dinner given for Mr. Waldheim by Prime
Minister Dong was viewed by the United Nations officials as a sign of Vietnam's
eagerness for negotiation. However, Hanoi has not made the basic concession that
Thailand demands: the withdrawal of its troops from Cambodia.

Mr. Waldheim was taken on a helicopter visit to refugee areas on the border
today and said he was ''heartbroken'' by the tragic situation of the tens of
thousands of refugees. ''Will we ever come close to solving this problem if we
can't solve the political problem?'' an official asked skeptically.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Kurt Waldheim

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 7, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL WILLIS D. CRITTENBERGER: A LEADER OF ALLIED FORCES IN ITALY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 350 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 6


Lieut. Gen. Willis D. Crittenberger, commander of the allied troops that
accepted the first surrender of the German Army in Italy in World War II, died
Monday in Chevy Chase, Md. He was 89 years old.

As commander of the IV Corps, made up of infantry and armored divisions from
seven nations, General Crittenberger directed 326 days of continuous combat in
Italy. On April 29, 1945, in Castiglione, Italy, he accepted the unconditional
surrender of the German Ligurian Army, an event that marked the imminent
collapse of German resistance in Italy.

In its sweep through Italy, the IV Corps liberated more than 600 cities and
towns. In addition, General Crittenberger, who was known to his troops as
''Crit,'' was credited with initiating troop movements that sealed several
Alpine passes and prevented German forces in Italy from joining the main German
armies in the final days of the war in Europe.

Born in Baltimore

Willis Dale Crittenberger was born in Baltimore on Dec. 2, 1890, and spent his
childhood in Anderson, Ind. He attended Braden Preparatory School near West
Point, N.Y., and graduated from the United States Military Academy there in
1913.

He served in the cavalry along the Mexican border in Texas and later returned to
the military academy as an instructor. In the 1930's, he worked with two other
officers in drawing up the first Table of Organization for a United States Army
Armored Division. The plan was still in effect, with slight modifications, when
he retired in 1952.

After retirement, General Crittenberger led the Greater New York Fund for three
years and was principal adviser to Mayor Wagner for civil defense in New York
City.

General Crittenberger is survived by a son, retired Maj. Gen. W.D.
Crittenberger Jr. Two other sons were killed in action, one in World War II and
one in Vietnam. His wife, Josephine, died in 1978.

A chapel service will be held at 10:00 A.M. today at Fort Myer Memorial Chapel,
followed by burial at Arlington National Cemetery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Lieut. Gen. Willis D. Crittenberger

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PEACEFUL MARCH BY IRANIANS IS CONDUCTED IN WASHINGTON

BYLINE: By ERNERST HOLSENDOLPH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 7


More than 200 Iranian students and their supporters conducted a peaceful march
and demonstration here today in support of the Iranian Government and against
their handling by the Washington police during a protest 11 days ago.

The march was allowed despite concern among American officials that the Iranians
were seeking a showdown with the police for propaganda use by Iran.

However, the only conflict was between onlookers and the police, who seized
three Washington area residents for having thrown eggs and other objects at the
marchers. At least one Iranian was struck on the head by a soft-drink bottle,
but he ignored a bleeding wound as he joined in a group prayer in Lafayette
Park.

The police arrested Charles Walker, 45 years old, of suburban Bowie, Md.;
Sanford Gaines, 18, and Christopher John Frenze, 25, both of Washington. Mr.
Walker requested a trial; the others paid $50 fines and were released.

No Basis for Rejecting a Permit

Considering the sensitivity of the march and its possible effect on the hostage
situation, there was some surprise that the police had approved the request for
a demonstration permit by the Moslem Students Association.

Lieut. Larry Soulsby, a police spokesman, said the White House had not been
consulted, and the matter did not even come to the attention of Elijah Rodgers,
Mayor Marion Barry's top aide.

''Basically we had no legal way to turn a permit application away,'' Lieutenant
Soulsby said.  R. S. Brooks, a member of the city's legal office, said the
demonstration represented no ''clear and present danger'' and thus there was no
reason to deny the permit. Asked about the conflict more than a week ago between
opponents and supporters of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, he said:

''The reason for that development was the unexpected clash between the
anti-Khomeini group and the pro-Khomeini group, but we are taking care to keep
them separate now.''

The Iranians and their supporters gathered just before noon on DuPont Circle,
chanting ''Long Live Khomeini!'' and carrying signs that said ''Rise Oppressed
People,'' and ''Media Tell the Truth.''

Police Outnumber Marchers

The demonstrators were outnumbered by a police contingent and a group of mostly
youthful American counterdemonstrators. One youth, who declined to give his
name, carried a carton of eggs and offered them to bystanders, many of whom
accepted.

On the noisy march down Connecticut Avenue, the counterdemonstrators were
applauded by office workers who leaned out of windows on the hot, humid day.

''Russia Out of Afghanistan, C.I.A. Out of Iran!'' the Iranian marchers
proclaimed. ''Go Home! Go Home!'' the counterdemonstrators shouted.

As the procession entered Lafayette Park, across from the White House, the
number of policemen, many on horseback, swelled to a magnitude not seen here
since the demonstrations against the Vietnam War in early 1970's.

The horses cut a path between the marchers and the hundreds of onlookers and
hecklers. Police motorcycles were parked in a circle to seal off the
demonstrators. A phalanx of police officers stood facing the
counterdemonstrators as the marchers gathered in the center.

From time to time eggs were lofted from the rear of the crowd, splashing many of
the Iranians in the face and hair.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 869 words


AROUND THE NATION;
Army Recruiting Chief Opposes Draft, Asks Raises

WASHINGTON, July 7 (AP) - The Army's recruiting chief today opposed any
peacetime draft, asserting that a quality volunteer force could be sustained if
military pay was adequately increased and if Congress revived the G.I. Bill of
Rights education program.

''I think the Army is a good Army,'' General Thurman said. ''The troops are well
motivated. To say the Army is not a quality force is not so.''

General Thurman discounted a recent finding by Defense Department manpower
officials that 46 percent of the Army's recruits last year were in the lower
mental category. This finding was based on a study that found major errors in
the scoring of mental tests.

General Thurman stressed that, in his view, the more important tests that
recruits must undergo to enter the Army were those measuring qualifications in
specific military skills. ''Unless a person is a functional illiterate, most
people are trainable,'' he said.

In arguing for higher pay as an incentive, General Thurman said today's recruits
were receiving the equivalent of about 84 percent of the $3.10 minimum hourly
wage paid in the civilian sector for a 40-hour work week. He also put great
emphasis on the value of postservice educational benefits as an enticement for
volunteers, citing a big drop in recruiting since the program ended.

Solar-Powered Plane Achieves Sustained Flight

EDWARDS AIR FORCE BASE, Calif., Aug. 7 (AP) - The Gossamer Penguin, a fragile
solar-powered airplane, wrote a footnote to aviation history today by bouncing
for two miles above a desert stream bed.  The 15-minute early-morning flight was
piloted by Janice Brown, who is 32 years old.

''This is the first true solar-powered plane with no batteries and no pedals,''
said the plane's designer, Paul MacCready. He said that earlier solar aircraft
stored electricity in batteries, while the 68-pound Penguin used solar cells to
convert sunlight into electricity.

Mr. MacCready also designed the pedal-powered Gossamer Albatross, which won a
$213,000 prize last year when it flew across the English Channel.

Mrs. Brown, a schoolteacher and an experienced glider pilot, said that the plane
hit a top speed of 16.5 miles an hour and once climbed as high as 12 feet as it
covered almost exactly two miles today at Dryden Flight Research Center at
Edwards Air Force Base. The plane, with its aluminum tube frame covered with
paper-thin clear plastic, resembles a giant insect.

Garwood Judge to Examine Papers Released by Nixon

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Aug. 7 (AP) - Former President Richard M. Nixon has agreed
to release some of his Presidential papers, which may be relevant to the
court-martial of Pfc. Robert Garwood of the Marine Corps, a military judge said
today. Private Garwood is charged with desertion and collaboration with the
enemy in Vietnam.

Col. R.E. Switzer, the presiding judge, said today that he would read the papers
in private and give the defense any of them relating to the Nixon
Administration's attitude toward prosecution of prisoners of war returning from
Vietnam.

The defense is asking that charges against Mr. Garwood be dismissed on the
ground that the Nixon Administration's

National news appears on pages A12-20; political news

on pages A14-16.
policy was not to prosecute any former prisoner of war for misconduct.
Meanwhile, the judge tentatively set Aug. 18 for the beginning of jury
selection.

Ohio Town Stores Robbed As Police Strike Continues

MANSFIELD, Ohio, Aug. 7 (UPI) -Thieves plundered stores and businesses here
today, keeping a handful of police officers working around the clock in the
third day of a strike by the city's 81-member police force.

''We had numerous burglaries and robberies all Wednesday night and early
today,'' said Capt. Wayne Carr. ''I would say it is double what we normally
have. But it's pretty quiet right now.''

Captain Carr and Police Chief Matthew Benick led an unspecified number of other
officers, the only ones on duty.  The strike was called after the police worked
since May 1 without a contract and after the City Council voted to repeal an
agreement with the Fraternal Order of Police to enter into binding arbitration
on contract matters. Negotiations continued today, with progress reported.

Appeals Court Upholds Busing for Los Angeles

LOS ANGELES, Aug. 7 (UPI) - The state appeals court upheld mandatory busing in
the nation's second largest school district yesterday, but it temporarily set
aside parts of a plan calling for multi-ethnic integration of some schools.

The 12-page ruling left in doubt the number of students or schools to be
integrated when the new school year, the district's third under the
court-ordered program, begins next September.

Fred Okrand, a spokesmen for the American Civil Liberties Union, said his group
and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People would appeal
the ruling to the State Supreme Court in the hope of restoring Superior Court
Judge Paul Egly's original plan, which would have significantly expanded busing.
But Mr. Okrand said that he was pleased the appeals court had enforced the
judge's basic program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 8, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JORDAN URGES BLACKS TO USE THEIR POLITICAL STRENGTH

BYLINE: By SHEILA RULE

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 700 words


Delegates to the National Urban League conference that ended here Wednesday
returned home with a charge from the organization's president, Vernon E. Jordan
Jr., to make black ballots a significant force in this election year.

In a recorded message delivered at the close of the organization's 70th
conference, which included appearances by the four major Presidential
candidates, Mr. Jordan urged delegates to do more than ''just talk black
political strength.''

''Let's show it, let's demonstrate it, let's prove it,'' said Mr.  Jordan, who
remains at New York Hospital/Cornell Medical Center as the result of a gunshot
wound he suffered in May in Fort Wayne, Ind.

Mr. Jordan went on: ''Therefore, it is the responsibility of urban leaguers to
go down from the mountaintop experience of this conference into the valleys of
the ghettos, the black and poor neighborhoods, with voter registration programs,
citizenship education programs and get-out-the-vote programs, so that, come
Election Day, black political power will be the decisive factor in the political
leadership of this country for the next four years.''

Last Year's Theme Repeated

Mr. Jordan's appeal repeated a theme he expressed last year to the largely
middle-class conference, one that is often used by other black leaders.

Politics overshadowed other events at the conference, with appearances by
President Carter, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, who is
challenging Mr. Carter for the Democratic Presidential nomination; Ronald
Reagan, the Republican nominee, and Representative John B. Anderson of Illinois,
the independent Presidential candidate.

John E. Jacob, executive vice president of the league and its spokesman in Mr.
Jordan's absence, said the nonpartisan organization would mobilize its 116 local
affiliates around the nation for an effort to register and educate voters.

In addition, Mr. Jacob said the group is participating in ''Operation Big
Vote,'' an effort by 70 national organizations to increase voting among the
estimated 17 million blacks in the nation who are eligible. The organizations
hope to increase voting by 20 percent in heavily black states including New
York. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the
nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization, also hopes to register at
least two million black voters this year.

Carter-Reagan Debate Proposed

In another attempt to reach black voters, Black Enterprise Magazine and the
Joint Center for Political Studies have invited Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan to
participate in a debate between Oct. 11 and 20 on issues of concern to blacks
and other minorities. A spokesman for Earl G. Graves, publisher of the magazine,
said yesterday that Mr.  Reagan had not yet responded but that White House aides
had said that the President was eager to participate. The spokesman said Mr.
Carter will not make a final decision, however, until after the Democratic
National Convention next week.

Black Enterprise, which has its headquarters in New York City, is a national
monthly publication that focuses on business and economic development issues,
while the Joint Center for Political Studies is a Washington-based, nonpartisan
organization that encourages minority participation in politics.

More than 16,000 people participated in the urban league conference, the largest
attendance ever at the national meeting. They went to workshops on such topics
as the relationship between educational deficiencies and juvenile delinquency,
employment, the quality of life in inner cities, the impact of crime on health,
coalitions among black women and problems of Vietnam veterans.

In addition, the organization released the first report based on its Black Pulse
Survey, which polled 3,000 black households nationwide last fall and winter. The
survey found that blacks ranked unemployment first among their problems,
followed by discrimination and inflation. Another report, titled ''The Myth of
Income Cushions for Blacks,'' said that 70 percent of all unemployed blacks
never received any jobless benefits and that more than half of all poor black
households received no welfare assistance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 9, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 852 words


AROUND THE NATION;
3-Mile Island Repair Put At $760 Million for 3 Years

HARRISBURG, Pa., Aug. 8 (UPI) - Officials of the Three Mile Island nuclear plant
said today that restoration would cost about $760 million and take at least six
years, more money and time than originally estimated.

William G. Kuhns, chairman of the General Public Utilities Corporation, which
owns the company that operated the crippled plant, said the revised cost, $100
million more for decontamination, was a result of new assessments.

He said that the decontamination would last through 1983 and cost about $500
million, with $260 million more needed to restore Three Mile Island as a nuclear
power generator.

He said the utility company's recovery plan was limited by several factors
beyond the company's control, including regulatory requirements, public protests
over cleanup techniques and the unresolved matter of disposing of solid and
liquid radioactive wastes left by the accident on March 28, 1979.

Police Vote Ends Strike In Northern Ohio City

MANSFIELD, Ohio, Aug. 8 (AP) -Striking members of the Mansfield Police
Department voted today to accept a new contract offered by the city and end a
four-day walkout that left this city of 47,000 people with minimal protection.

The officers approved the pact by 3 to 1, city officials said after a
three-and-a-half-hour closed session. Earlier, the

National news appears on pages 5-9 and 24; political

news, pages 12 and 20.
City Council met to discuss the latest contract offer to the 81-member force.

False fire alarms, vandalism and break-ins have plagued the northern Ohio city
in the walkout. Police supervisors and sheriff's deputies have been handling law
enforcement.

At issue were wages, manpower and union membership. There were no immediate
details of the final agreement, but the city had offered a 7 percent increase
this year, the offer it made other city workers, including firefighters.

The police had asked an 8 to 10 percent increase, plus a cost-ofliving clause.
The average police officer had earned $14,000 a year. The police had been
working without a contract since May 1.

Los Angeles Told by Court To Begin Busing Program

LOS ANGELES, Aug. 8 (AP) - A Superior Court judge has ordered busing for
students in more than a third of Los Angeles' grade schools, a day after an
appeals court struck down a desegregation plan that would have involved fewer
white students.

Judge Paul Egly yesterday ordered the school board to respond to the new plan.
The judge's earlier plan considered schools desegregated if they contained
mixtures of whites, blacks, Hispanic persons and Orientals. But the State Court
of Appeals ruled Wednesday that the proportion of all minority students to white
students should be considered.

Judge Egly said rejection of his concept would lengthen bus rides and lessen
desegregation. The new plan calls for busing in 175 of the district's 497
elementary and junior high schools. School board members said they would
continue the appeal process.

The timetable for the plan includes three days next week for comment from
parents. The plan would take effect next month.

Decision on Superjet Delayed Again by U.S.

WASHINGTON, Aug. 8 (UPI) - The Federal Aviation Administrator, Langhorne M.
Bond, has once more delayed a final decision on approval of the newest McDonnell
Douglas DC-9, the Super 80.

A notice was published yesterday in the Federal Register announcing that the
plane, the first of a new generation of twin-engine jetliners, would not be
issued a certificate before Aug. 18. Any new model needs a certificate from the
Federal agency.

The manufacturer had hoped to begin deliveries last month, but two serious
accidents in test flight operations pushed back the certification process.

Meanwhile, the Air Line Pilots Association has filed suit in Federal District
Court in Washington demanding that the agency be forced to release documents
evaluating the Super 80.

It is a ''stretch'' version of earlier DC-9s and will carry 155 passengers.

Jury Selection Scheduled For Garwood Court-Martial

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Aug. 8 (UPI) - After almost nine months of pretrial
hearings, the judge has scheduled jury selection for Aug. 18 in the
court-martial of Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps, who is accused of
desertion and collaboration with the enemy in Vietnam.

Yesterday the judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, recessed pretrial hearings in the case
until next week, when he is to hear further defense arguments to dismiss.

Private Garwood's attorneys contend that President Nixon ordered the dropping of
collaboration charges against some American servicemen who were returned from
prisoner-of-war camps in 1973.

Colonel Switzer will review three documents from Mr. Nixon's papers that, the
defense says, may prove its assertion that he granted an amnesty that should be
extended to Private Garwood. He was 19 years old when he was taken prisoner at
Danang in 1965. Other prisoners have accused him of helping his captors to
indoctrinate, interrogate, inform on and guard Americans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 9, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS IN CONGRESS FEARCARTER MAY HURT THE TICKET

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 8


Democrats on Capitol Hill are increasingly fearful that if President Carter does
as badly this fall as the polls now indicate, he would drag dozens of
Congressmen down to defeat with him.

Democratic Congressmen and their advisers generally believe that after the
convention in New York Mr. Carter will improve his standing in the public
opinion polls, which now show him running third in some states. Moreover, as the
electorate grows more independent, a Presidential candidate's coattails have
less effect on others on the party's ballot.

Still, the tide seems to be running so strongly against the President now that
many Democrats fear he is bound to hurt the rest of the ticket.

Ralph Murphine, a political consultant who advises Democrats in Congress, said:
''It has all the earmarks of a disaster. It's enough to scare you to death.''

This fear was underlined today when the Democratic Study Group released a series
of polls showing Mr. Carter running far behind Ronald Reagan, the Republican
nominee, in many districts now held by Democrats. According to the study group,
an organization of House liberals, the President was running first in only 10 of
50 districts surveyed and his level of support had dropped by 30 percent in
three months.

'Worst Fears' Are Confirmed

The polls were taken before Mr. Carter's Monday night news conference, which
seems to have improved his popular standing somewhat, but they still sent a
shudder through Capitol Hill Democrats. ''This confirms the worst fears of how
many seats we might lose,'' said Richard Conlon, staff director of the study
group.  ''We're going to lose more than we anticipated.''

Democrats now have a 60-seat margin in the House. Party strategists believe that
only about 40 of those seats are vulnerable to a landslide, so there is no fear
of losing control. But in the Senate, where the party holds a nine-seat margin,
the loss of five or six seats could jeopardize the party's control.

The Democrats' concern has been heightened by a national advertising campaign
sponsored by the Republicans that blames the Democratic Congress for many of the
nation's ills. ''One variable in all this,'' a Capitol Hill strategist said,
''is whether people are willing to assign enough blame to Congress so they would
vote out the incumbent.''

A result of this fear is that many Democrats have been trying to put as much
distance as possible between themselves and the President. Several dozen
lawmakers, including the Senate majority leader, Robert C. Byrd of West
Virginia, have publicly backed calls for an ''open'' convention and opposed a
rule that would guarantee Mr. Carter's nomination.

Few Congressmen believe that they have any chance of blocking the President, and
some are supporting the convention rule to free delegates from their earlier
commitments because they think it might strengthen Mr. Carter's political
stature. In any case, they believe that an independent stance makes for good
politics back home.

''Our recommendation to our clients,'' said Joe Rothstein, a political
consultant, ''is not just to get involved with the open convention move, but to
get aggressively involved.''

Many Democrats, even if they fear a Republican sweep in the fall, are not taking
such advice. Four members of the Black Caucus, for example, met with Mr. Carter
and reiterated their support last Friday, the same day that 107 Democratic
Congressmen signed a statement opposing an ''open'' convention.

Still, in a recent meeting with aides to many of the 20 Democratic Senators who
are running for re-election, Presidential assistants suggested that the entire
Democratic ticket share mailing lists, phone banks and headquarters this fall.
One of the Senators' aides recalled his response this way:

''I said to them, 'If you were running for the Senate and you had 60 percent,
and a Presidential candidate came along who had 20 percent, would you want to
share phone banks with that guy? Would you want to run with that guy?' ''

No Praises Offered

On the campaign trail, Democrats often defend the President with something less
than total devotion. ''I'm very honest with the electorate,'' said
Representative James Blanchard of Michigan. ''I say, 'Yeah, I'm just as
disappointed with Carter as you are. But I won't recommend Ronald Reagan.' ''

Capitol Hill was shaken when a recent Louis Harris survey indicated that
Americans were ready to vote for a Republican Congress for the first time since
1952, and soundings taken for individual candidates have been just as gloomy.
One poll-taker, who surveyed 18 closely contested Congressional districts around
the country and averaged the results, found that Mr. Carter was running third,
with 23 percent of the vote. Mr. Reagan had 34 percent and Representative John
B.  Anderson, the independent candidate, had 25 percent.

The issue is hard to quantify and varies considerably from state to state, but
several experts on voting behavior estimate that Mr.  Carter could cost many
Democrats 5 to 10 percentage points. The effect would be greater in such states
as Indiana, where ticket splitting is discouraged by the mechanics of the voting
machines.

Concerned About Coattails

In an era of rising educational levels and declining party loyalty, more voters
are splitting their tickets. But this year, many Democrats worry that Mr.
Reagan's coattails could grow longer for several reasons:

- The effectiveness of the advertising campaign against Democratic lawmakers is
enhanced by Mr. Carter's perceived weakness. ''He just adds a lot of credibility
to the idea that Democrats don't know how to run the country,'' said Gary
Hoggard, a polling specialist who advises Democratic candidates.

- The issues of the early 1970's, from Vietnam and civil rights to Watergate,
have now largely been replaced by economic concerns, and the Republicans seem to
be capitalizing on this by emphasizing fiscal responsibility.

- Mr. Reagan is an ideological candidate, ''an embodiment of a cause,'' as one
Capital Hill aide put it, and thus might be more effective than President Ford
was in persuading voters ''to give him a Congress he can work with.''

- The antipathy toward Mr. Carter will keep many Democratic voters home.
Accordingly, many Democratic Congressmen are hoping that Mr.  Anderson will run
strongly in their states because they feel that he could draw some of those
disaffected Democrats to the polls.

Representative Doug Walgren of Pennsylvania summed up the attitude of many
Democrats when he said of Mr. Carter, ''We don't need his enemies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 9, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VETERAN DENIED HELP AT HOSPITAL IS SEIZED AS HIS MOTHER'S KILLER

BYLINE: By JILL SMOLOWE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 482 words


A 36-year-old man was arrested yesterday 15 minutes after his mother was found
beaten to death with a hammer and his father was injured at their home in
Bayside Hills, Queens.

On Tuesday, the man had sought and was denied treatment at a Long Island
veterans' hospital where he is a mental outpatient, according to District
Attorney John J. Santucci of Queens.

The man, John T. O'Shea, was carrying a hammer when he was arrested two blocks
from his home, the police said. He was arraigned last night in State Supreme
Court in Kew Gardens, Queens, on murder and assault charges.

Mr. O'Shea had been found sitting in a parked car ''in a despondent,
unresponsive state'' late Sunday evening by a police officer in Troy, N.Y., Mr.
Santucci said. He was taken to the Samaritan Hospital in Troy Monday afternoon
and was driven home by his parents the next day.

Mr. O'Shea, a Vietnam War-era veteran, then sought admission to the Veterans
Administration Hospital in Northport, L.I., and was told there were no beds
available, Mr. Santucci said. Hospital officials, he said, determined that Mr.
O'Shea was not an ''emergency case,'' and did not seek to have him placed in a
less crowded facility.

Mother Beaten With Hammer

Ann Stattel, a spokesman for the hospital, declined to comment on which branch
of the armed services Mr. O'Shea had been with, whether he had served in Vietnam
and whether he had received treatment prior to July 1978, when he was admitted
to the Northport Hospital after a monthlong stay at Creedmoor Psychiatric Center
in Queens.

Mr. O'Shea allegedly entered his parents' bedroom at 58-27 219th Street at 6:30
A.M. and beat his mother, Marion, with a hammer that he frequently carried with
him, the police said.

After striking his father, William, on the head, Mr. O'Shea pursued his mother
out of the two-story brick house into the driveway where he continued to beat
her, the police said.

A next-door neighbor, who refused to give her name, said she had seen the
driveway tussle and called the police. ''I heard screams for what seemed like
hours,'' she said.

The police found Mrs. O'Shea clad in her nightgown in the driveway, battered to
death. Her 66-year-old husband, a retired Con Edison employee, was found by the
police in his bedroom.

Along 219th Street, where most of the residents are retired couples who have
lived there for decades, Mrs. O'Shea's screams had gone unnoticed by most of her
neighbors, who said the hum of their airconditioners had stifled the sound.

Mary Kast, who lives across the street, said, ''John has had a history of mental
breakdowns for five years.'' Several other neighbors said the younger Mr. O'Shea
had been subdued by police officers two years ago when he ''went berserk'' in
the attic, and had been taken to Northport for treatment. They described the
tall veteran as muscular, quiet, shy and ''in need of help.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Mary and Edward Kast

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS BY AND ABOUT CANDIDATES

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 49, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 971 words


Convention-watchers who wish to read about a candidate's views as well as
hearing about them through the voices of anchors on television can turn to some
current or still-in-print books by or about the candidates and the Presidency.

To begin with, students of tea leaves may wonder: Does it help a Presidential
aspirant to write a book with a title that ends in a question mark?

Consider: Jimmy Carter wrote ''Why Not the Best?'' in 1975 (Broadman Publishing
in hardcover, Bantam Books in paperback). It sold very well and is available in
regular, de luxe and mass-market editions.

Ronald Reagan wrote ''Where's the Rest of Me?'' in 1965 (Duell, Sloan & Pearce).
The Republican candidate later provided his own lighthearted criticism about
what turned out to be a flop: ''My book was not a best-seller. That's strange,
too, because it is the best book I've ever written - it is also the only book
I've ever written.''

More Candidates and Books

More recent books expounding Mr. Reagan's ideas are ''Ronald Reagan's Call to
Action'' by Mr. Reagan and Charles Hobbs (Warner Books) and ''Sincerely, Ronald
Reagan,'' edited by Helen Von Damm (Berkley Books, 1980).

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, has written a couple of
works in print, ''This Day and Generation'' (Simon & Schuster, 1979); a
text-and-picture book derived from his record, edited by Henry Steele Commager
with a foreword by Archibald MacLeish, and ''In Critical Condition: The Crisis
in America's Health Care'' (Pocket Books, 1973).

The two leading independent candidates, Representative John B.  Anderson,
Republican of Illinois, and Barry Commoner, also are on book record.

Representative Anderson wrote ''Between Two Worlds: A Congressman's Choice''
(Zondervan Publishing House, Grand Rapids, Mich., 1970). In the foreword to what
is essentially a political autobiography that stresses the need for
independence, he comments on the literary life: ''I have learned that the leap
from the political stump to the author's chair is fraught with great peril.''

Assessing Carter

Professor Commoner is, of course, a seasoned writer, especially in the areas of
his expertise, the preservation of the environment and the need to help the
less-privileged in the economy. Among his recent books are ''The Politics of
Energy'' (Knopf, 1979), ''The Closing Circle'' and ''The Poverty of Power''
(Knopf and Bantam Books).

A number of other current books assess recent Chief Executives.  President
Carter fares poorly in just about every one of the new books written by
historians, journalists and political scientists.

''Jimmy Carter: In Search of the Great White House'' by Betty Glad (W.W. Norton,
published this month) is a well-documented biography by a professor of political
science at the University of Illinois. The author concludes:

''The moral direction that great leaders provide is based on some deeper
appreciation of the requirements of justice in their time, along with an ability
to tap the emotions and the interest of their people to win their support for
this larger vision. The sad thing for Jimmy Carter and maybe for America as a
whole, is that for all his high ambition, he does not understand this.''

Promising 'the Best'

''In the Absence of Power: Governing America'' by Haynes Johnson (Viking, 1980)
is a consideration of the Presidency, with emphasis on the Carter
Administration. The author, a Washington journalist, writes:

''The promise of Jimmy Carter's Presidency hasn't been fulfilled, but the
political challenge remains the same. It is to lead America into an
understanding of the realities of late-20th-century life.''

''The President Who Failed'' by Clark R. Mollenhoff (Macmillan, 1980), with a
foreword by Jack Anderson, is an indictment of the Carter Presidency. The author
says:

''The tragedy of the Carter Administration was that the President failed to live
up to the ideals that he preached on the campaign trail in 1976. He did not
select 'the best' men and women for office from a standpoint of either
competency or higher standards of honesty.''

Other Times, Other Presidents

''Jimmy Carter: An Interpretive Biography'' by Bruce Mazlish and Edwin Diamond
(Simon & Schuster, 1979) is a character study by two Massachusetts Institute of
Technology professors. In a generally even-handed analysis, the authors predict,
''Carter may not have a second term in which to prove that he can measure up to
the role of President.''

''Palace Politics: An Inside Account of the Ford Years'' by Robert T. Hartman
(McGraw-Hill, 1980), Gerald R. Ford's White House chief of staff, stresses the
theme that Mr. Ford was a good President and that he would have survived in
office had he put in his own aides instead of being stuck with Richard M.
Nixon's discredited leftovers.

''Lyndon: An Oral Biography'' by Merle Miller (Putnam, 1980) results from
hundreds of interviews with family, friends and political associates in the
highly readable style of Mr. Miller's oral biography of Harry S. Truman, ''Plain
Speaking.'' From the Great Society to the Vietnam War, the book recalls many of
Lyndon B.  Johnson's achievements and especially his ability to work with
Congress.

Examining the Pulse

''Of Kennedys and Kings'' by Harris Wofford (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1980) is
an authoritative appraisal of John F. Kennedy and the Kennedy circle and the
events of the 60's. Mr. Wofford was special assistant to President Kennedy for
civil rights and later associate director of the Peace Corps.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION IN SUMMARY;
by Caroline Rand Herron and Michael Wright;
An Argument For Compensating A-Test Victims

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1134 words


The leap between owning up to and paying up for past mistakes is one Washington
has not made when it comes to persons exposed to nuclear weapons testing in
Nevada in the 1950's and 60's. Last week, however, Congress waded in, with a
report on ''The Forgotten Guinea Pigs'' and brought Federal authorities nearer
the brink of making massive reparations they hope to avoid.

The firm nudge appears in a House subcommittee recommendation that legislation
be passed providing ''prompt and adequate compensation'' for the civilian
victims of the A-bomb testing program. It joins similar proposals now before the
House Judiciary Committee, and in a Senate measure advocating blanket Government
liability for damages to persons residing near the atomic test site who
developed certain illnesses.

Such legislation, however, may encourage expensive compensation litigation, at a
time when some 965 claims for $2 billion in damages already have been filed in
Federal Court in Salt Lake City by residents of Utah, Arizona and Nevada. These
lawsuits, say Federal attorneys, could in turn establish judicial precedents for
Government responsibility in other incidents - the use of the herbicides in
Vietnam, for example, exposure to which, say veterans, has crippled and killed.

For residents of Love Canal, chemical companies are being blamed for the
contamination, but the government relied on for reparation.  Now, state and
Federal disputes have combined not only to limit financial aid, but to delay its
distribution. Governor Carey's administration last week admitted its
unwillingness to accept the current Federal offer providing $22 million to
resettle 800 families still living in the contaminated section of Niagara Falls.
The refusal leaves the two parties ''negotiating'' and the Love Canal residents
waiting.

An Uncomfortable Lead for Talmadge

After a member of Congress has had a brush with the law or otherwise stumbled,
it's not unusual for his constituents to rally round on election day. Last week,
though, many of Georgia's Democrats gave Senator Herman E. Talmadge a cold
shoulder.

In his current six-year term, Mr. Talmadge has been divorced (nastily), treated
for alcoholism and denounced by the Senate after an investigation of his
finances. Back home, Mr. Talmadge campaigned as something of a regional asset
that had to be preserved, suggesting that it would be plain dumb to not re-elect
the chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee. His frequently run television
spots blamed most of his difficulties on bad luck or associates who had betrayed
him. On primary day, in a five-man race, Mr. Talmadge got a bare 40 percent of
the vote.

He now faces a runoff election on Aug. 26. His opponent will be Lieut. Gov. Zell
Miller, who has repeatedly attacked the Senator for bringing ''shame and
dishonor on the state.'' Mr. Miller's message appeared to have clicked with
city-dwellers, union workers, blacks, and most newcomers to the state - voters
who didn't know, or didn't care, about Mr. Talmadge's seniority on Capitol Hill
or the half century his family has been deeply involved in state affairs.

As Georgia politics is played, an incumbent forced into a runoff is about to
lose his job. But it has also been generally true that any conservative matched
against a liberal - the label, whether he likes it or not, that is frequently
attched to Mr. Miller - almost always comes out on top.

Other incumbent Senators had better luck. Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, and
Thomas F. Eagleton, Democrat of Missouri, easily won renomination in primaries
last week.

No Abscam Offense Is the Best Defense

''Any member of Congress approached by agents conducting a bribery 'sting'
operation can simply say no,'' Judge Jon O. Newman said last week. He spoke for
the United States Court of Appeals, which rejected motions to dismiss Abscam
indictments on grounds that - among other things - the constitutional rights of
an accused Representative had been violated by the abridgement of the separation
of powers.

Thus, the first of at least six trials growing out of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation's Arab-Scam inquiry is still scheduled to begin tomorrow in
Federal District Court in Brooklyn. The defendants include Representative
Michael O. Myers, Democrat of Philadelphia, accused of taking $50,000 for
promising to help Middle East business executives enter and remain in the United
States, and three other men charged with sharing the money.

Three appeals court judges unanimously upheld rulings in the lower court against
dismissal. But the judge who made them, Jacob Mishler, withdrew from the case to
avoid, he said, ''the appearence of impropriety.'' Mayor Angelo J. Errichetti of
Camden, N.J., one of Mr. Myers' co-defendants, had challenged the judge's
impartiality and charged that Judge Mishler participated in a ''sham
proceeding'' in January 1979 intended ''to protect the cover of Abdul
Enterprises as an F.B.I. undercover operation.''

Before he withdrew, Judge Mishler observed that the conduct of Federal officials
who leaked information about the bribery and conspiracy investigation ''was
grossly improper and possibly illegal.'' But he denied a motion for dismissal on
the ground of ''prejudicial pre-indictment publicity generated by the
Government.''

Army Blames Exam, Not the Exam-Taker

Critics have pointed to low test scores of recruits as evidence that the
volunteer armed forces aren't getting enough bright people.  Secretary of the
Army Clifford L. Alexander Jr. argues that tests aren't everything, and last
week he disclosed that one basic exam - the Armed Forces Qualification Test -
may soon mean nothing at all.

Mr. Alexander said he had ordered the test scores removed from field personnel
records where, he maintained, they had been used to decide duty and training
assignments on the basis of ''mental categories'' that were unfair and
unscientific. The Secretary said he was studying recommendations for new tests
that would more accurately measure a soldier's potential, and looking into
better ways of recruiting and assigning personnel.

A recent Pentagon report said tests showed that 46 percent of those accepted
into the Army fell into the lowest of four mental aptitude categories. Mr.
Alexander insists that the recruits are as capable as their civilian peers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Caroline Rand Herron and Michael Wright

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FRENCH 'UNDERSTANDING' OF AMERICAN POLITICS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


Sam PARIS - No American can get through a dinner party in France this summer
without being asked: How can an actor possibly be nominated for the Presidency?
The visitor is assured that in Europe such a choice could not even be
envisioned.

The questioning continues: Why does a country that produces such impressive
leaders in economic, scientific and cultural life offer such a limited and poor
choice of Presidential candidates? Without waiting for answers, the French
launch into their own: Americans are ignorant about politics, probably because
their newspapers are so uninformative; the dominant corporations insist on
mediocrities who will pose no challenge to their tranquility; these same
corporations rule out meaningful choices by suppressing Socialist and Communist
movements. Voila!

To enliven conversation after dessert, this visitor likes to argue the reverse
of the above propositions. First, why should an actor be barred from pursuing
another career, including one in politics?  Should some jobs, like servicing
airplane engines (Georges Marchais, the Communist Party leader), making pastry
(Jacques Duclos, former Communist leader) be considered adequate preparation for
Presidential candidates but not the work of the theater or cinema?

In France, the local doctor is a classic choice for mayor, then Deputy, and
occasionally Prime Minister. But medicine has no more to do with politics than
the theater or pastry-making - or journalism, teaching, and the military, for
that matter.

Furthermore, European Socialist leaders are not reluctant to be photographed in
the company of Melina Mercouri at international conferences. Come to think of
it, I have never heard any criticism of Miss Mercouri's participation in Greek
politics.

As for an enlightened citizenry, public-opinion polls show that Americans tend
to pay somewhat more attention to political news of any kind, domestic or
foreign, than do Europeans. (A much larger percentage of Americans read
political news than the French, specifically.) There is only one outstanding
newspaper in France, Le Monde - whose journalistic standards, moreover, are not
without flaws. It is hardly possible to form sophisticated judgments by reading
the other newspapers, especially in the provinces.

Quality of leadership is difficult to assess, but by and large American
political leaders have compared favorably to their European counterparts;
consider such figures as Marshal Petain, Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, and
Josef Stalin, as well as lesser democratic lights like Edouard Daladier, Neville
Chamberlain, and others now in office.

And do you really believe, I ask my French friends and colleagues, that what the
Americans need above all is a replica of the French Socialist Party (now going
through another dogfight among rival contenders, and in a state of total
ideological disarray), or a transatlantic equivalent of Georges Marchais's
buffoonery, for goodness' sake? Finally, I suggest to my dinner partners that
the weakness of Socialist and Communist Parties in the United States is due
mainly to working-class choices at critical periods before World War I (when
Samuel Gompers turned trade unions away from Socialist intellectuals) and during
the New Deal. I can sing for my supper as well as the next fellow!

There is a profound crisis of the American political system today -but for
reasons that Europeans find almost impossible to grasp.  Nothing in their
political experience enables Europeans to understand how the strengthening of
Congress in the aftermath of Vietnam and Watergate has plunged the polity into
paralysis. Nor can Europeans appreciate how the judiciary has been able to
intrude into the political process, creating anarchy through its veto power.
Unable to defend recent developments myself, I no longer find it fun to explode
old myths.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Bernard E. Brown, professor of political science at the Graduate School of the
City University of New York, is spending the year in France as a Fulbright
professor. He is the author of ''Intellectuals and Other Traitors.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon of Frenchman and Uncle

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LOBBY LBJ THE PERFORMER

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS; Anthony Lewis is a columnist for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1532 words


LYNDON An Oral Biography.  By Merle Miller.  645 pp. New York: G.P. Putnam's
Sons. $17.95.

ON a night in August 1958, I sat in the Press Gallery watching the Senate debate
a collection of bills designed to punish the Supreme Court for recent decisions
protecting citizens suspected of radical ideas. The bills had already passed the
House and seemed about to go through the Senate. The sponsors, those classic
red-baiters John Marshall Butler of Maryland and William E. Jenner of Indiana,
screamed for a final vote. But the Senate Majority Leader, Lyndon B.  Johnson,
moved to adjourn, demanded a role-call vote and ostentatiously began to write
down the names of those who opposed him. The Senate adjourned.

As I left, Johnson came by with Senator Hubert Humphrey in tow. He grabbed me
with his other hand and took us to his office. There he lectured Humphrey on how
to beat those bills. It was a two-hour monologue; Humphrey got in only a few
sentences.

''Talk, Hubert, but don't let them call it a filibuster when you liberals are
trying to stop filibusters. Keep talking to the issues.  When they strike you on
one cheek, turn the other.''

Here Johnson took his huge hand and slapped himself, brutally hard, on one cheek
and then the other. At another point he suddenly stopped, whirled around and
pointed to a portrait of Franklin D.  Roosevelt that was behind his desk:
''Look. Look at that chin!''

It was The Treatment, and Humphrey came out of it ready to do exactly what he
had been urged. In fact, it turned out to be unnecessary. The next day Johnson
somehow found the votes to kill all the Supreme Court bills. I remember only one
detail: Johnson persuading the Railroad Brotherhoods to get conservative Wallace
Bennett of Utah to vote with him.

That is the Lyndon Johnson mainly on display in this remarkable book: the
legislative genius, the manipulator of men, the performer.  And most of it for
good ends: responsible, liberal, humane. So many years and so much bitterness
have passed since Johnson played that role, that many forget, remembering only
Vietnam.

Merle Miller first essayed an oral memoir with Harry Truman in ''Plain
Speaking.'' Here he has done something more difficult: putting together the
memories others have of Lyndon Johnson. From Mr. Miller's own taped interviews
and hundreds of others, he has pieced together firsthand pictures of Johnson
from birth to death, linking the quoted passages with his own brief explanation
and comment. The result is a coherent, sensitive, fascinating biography.

The first thing to say is that it is a moving book, and often uproariously
funny. Johnson was a Rabelaisian figure, and even those who knew him best will
find amazing new anecdotes. Here is Johnson visiting the Pope and producing a
present: ''Luci wanted me to give you this.'' L.B.J. whipped out a jackknife to
cut through the wrappings, spilling excelsior all over the Pope's rugs, and
pulled out the gift. It was a huge plastic bust of Johnson.

As a freshman member of the House, Johnson arranged with James H.  Rowe Jr. and
Grace Tully of the White House staff to have President Roosevelt give Sam
Rayburn a surprise birthday party. Mr. Rowe remembers:

''The thing I noticed when they started taking pictures was that there was
Roosevelt, and there was Rayburn, and the fellow in the middle behind them was
Lyndon Johnson. I began to think I had really met an operator. Johnson had even
bought a Texas Stetson for Roosevelt and gave it to him. The point is -Lyndon
did it all, down to the last detail. He always paid terrific attention to
detail. The thing that amazed me most about Johnson through the years was how he
did everything himself. He never trusted anybody else to do anything.''

There are stories about his telephoning. When a White House aide went to a
restaurant for lunch, he would be called to the phone to hear the President ask
what he was eating: ''Now have you salted and peppered it?'' Erv S. Duggan sees
the phone calls, shrewdly, as ''a way of being in control.''

The famous vulgarity may also have been, in part, a method of control: Bring
Douglas Dillon into the bathroom with you, and he has a little less independent
dignity. The book adds one unforgettable scene to the lore of Lyndon. He is
lying on his side in bed in the White House, flicking channels on three
television sets, talking with Mrs. Johnson and Bill Moyers, dictating to a
secretary - while a nurse gives him an enema.

The most moving passages remind us how much he really cared about the poor and
the black. Passing civil rights legislation seems relatively straightforward
now, but when Johnson did it, the obstacles of history and politics were
overwhelming. In 1964, when he wanted the Senate to pass John Kennedy's sweeping
bill without change, he telephoned Humphrey and said, ''You liberals will never
deliver. ... No, your bomb-throwing friends will be out making speeches to the
already converted - for a fee. And, Hubert, I'm not sure that you yourself ...''

Humphrey: ''He had sized me up. He knew very well that I would say, 'Damn you,
I'll show you.' One thing about Johnson was that even when he conned me I knew
what was happening to me. It was kind of enjoyable. I mean I knew what was going
on, and he knew I knew.''

Unhappily, that was not in the end Lyndon Johnson's relationship with Hubert
Humphrey. Johnson effectively broke Humphrey as a human being and a political
character. When Humphrey finally was the nominee for President in 1968, he had
become so dependent on Johnson that for fear of L.B.J.'s disapproval he would
not speak out on Vietnam until too late - and then too little. That cost him the
election and cost the country more dearly than we can yet reckon.

That side of Lyndon Johnson gets muted treatment here. We are reminded of the
way he drove his staff without mercy. But we are not told of the deliberate
humiliations to which he subjected Humphrey at the 1964 convention, pretending
that others might be his runningmate, and afterward when Humphrey was Vice
President.

On Vietnam, similarly, we get hints of Johnson's willful blindness to unpleasant
facts, his susceptibility to the fantasies spun by Walt Rostow and others. But
there is no sense of the giant obsession that overcame him and finally tore the
country apart, of the lies and evasions on economic policy that set us on the
path of destructive inflation. His withdrawal speech of March 31, 1968, is
presented with tearful sympathy - but without awareness that Johnson continued
to hobble the peace negotiations until Richard Nixon had won the election and
carried us into four more years of war.

The warts are here, all right. Mr. Miller is understanding but candid, for
example, about Johnson's attitude toward truth. He distorted even his own
childhood, painting it as more deprived than it really was - to attract
sympathy, Horace Busby suggests. Another long-time aide, George Reedy, his White
House press secretary, says that L.B.J.'s trouble with the press stemmed from
the fact that he ''had so little respect for the integrity of words. I think he
thought words were something you used as weapons. ... He thought a good story
was something that began, 'Lyndon Baines Johnson is a calm, collected statesman
who is the finest representative of the American dream.' ''

That was part of the man all along. What Mr. Miller and his sources do not
explain is how it went wrong, how what was once colorful and amusing became
tragic. Perhaps no one can. For the Johnson hyperbole, which had always been so
rooted in reality, turned into fantasy. At the end, according to Doris Kearns's
''Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream,'' he was suggesting that James Reston's
columns on Vietnam were inspired by the Soviet ambassador.

But it is enough to have a book that pungently and accurately portrays the
amazing figure who did so much before Vietnam - who bewildered senators and
civil servants into being better than they knew. It was like a Pirandello play,
George Reedy says: You were left wondering ''whether the whole thing was a
figment of somebody's imagination; whether this man really was a king, or
whether he was just a demented lunatic that was surrounded by some others.
Johnson would leave you like that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Sketch of Lyndon B. Johnson

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

L.I. DELEGATES LINE UP FOR CONVENTION

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 1, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1268 words


ROLES

By FRANK LYNN

AT past Democratic National Conventions, Carol A. Barnett of North Massapequa
would never have been a delegate. Those posts were reserved for big contributors
or politicians who worked at it the year round.

Mrs. Barnett is neither. But this morning, the 30-year-old political novice is
scheduled along with other New York delegates to have breakfast with Mayor Koch
at Gracie Mansion, the beginning of five days of almost continuous politicking,
talking, arguing and socializing at the Democratic National Convention.

''A once-in-a-lifetime experience,'' Mrs. Barnett said.  She symbolizes the
changes in the selection of Democratic National Convention delegates that have
lessened the role of white male professional politicians and introduced into the
Presidential selection process female, minority and rank-and-file Democrats.

Mrs. Barnett is one of 36 delegates from Nassau and Suffolk Counties - 22
committed to Senator Edward M. Kennedy and 14 to President Carter. The division
reflects the Senator's strong run in the March 25 Presidential primary on the
Island.

The Long Island delegates include such well-known politicians as John F.
English, the former Nassau Democratic chairman and a major figure in the Kennedy
campaign; Joseph R. Quinn, the Smithtown Democratic chairman who headed the
Kennedy campaign in Suffolk County, and two influential union leaders, Jan
Pierce and Morton Bahr, both of the Communications Workers of America.

Prominent politicians in the Carter camp include Dominic J.  Baranello, the
state and Suffolk Democratic chairman; Hazel Dukes, state president of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People; Sol Chaikin, the
leader of the International Ladies' Garment Workers Union; Frank Coveney, the
Suffolk Elections Commissioner; Suffolk County Legislator Robert J. Mrazek and
Jeanne R. Aronson, treasurer and executive director of the Nassau Democratic
organization.

Mr. English and Mr. Baranello are likely to be particularly prominent on the
convention floor and in behind-the-scenes manuevering.

Mr. English, who is a longtime friend of Stephen Smith, Senator Kennedy's
brother-in-law and campaign manager, is a leader of the Kennedy forces in New
York. His law partner, Harold Ickes, an expert on convention rules and
procedures, is playing a major role in the struggle over convention rules.

Mr. Baranello is on the other side of the struggle. He is executive vice
chairman of the New York delegation and is trying to keep Carter delegates in
the President's corner.

Other delegates include relatively obscure members of the Democratic State
Committee, present and former zone and Assembly district leaders, members of the
New York State United Teachers Union, former unsuccessful candidates for public
office and relatives of local party leaders.

Many of them would have been passed up in favor of well-known party and public
officials at previous conventions. Many of these officials did not want to go
through the laborious process - and risk public repudiation - in which a
would-be delegate had to make a Presidential choice early, hope that his
candidate would win delegate positions in his Congressional district primary and
then have enough support at a Congressional district caucus to be elected as a
delegate.

Most professional politicians prefer the typical procedure in the past of almost
automatic election as an uncommitted delegate in the primary.

The Kennedy delegates are more likely to be relative newcomers to the political
process because they generally were battling the Democratic establishment, which
supported the President in both counties.

Mr. Baranello led the Carter forces in Suffolk while Stanley Harwood, the Nassau
Democratic chairman, lost a bid to be a Carter delegate.

Among the Kennedy and Carter delegates on the Island, Mrs. Barnett, who is the
wife of a Uniondale lawyer and the mother of a 20-monthold daughter, probably
qualified as the newcomer to Long Island politics.

A Long Islander who graduated from Baldwin High School and, after her marriage,
from the State University at Old Westbury, Mrs. Barnett had been ''minimally''
involved in a Congressional campaign of the late Allard K. Lowenstein. Although
she had opposed the Vietnam War, she was not, she said, ''heavily into antiwar''
movements.

But she was an admirer of Senator Kennedy, and last August she telephoned Nassau
Democratic headquarters to inquire about the ''draft Kennedy'' movement. She was
referred to Anne Weiland of New Hyde Park, a Democratic state committeewoman and
a Kennedy supporter.

Mrs. Barnett volunteered to help to set up a youth committee and enlisted 10
young men and women from Long Island colleges to distribute literature, canvas
by telephone and journey to other Northeastern primary states to help the
Senator. The initial 10, who met every Monday evening at Mrs. Barnett's home,
brought in as many as 100 other young workers at one time or another.

Although ''I never thought I had a chance,'' she said, Mrs.  Barnett applied to
be a Kennedy delegate - any enrolled Democrat could - and then just before the
April 27 caucus was approached to be part of a three-delegate slate that was
supported, Mrs. Barnett said, by an experienced political operator, Bernard
Chetkoff, a Nassau Democratic zone leader.

Mrs. Barnett and her running mates - Thomas Stivala of Plainview, another zone
leader and a member of the Nassau County Planning Commission, and Judith Jacobs
of Woodbury, a community and political activist - won easily at the Kennedy
caucus in the Third Congressional District, which straddles the Nassau-Suffolk
boundary.

The slates in which delegate candidates would combine forces provedto be highly
successful in most Congressional district caucuses, where 100 to 150 supporters
were enough to win.

Mrs. Barnett was enthusiastic about the results of her first electoral effort,
but she was disappointed by her first meeting as a delegate shortly after the
caucus.

''I felt that everything was decided before I got there,'' she said of the
meetings in a Manhattan hotel at which delegates at large and various delegation
officers were selected.

''They told us who to vote for - I felt we were just puppets,'' an obviously
disillusioned Mrs. Barnett said.  Disillusioned but not discouraged, Mrs.
Barnett said that she would make her views known today when she met the Mayor.
She said she would urge that he allow draft registration opponents ample
opportunity to protest outside the convention hall this week.

Although she was not deeply involved in the anti-Vietnam War movement, Mrs.
Barnett described herself now as a pacifist. She said she opposed draft
registration and was being trained as a draft counselor by the Catholic Peace
Fellowship on Long Island, although she is Jewish.

''Registration will lead to the draft, and the draft will lead to some
conflict,'' she said. She feels strongly enough about the draft and registration
that her support of a constitutional amendment on equal rights for women is
tempered by the concern that such an amendment might be used to justify drafting
women.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Carol Barnett photo of Madison Square Garden

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MALAYSIA REPORTS SHARP DROP IN VIETNAM REFUGEES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 299 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Aug. 10


The number of Vietnamese refugees in Malaysia has fallen from a high of 76,500
in June 1979 to 20,000, officials said today.

Malaysian officials, however, complained that the program of direct refugee
departures from Vietnam to the United States, Canada, France and other Western
countries had become bogged down and could eventually result in a new wave of
refugees sailing across the South China Sea to Malaysian shores.

The refugee traffic sailing from Vietnam reached a peak in the first half of
1979, before the Hanoi Government agreed in June 1979 to establish a program for
direct emigration to Western nations.

Despite the program, about 11,000 refugees have landed in Malaysia since
January. Departures from Malaysian camps have averaged 3,000 to 5,000 each
month, steadily decreasing the total number here, refugee officials said.

The officials said that most of the new arrivals in Malaysia were Vietnamese,
compared with earlier refugees who were predominantly ethnic Chinese residents
of Vietnam. The officials said they expected a reduction in Vietnamese
emigration to Malaysia in the next few months because the monsoon season will
make the South China Sea crossing more dangerous.

An average of only 300 people a month left Vietnam during the first six months
of this year under the direct emigration program, although the number rose to
719 in July, the officials said.

Malaysian officials said the program of direct departures from Vietnam had been
moving slowly because the lists of names of qualifying refugees presented by the
Western nations in most cases had not matched the list of 39,000 names of those
the Vietnamese Government said wanted to leave. The Western governments
generally are taking only those who have relatives already settled in their
countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AID FOR THE AFGHANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 163 words


To the Editor:

It appears to me that from reading your paper there are indications that the
United States has not seen fit to provide the Afghan people with basic
anti-helicopter and anti-tank weaponry which would make a considerable
difference in their ability to defend themselves against invasion and
occupation.

I believe that if the Administration were truly devoted toward peace, as
contrasted with appeasement, they would be providing the Afghan people with this
equipment so that they could demonstrate to the world in general, and the
Soviets in particular, that a Vietnam style of imperialism not only does not pay
for the U.S., it also does not pay for the Soviet Union.

In particular, a Vietnam-style war for the Soviet Union in Afghanistan would
deflate the Soviets' beliefs and the world's beliefs in the invincibility of the
Soviet army. This, alone, would be of considerable help in the promotion of
world peace.
MARTIN SHUBIK, New Haven, July 30, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CARTER AT A CROSSROADS: PATH TO VICTORY IS STREWN WITH OBSTACLES: HIS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1732 words


SUPPORTERS GAIN INSPIRATION FROM TRUMAN'S 1948 COMEBACK

* DEMS SPECIAL *

By HEDRICK SMITH

Not since Harry S. Truman staged his brash and startling comeback against a
complacent Republican ticket in 1948 has an elected incumbent President been
such an underdog for re-election as Jimmy Carter is in 1980. And not
surprisingly, the Carter partisans now cling for inspiration to that epic Truman
effort.

But what gives a sharp edge to the 11th-hour insurrection against Mr. Carter
within his own party on the eve of its convention is the uncertainty, as one
Democratic politician put it last week, over whether ''Jimmy Carter is another
Harry Truman or a Democratic Herbert Hoover.'' And that conjures up the alarming
image of a leader bringing his party to crushing defeat across the board next
fall.

For no matter how history hemmed in Mr. Truman, his problems seem less daunting
than Mr. Carter's. In 1948, he never fell so low as Mr. Carter in his public
approval rating or as far behind his Republican rival, nor did he have to battle
as formidable a convention foe as Senator Edward M. Kennedy.

Role of New Deal Coalition

Mr. Truman had to contend with splinter factions of Progressives and Dixiecrats
on left and right, but Mr. Carter faces even more fundamental disaffection with
the heart of the New Deal coalition. He has been bogged down by a controversy
over his brother's taking money from Libya. But, more importantly, while Mr.
Truman rode the tide of a buoyant economy, Mr. Carter is hobbled by 7.8 percent
unemployment and 12 percent inflation.

In any less volatile year, any campaigner less tenacious and cunning than Jimmy
Carter would almost be counted out. But the former Governor of Georgia has
successfully ridden this campaign's political roller coaster from a 30-point
popularity deficit to Senator Kennedy in the polls last fall to a string of 24
primary victories and 60 percent of the Democratic convention's 3,331 delegates.
In terms of delegate strength, he leads his Massachusetts challenger by about
1,975 to 1,250.

Yet, instead of being able to take his nomination for granted and to use the
convention to knit together the divided Democratic ranks, he is once again beset
by the drive for an ''open'' convention that would undo the delegates' earlier
commitments and by Senator Kennedy's decision to make an early personal
appearance at the convention, with all the explosive potential of that moment.

Commitment to Voters Stressed

Coolly, Mr. Carter has marshaled his forces to contain the Kennedy legions on
the key rules fight, arguing that failure to adopt his own ''faithful delegate''
rule would break a moral commitment to primary voters and turn the convention
back to ''the power brokers.'' And for all the disaffected fidgeting of
Democratic officeholders, largely cut out of the nominating decision and fearful
that Mr. Carter's renomination might spell their own political doom, the
President seems likely to prevail in the rules fight and on the nominating
rollcall - though no one can bar some final dramatic maneuver that will throw
the convention out of his control.

''Carter is still the favorite for the nomination even if he loses the rules
fight,'' conceded Patrick J. Lucey, deputy manager of the Kennedy campaign.
''But it is by no means certain he'll be the nominee.''

Nonetheless, if Mr. Carter clears that hurdle and gains the nomination, as most
politicians now expect, he has made coming from behind such a political
trademark that he professes to be undaunted by his present 27-point disadvantage
to Ronald Reagan in the polls.  What is more, his strategists discount as
seasonal aberrations various polls that show him running third and even fourth
(behind the independent candidate and undecided voters) in some states.

''I think this time four years ago I was much further ahead of President Ford
than I am behind today,'' Mr. Carter remarked a week ago. ''But polls go up and
down and when President Ford wound up the campaign, he was very close to me.''

The Problem of Anderson

Privately, Carter strategists concede the difficulties they face, especially
with John B. Anderson, the independent candidate, poised to siphon off
disaffected liberal Democrats in some of the major swing states of the Northeast
and Middle West. But they expect Mr.  Anderson to fade badly in the fall, and
they are pointing their major thrusts at Mr. Reagan, counting on being able to
ferret out and exploit his potential weaknesses.

''Reagan's greatest vulnerability is Ronald Reagan himself,'' commented one
longtime Carter political aide. ''Those debates are going to be terribly
important in the fall. We want as many of them as we can get. The President does
well in debates. Reagan will make his bobbles and we'll make him the issue.
Reagan and the Republican platform will be the issue.''

Gerald M. Rafshoon, his media planner, is already at work on an advertising
campaign that will stress Mr. Carter's intelligence, hard work, moderation and
grasp of complex issues, inviting the public judgment that Mr. Reagan by
comparison is less intelligent, less hardworking, too conservative and too
simplistic.

''Reagan comes across as a nice guy, but we have to focus people's attention on
what he'd do as President,'' asserts Tim Kraft, the Carter campaign director.
''People have to deal with the consequences of his statements and actions.''

Reagan's Past Researched

Vice President Mondale has begun ripping into Mr. Reagan's past comments about
taking antitrust action to break up trade unions, criticizing the minimum wage
or making the Social Security system voluntary. And if President Carter gets to
deliver his acceptance speech, he will draw a contrast between the two parties,
invite attention to his own steadiness and experience, point to progress on the
energy issue and sound the theme of American bounty and American economic
renewal for the years ahead.

But Mr. Carter's path toward renomination underscores his own vulnerabilities
for the fall campaign. Aided by a surge of national patriotism after the Iranian
seizure of American Embassy hostages last Nov. 4 and the Soviet incursion in
Afghanistan in December, along with public disenchantment with Senator Kennedy
over the character issue symbolized by the accident at Chappaquiddick, Mr.
Carter won early tests with stunning strength. He canceled his participation in
debates and did not even make a campaign appearance until the last week of
primaries.

By the time of his lopsided victory in the Illinois primary on March 18, his
momentum was unbeatable. Running everywhere, the Carter campaign kept the
beleaguered Kennedy forces scattered and short of money.

But late in the campaign, as the economoy worsened and Senator Kennedy pressed
the economic issue, evoking Herbert Hoover and chiding Mr. Carter as a ''Reagan
clone'' pursuing Republican economic policies, the tide turned. Mr. Carter lost
in New York, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Michigan, New Jersey and
California, raising the specter for other Democratic politicians of a ticket
headed by a candidate unable to carry the traditional Democratic heartland.

Problem of Unifying the Party

''The long hard primary and the very harsh criticisms of the President,
questioning his credentials as a Democrat, have given us trouble for the general
election,'' concedes Mr. Kraft. ''The major elements of the Democratic coalition
are in disarray. Unifying the Democratic Party is going to be a big job, but we
can do it.''

For starters, the Carter camp chose a liberal champion, Representative Morris K.
Udall of Arizona, as the convention keynote speaker. Vice President Mondale
persuaded Douglas Fraser, head of the United Automobile Workers and a major
backer of Senator Kennedy, to put Mr. Mondale's name in nomination. Even by
acceding to Kennedy demands for an open rules fight and a prime-time platform
debate on economic issues, the Carter strategists were hoping to draw the
Kennedy faction back into the fold.

But few Kennedy partisans are in a mood now to campaign actively for President
Carter in the fall and most are doubtful that Senator Kennedy himself will make
more than a limited token effort. ''I'd find it very difficult to make a
credible case for Carter in states where we ran a negative campaign against
him,'' said Mr. Lucey, echoing the private comments of others.

And unless Mr. Carter's projected economic program appeases liberals, he will
face serious disaffection among their ranks, and nowhere more crucially than in
New York, where Mr. Anderson bids fair to win the Liberal Party endorsement.
Carter strategists concede that if Mr. Anderson gets it, the President's chances
of carrying New York will be seriously damaged.

Situation in Various Areas

Although Mr. Carter is now reckoned to be behind Mr. Reagan even in his home
base in the South, most politicians expect him to regain the upper hand there.
But it would take him an enormous effort to penetrate Mr. Reagan's strength in
the West, including California.  Texas and the Southern border states would be
contested, but the main battlegrounds would be in the Northeast and Middle West,
the areas of Mr. Carter's primary weakness.

Among Jewish voters, disenchantment with his Middle East diplomacy has been
sharpened by the controversy over Billy Carter's connections with Libya. Blacks
and minorities still seem with him. But although trade union leadership is
drifting back toward traditional support of the Democratic ticket, Mr. Reagan
has shown startling ability to draw support from rank-and-file union members
angry at rising unemployment and receptive to the Republican argument that the
Carter Administration has let American international power and prestige slip.

Faced with such disarray among Democrats, the Carter camp contends that the
Democratic Party is not as painfully split today as in 1968 when Hubert H.
Humphrey gained the nomination at the stormy Chicago convention in the depths of
the Vietnam War and still made a close race. But others comment that when the
President cites the comeback of Mr. Ford and when his aides recall Mr. Humphrey
they skip over the fact that in the end both men lost, and that the one
victorious comeback was made by Mr. Truman, who did not have to answer to the
voters for a troubled economy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 12, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REFUGEES RESTAURANT SURVIVES HURRICANE f881>

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 410 words

DATELINE: SEABROOK, Tex., Aug. 11


As the sun floated amid clouds skirting a blue sky above this seacoast town
southeast of Houston on Galveston Bay, My Ich Tran and his wife, Ngu, examined
the unexpectedly mild damage to their restaurant in the wake of Hurricane Allen.

The hurricane, at one point among the strongest on record, had failed to live up
to its advance billing. It left Nina's Seafood Restaurant whole but with floors
waxed in a rich mud slick, and with paneling that no longer adhered to the
walls.

For the Trans, whose journey from Vietnam to Texas was salted with difficult
hours, the hurricane's miss was an inexplicably benevolent event. Their odyssey
started in April 1975, when they left Saigon with nothing; they got to Columbus,
Ohio, where their apartment was stripped; they ended up in Seabrook.

A large group of Vietnamese refugees have settled in this city of more than
5,000 people and the neighboring town of Kehmah. Many of the Vietnamese here are
fishermen, and last year the area saw violent clashes between Vietnamese and
American fishermen.

'They Were All Praying'

''We were worried so much in the last few days,'' said Mr. Tran.  ''My wife, my
sister-in-law and my mother-in-law, they were all praying. If we had lost this,
we would have to start all over.  Again.''

The Trans and their adult relatives all work at several jobs, often 12 hours a
day. They pooled their money to buy the restaurant several years ago.

Mr. Tran works as a mechanic seven days a week, with one day off every two
weeks, to help meet his share of the $4,300 quarterly mortgage payment on the
restaurant. He worries that despite his long hours of work, his three children,
the eldest 10 years old, may have to work when they got to college.

''In Vietnam, parents work so that their children can spend their time studying
when they get to school,'' Mr. Tran said, ''like my father did for me.''

''We try to open again this weekend,'' Mr. Tran said as Mrs. Tran bustled around
the restaurant assessing the damage - a refrigerator unit down, buckled tiles
and sodden carpeting - before calling the insurance company.

A man repairing the road down the way came to the door to ask whether the
restaurant was open and if there was any cold beer for sale. Mrs. Tran told him
the restaurant was not open yet, but to be sure to come back.

''Everybody else, you know, they prayed for their houses to be O.K.,'' she said.
''Me, I prayed for the restaurant; it's everything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 12, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A DEBATE OVER AFFIRMATIVE ACTION:WILL BLACKS LOSE TO OTHER GROUPS?

BYLINE: By THOMAS A. JOHNSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1662 words


Are blacks put at a disadvantage by the active competition of women, Vietnam
veterans, the aged and the handicapped for special assistance in employment and
business contracts under affirmative action laws?

Or does the granting of ''protected class'' status to others strengthen blacks
by providing allies in their efforts to influence government and industry?

This debate, which has waxed and waned during recent years, has grown
significantly within the civil rights movement, as well as in the relatively new
area centered on affirmative action programs in government and industry.

The affirmative action laws - which grew out of the civil rights statutes of the
mid-1960's, and were eventually expanded to groups other than blacks -assume
that some people have been the victims of discrimination in the past. To correct
that, the laws require that special consideration be given to those groups in
terms of hiring, promotion and the awarding of certain contracts.

An Order by the Governor

The debate among the groups covered by the laws is most serious in the
competition between the two protected classes that are bestorganized - white
women and blacks of both sexes - and is exacerbated by recession, inflation and
high unemployment.

The conflict is moving into public in New York as the heads of state agencies
attempt to obey Governor Carey's Executive Order 40.1 of April 8, which was
issued to ''insure the completion and full implementation'' of the state's
affirmative action laws on behalf of ethnic minorities, women, the handicapped
and veterans.

In addition, according to Eleanor Holmes Norton, head of the Federal Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, the competition between the protected classes
has increased - as has the number of lawsuits charging discrimination - because
people are beginning to see that affirmative action laws are now being enforced,
sometimes at great cost to employers.

''The debate is serious, since the views are drawn from individual
perceptions,'' she said, ''but it is most important that those who debate are
informed - that they have statistics to back up their arguments.

'Needless Competition' Seen

''There is the danger of the groups hurting one another by needless competition
based on suspicion and distrust. The country can accommodate a diversity of
groups, and the enforcement agency has the responsibility to make certain that
the opportunities are fairly distributed.''

Another commission official added: ''At base, the major problem is that many of
the black civil rights activists have no understanding of the problems of
sexism, and many women's groups have no understanding of racism.''

Both sides agree that harmful competition should be avoided and stress the need
for alliances among the competing groups.  Accordingly, both camps endeavor to
keep the conflict quiet.

''The question is simply, how can you 'dump' on women?'' said Horace Morris,
executive director of the New York Urban League.  ''Even though you see the
dilution of concern for discrimination against blacks and the far greater
acceptance by government and industry of white women as 'minorities,' most
people feel you cannot attack women as a group.''

A Call for Alliances

But Barbara Rochman, executive director of the New York chapter of the National
Organization for Women, said the debate was muted because ''it poses disturbing
questions of racism and sexism within groups that pride themselves as being free
of racism and sexism.'' The position of ethnic minorities would be strengthened,
she added, by allies from other groups.

The terms ''protected group'' and ''protected classes'' apparently were first
used in two 1976 United States Supreme Court rulings - General Electric v.
Gilbert and Massachusetts Board of Retirement v. Mergia. They have been used in
subsequent Supreme Court cases and have become part of the lexicon of civil
rights and affirmative action discussion, referring to all persons or groups
covered by the applicable statutes.

Interviews with scores of persons concerned with civil rights and affirmative
action programs disclosed that to a considerable extent, black civil rights
activists believed that blacks were hurt when they were classed with others.
Within affirmative action programs of government and industry, however, both
blacks and whites thought blacks were not imperiled by such classification.
Several persons in each camp took the opposite view when speaking off the
record, though.

While group interest was obvious in many of the direct responses, other answers
disclosed the quandaries of concerned and committed people about the debate's
complexities.  Dr. Kenneth B. Clark, the psychologist, who is a member of the
State Board of Regents, wondered aloud at the same session: ''Are there now so
many protected groups that none are protected?''

Criticism of White Women

The situation is further complicated because while blacks are beginning to speak
out against the moves by women and others, they can also be found in significant
- although minority - roles in the ''competing'' groups.

Assemblyman Charles Johnson of the Bronx, chairman of the Assembly subcommittee
on affirmative action, insists that ''the true beneficiaries of affirmative
action have been white women.''

Mr. Johnson, who is black, recently completed a series of hearings on
affirmative action in New York State government. ''We're having problems now
protecting the people the 1964 civil rights laws were written to protect,'' he
said, ''because the laws have been eroded.''

He said groups that were not originally thought to be protected by affirmative
action statutes - women, for example, and the handicapped and veterans - had now
become the primary beneficiaries of those statutes.

A 'Red Herring' Decried

C. Douglas Ades, who was a Chemical Bank vice president for community relations
for 11 years, said: ''The women threw a monkey wrench into the affirmative
action process - many were educated, wellto-do and militant, and when the
barriers came down they jumped in, head-to-head with blacks, and the women
won.''

Mr. Ades, who is white, suggested that employers saw black men as more
threatening than white women.  But Dr. Gloria DeSole, associate director of
affirmative action at the State University of New York at Albany, decried as a
''red herring'' the charge that white women have taken jobs from blacks.

''If we argue about who comes first, then the man has us fighting among
ourselves,'' she said. ''This is divisiveness in the extreme.  It is also
guilt-tripping.''

Dr. DeSole, who teaches a course titled ''The Emerging Concepts of Affirmative
Action,'' added: ''It is often so much easier to be angry with white women than
with white men - some people can attack white women but not white men, and they
look to find a sexual cause of the problems rather than a power-structure
cause.''

A Hispanic View

''Yes, there is a special case for blacks,'' said Miss Rochman, head of New York
NOW. ''They were enslaved - a unique situation that makes them 'special,
special.' But I don't see how you can have affirmative action for blacks and
Hispanics and not for Asians or other minorities. On the political level, the
more groups you include, the more you reduce the opposition to all the protected
classes.''

Manuel A. Bustelo, executive director of the National Puerto Rican Forum,
agreed. ''The new, expanded definition of civil rights is a favorable tool for
all to advance jointly,'' he said. ''We cannot advance certain segments to the
detriment of other segments.''

''The Puerto Rican woman has the lowest labor-force participation in the
nation,'' he added, noting that his organization had begun a
''displaced-homemakers' program'' for Puerto Rican women in cooperation with the
women's movement. He added, though, that Puerto Rican women, unlike many others,
were not seeking to re-enter the job market after having a family, but to enter
it for the first time.

Victor Robles, a State Assemblyman from Brooklyn, maintained that Puerto Ricans
had not been allowed a ''full partnership'' with either blacks or women, thus
broadening the dispute within the protected classes.

Competition on All Sides

''We're competing with all others -white, male and female; black, male and
female,'' he said. ''We're in worse shape, statistically, than the American
Indian.''

Mark Schwartz, coordinator of corporate relations for the American Coalition of
Citizens with Disabilities, asserted that the combined efforts of all protected
classes ''will do a better job of lobbying for all.''

''While it was necessary originally to assimilate blacks and Hispanics,'' he
said, ''this was done and, in my opinion, all the groups have been absorbed into
the work force. With the birth rate down and the average age going up, there
will be a shortage of labor in the next decade and employers will have to look
even more at the protected classes, at the nontraditional sources.''

State Compliance Promised

James C. Jones, an assistant secretary to Governor Carey, argued that the debate
''is not even an issue in state government - we refuse to allow the protected
classes to be played off against one another.''

Mr. Jones, who is black, is the Governor's liaison to the Affirmative Action
Advisory Council, an organization of affirmative action officers from all state
agencies set up to assist their department heads in implementing the order.

Like Mrs. Norton, Mr. Jones insisted that as the state implemented Governor
Carey's order to incorporate principles of affirmative action fully into all
state jobs and contracts, ''we will do the proper analyses, determine where the
deficiencies are, and then determine what group should receive what positions or
contracts.''

''The accountability is clear,'' he said. ''The head of every state agency will
be responsible to the Governor to make certain that affirmative action works.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 12, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
$107,000 Stolen From Armored Car

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 374 words


Thieves broke into an armored truck parked on the Lower East Side and took two
bags, one of them containing $107,000, the police reported. The contents of the
second bag were not immediately determined.

The truck was parked at Second Avenue and 12th Street while the two men assigned
to it were making a delivery or a pickup in the New York Telephone Company
building there. When they returned they found the two bags missing and no sign
of the thieves. A telephone company official, Angela Tedesco, said the truck was
operated by the IBI Security Service of Queens.

Protester Swims Around Manhattan

A 47-year-old New Jersey man completed an overnight swim around Manhattan in 9
hours, 16 minutes in hopes of alerting Democratic National Convention delegates
to the plight of veterans who were exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange during
the war in Vietnam.

But as the swimmer, George Kauffmann of Keansburg, pulled himself up onto the
East 89th Street pier near Gracie Mansion, he found his bid for attention
eclipsed by the opening-day proceedings of the convention. ''We knew the odds
were against us,'' he said, ''but we're trying to force the Democrats to say,
'Hey, here's something we overlooked.' ''

Mr. Kauffmann qnd Arthur O'Keefe, president of New Jersey Victims of Agent
Orange, are seeking a commitment from the Democrats to compensate Vietnam
veterans for health problems and their children's birth defects, which many
contend were caused by exposure to the herbicide.

Surgery on Arm Severed by Machete

Surgeons at Bellevue Hospital performed microsurgery to restore the arm of a tow
truck operator, severed by an angry fellow worker wielding a machete.

A hospital spokesman, Jim Walsh, said ''the prognosis is excellent'' in the
delicate procedure to restore the forearm of Paul Taylor, 29 years old, of 208
Grand Central Parkway, Queens.

The police arrested Davis Doran, 35, of 2194 University Avenue, the Bronx, and
charged him with attempted murder. A spokesman at the East Fifth Street station
house said that Mr. Taylor and Mr. Doran had argued and that Mr. Taylor had
punched Mr. Doran in the face.

Mr. Doran later caught up with Mr. Taylor and cut off his left forearm with a
quick swing of a machete.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 12, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HOWARD TUCKNER,48,TV AND NEWSPAPER REPORTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 17, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 285 words


Howard Tuckner, a television and newspaper journalist, died in New York on June
4. He was 48 years old.  Members of Mr. Tuckner's family said that the newsman,
who had been under treatment for depression, had jumped from the window of an
apartment building in the Bronx, where his family lived.

Mr. Tuckner, who worked in Southeast Asia and Bangladesh, had left his job at
ABC News several months before his death. His last foreign assignment for ABC
was as the network's chief correspondent in Johannesburg.

Before taking that assignment in 1977, Mr. Tuckner, a native New Yorker, was the
anchorman and senior correspondent for ''The 51st State,'' a Channel 13 news and
public-affairs program. He also worked for NBC television as a network
correspondent, at Channel 11 in New York and briefly as a writer and editor for
Newsweek magazine.

He covered a wide range of news in this country and abroad on assignments in
Vietnam, Cambodia, Britain and Bangladesh as well as in Hong Kong, where he was
ABC's bureau chief. He also worked for ABC in Chicago.

In the winter of 1968, while covering the war in Vietnam, he suffered a leg
injury when he was hit by rocket fragments during street fighting in Saigon.

Mr. Tuckner began his journalism career at The New York Times in 1954 and later
became a sportswriter, remaining at the paper nine years. A graduate of Columbia
College, he was awarded the 1956 Grantland Rice Fellowship and earned his
master's degree in journalism at Columbia.

In 1973, Mr. Tuckner married Jo Anne Andrews, a native of Australia who ran a
string of health clubs in Southeast Asia. She died four years later of brain
cancer.

Mr. Tuckner is survived by his mother and two sisters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 12, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BIBBY REACHES TOP BY TORTUOUS ROUTE

BYLINE: By MURRAY CHASS

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 706 words


Jim Bibby may not have done anything to change the course of United States or
military history during his tour of duty in Vietnam, but he has influenced
baseball history with his fling at free agency.

''Yeah,'' Bibby acknowledged, smiling. ''I told Earl Weaver, 'if you had gotten
me as a free agent, you would've won the World Series instead of Pittsburgh.' ''

Bibby is the Pittsburgh Pirates' 6-foot-5-inch, 250-pound pitcher who has won 14
games and lost two this season, the losses by scores of 1-0 and 2-0. He pitched
Sunday so the Mets don't have to worry about being a party to his 15th victory
while they are in Pittsburgh this week. Bibby has been a Pirate for two and a
half seasons, since he signed with them as a free agent in March 1978. He had
been declared a free agent by an arbitrator because the Cleveland Indians had
failed to pay him on time a $10,000 bonus that he had earned for starting 30
games in 1977.

''Philadelphia, Pittsburgh and Baltimore had the main interest in me,'' Bibby
said the other day after pitching against the Chicago Cubs. ''The money
Baltimore offered me was about the same per year as Pittsburgh, but they offered
four years and Pittsburgh offered six.''

6-Year Contract Signed

So Bibby, at the age of 33 and after six mediocre seasons in the majors, signed
a six-year contract with the Pirates for $830,000. He started the seventh game
of last year's World Series that made the Pirates the champions of baseball
instead of the Orioles.

But aside from the outcome of the Series, Bibby's decision to play for
Pittsburgh rather than Baltimore led to another interesting twist of baseball
history. The Orioles were left looking for a fifth starter, and they found that
starter eight months later, also in the free-agent market. His name is Steve
Stone.

Stone, with 18 victories, has helped save the Orioles this season.  With the
right combination of their victories and other pitchers' defeats, Bibby and
Stone could wind up as the best pitchers in their respective leagues.

''Nobody can envision the kind of year he's having,'' Chuck Tanner, the Pirates'
manager, said. ''But he won 12 games as a starter last year, and after the
seventh game of the World Series, we felt he would start this year where he left
off last year. I feel he can pitch as well as any pitcher in the league.''

Obstacles Along the Way

To reach his present plateau at the age of 35, Bibby had to endure more
roadblocks and landmines than the average major league prospect: five seasons in
the minor leagues, the first four in the Mets' system, interrupted by one year
on the disabled list after a spinal fusion (''They said I had a 50-50 chance of
pitching again.''). Then came two years in the Army. ''In Vietnam I was a truck
driver,'' he said. ''We handled everything from dead bodies to plastic forks. My
unit never got hit, and I didn't see anybody get killed so things weren't bad
for me. But the war messed up a lot of minds.''

''I never thought about quitting,'' the right-hander said of his baseball
career, ''because I felt it takes a few years to mature. I figured it would take
three or four years to make it to the big leagues, and I was going to give it
that time.''

Time and hard work have helped Bibby to reach the level he has attained this
season. Ed Ott, the Pittsburgh catcher, attributes Bibby's late-blooming success
to his changing the speeds of his pitches. One of the hardest throwing pitchers
in baseball, Bibby has found the right touch for the speed of his slider and has
developed an effective curve.

In his pre-Pirate major league days, Bibby compiled a remarkable record of 19
victories and 19 defeats with Texas in 1974. He had his best season with
Cleveland in 1976 - 13 victories, seven defeats. He began his tenure with the
Pirates in the bull pen but never gave up on his quest to become a regular
starter again. Thirteen months ago, Tanner snatched him from the bull pen for
good, and he responded with six straight victories as a starter. This season he
is the Pirates' only full-time starter whose record is above .500, and he has a
chance to become the club's first 20-game winner since John Candelaria in 1977
and the second since Vernon Law in 1960.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bibby

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 13, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

China Accuses Vietnam in Death

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 27 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Aug. 12


China accused Vietnamese soldiers today of killing one peasant and wounding
another yesterday with rifle and mortar fire in the Guangxi region in the south.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 13, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Boston Workers End Strike; Arbitrator to Settle Dispute

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Aug. 12


The six-day-old strike by city workers protesting what they call political
patronage abuses ended today as both sides agreed to submit the dispute to
binding arbitration.

At issue were five supervisory jobs that the city workers union contends are
part of the civil service system, but, it charges, were awarded by Mayor Kevin
H. White to workers who had participated in his campaign last fall for
re-election to a fourth four-year term.  The five employees were suspended today
pending the arbitrator's ruling.

Despite the walkout by 2,000 city employees, or about a fifth of its civil
service work force, the city was largely unaffected by the first municipal
workers strike here in 14 years.

Supervisory and managerial employees took over most functions and the only
visible impact of the strike today appeared to be the piles of litter in the
city's parks as well as in the Boston Common and the Public Gardens, two major
tourist areas.

Wagon Train Crossing U.S.  Hit by Mysterious Ailment

JOHNSON CITY, Tenn., Aug. 12 (UPI) - An epidemic of a mysterious flu-like
ailment swept through a cross-country wagon train of troubled teen-agers and
their counselors, leaving 34 hospitalized with high fevers today.

An administrator at Northside Hospital, Eddie George, said the latest two
victims were admitted to the hospital in stable condition.  The epidemic began
Friday when a handful of the travelers on horses and in wagons bound for
Washington, D.C., from Tucson, Ariz., became ill in Jonesboro, about 10 miles
from the hospital.

''We haven't been able to put a handle on the diagnosis,'' Mr.  George said.
''They come in with high temperatures, 103, 104, some even 105 degrees. They
have headaches, a stiff neck - what we would call acute flu symptoms.''

The 106-member wagon train is part of the Arizona-based Vision Quest program.
This year, 63 juvenile offenders and 43 staff members started the long journey
as rehabilitative therapy.

The national Center for Communicable Diseases in Atlanta assigned a
representative to investigate the case under the auspices of the Tennessee
Department of Public Health.

Snepp Pays U.S. $116,658 In Dispute on C.I.A. Book

WASHINGTON, Aug. 12 (UPI) -Frank W. Snepp 3d, the former Central Intelligence
Agency agent ordered by the Supreme Court to turn over his earnings from a
forbidden book to the Government, made a partial payment of $116,658.15 today
and said it left him broke.

Mr. Snepp said he had 30 days to pay $24,000 more that he owes as his proceeds
from the book ''Decent Interval,'' which portrayed the C.I.A. as bungling the
evacuation of Saigon during the fall of South Vietnam.

Mr. Snepp told reporters he had been living on loans and advances from Random
House, the publisher, and owed about $40,000, including $12,000 owed to the
publisher.

Navy Lesbianism Hearings Are Closed to Reporters

LONG BEACH, Calif., Aug. 12 (UPI) -The Navy has barred reporters from hearings
of sailors accused of having lesbian affairs aboard the U.S.S. Norton Sound,
after a complaint that the inquiry was ''being made into a circus.''

The closing came yesterday at the start of the second full week of testimony in
administrative hearings for three of the eight sailors accused of homosexual
behavior.

The decision to exclude three pool reporters from the crowded hearing room
aboard the ship came at the request of a

National news appears on pages A15, 18, 20; political

news on pages B1-5.
prosecution witness, Joyce Arnold, who was scheduled to testify against Seaman
Barbara Underwood, 22 years old, of Orlando, Fla.

Miss Arnold told the three-member military board that ''a lot of this is being
made into a circus and I don't want my testimony to be made part of that
circus.''

Seaman Underwood's civilian attorneys objected, contending that their client's
constitutional right to an open trial was being violated.

Court Blames Ford in Death Of an Intoxicated Speeder

NEW ORLEANS, Aug. 12 (AP) - A Federal appeals court says that the Ford Motor
Company was negligent in the death of a Louisiana man who was intoxicated when
his sports car crashed at 105 miles an hour.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit said the accident was
caused by improper tires, not by the man's drinking or by the excessive speed.

Shelby Leleux died and a passenger was seriously hurt when his 1976 Mercury
Cougar crashed near Kaplan on June 6, 1976.  In its ruling yesterday, the
appeals court upheld a decision by Federal District Judge Eugene Davis.  The
court said that the car was designed to be capable of speeds over 100 miles an
hour but was equipped with Goodyear tires designed for speeds below 85 miles an
hour. The court said Ford was negligent in not warning the driver of the tires'
limitation. The decision did not mention a damage award.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 13, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SPOLLING 'A HILL OF BEANS';
by Bruce J. Ennis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 862 words


The controversy over President Carter's discussion of classified information
with his brother, Billy, illustrates three overlooked key points: The Government
unnecessarily classifies much information that is trivial while claiming falsely
that its release would damage national security; Government officials routinely
leak classified information favorable to themselves; unnecessary classification
and selective leaking increase the likelihood that secrecy laws will be enforced
against critics of government but not against friends. The convictions of Ronald
Humphrey and David Truong underscore these points.

In 1978, the Administration prosecuted Mr. Humphrey for giving ''confidential''
documents to Mr. Truong, allegedly an agent of North Vietnam. Mr. Humphrey and
Mr. Truong claimed, unsuccessfully, that the documents did not contain
information that could harm national security; they were sentenced to 15 years.
(In a similar case prosecuted by the Administration, the court ruled that ''the
propriety'' of a classification is irrelevant; the fact of classification ''is
enough.'') Mr. Truong was also convicted of acting as a foreign agent without
notifying the Government. Unlike Billy Carter, he was not given an opportunity
to avoid prosecution by filing belatedly.

The Senate is investigating the possibility that President Carter gave
''confidential'' documents to his brother, an agent of Libya.  Like Mr. Humphrey
and Mr. Truong, Mr. Carter claims that the documents do not contain information
that could harm national security. As his press secretary, Jody Powell said, the
information in those documents did not amount ''to a hill of beans.''

Mr. Powell was right. One ''confidential'' cable reveals that Libyan news-media
coverage of Billy's visit was ''routine throughout,'' that 400 Americans
attended an embassy reception, and that Billy noted ''rapid progress'' in Libya,
''particuarly in the agricultural field.'' Not much there to shake the nation's
security.  A second ''confidential'' cable reveals the embarrassing fact that
our charge d'affaires in Libya had not received a shipment of household effects,
but he had enjoyed a ''private swim-lunch'' with Billy, who was ''strictly on
the wagon.'' Another ''confidential'' cable complains that the ''secretarial
problem'' at the embassy is ''genuine,'' and notes that the Libyans had tried
unsuccessfully to delay Billy's visit ''because of shortage of hotel space.''

Cables are supposed to be marked ''confidential'' only if unauthorized
disclosure would ''damage'' national security. Under those standards, the Libyan
cables should never have been classified.

According to The New York Times, the State Department admits that classified but
''nonsensitive cables were, in practice, routinely released,'' and according to
The Washington Star, the former State Department spokesman Hodding Carter 3d
acknowledged that the department ''leaks like a sieve,'' and said that the White
House, National Security Council and the Defense Department also leaked
information ''for self-serving reasons and for policy reasons.''

Control of information increases political power. By classifying information
unnecessarily, leaking favorable information, and prosecuting those who leak
embarrassing information, the Government augments its power and shapes public
perception of its actions.

Following our failure to rescue the hostages in Iran, the Government countered
questions about the competence of the operation by leaking much unnecessarily
classified information to show how thoroughly the attempt had been planned. Some
of the leaked information may have been properly classified, and leaking it may
have jeopardized lives. We learned, for example, as did Iran, that Central
Intelligence Agency agents posing as European businessmen had leased warehouse
space as rescue staging areas.

I do not suggest that Mr. Carter should be prosecuted if he gave ''classified''
documents to Billy. No one should be prosecuted for disseminating improperly
classified but harmless information. No do I suggest it was wrong to warn Billy
to register or face prosecution.

But there should not be one standard for the politically powerful and another
for the politically weak. The same rules that apply to a President and his
brother should apply to Mr. Humphrey and Mr.  Truong.

Government officials are unnecessarily classifying harmless information, leaking
favorable and politically advantageous information, and selectively enforcing
the law. Although the contents of the Libyan cables did not amount to ''a hill
of beans,'' the incident should prompt us to question the reality of our
constitutional commitment to equal justice under the law.
Bruce J. Ennis is national legal director of the American Civil Liberties Union.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 13, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Donald G. Herzberg, 55, Professor of Government

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 310 words


Donald G. Herzberg, dean of the Graduate School and vice president for graduate
studies and research at Georgetown University in Washington, where he was a
professor of government, died Monday in Manhattan, apparently of a heart attack.
He was 55 years old.

Mr. Herzberg was a political analyst and since 1966 had been consultant to ABC
News on elections and politics. For several years he had a program on politics
and government on ABC's Channel 7 in New York City.

In 1956, he was named the first executive director of the Eagleton Institute of
Politics at Rutgers University. He was chairman of the Rutgers political science
section from 1963 to 1965.

He was staff director of the President's Commission on Registration and Voting
Participation in 1963 and 1964. He was a member of a team chosen by President
Johnson to observe the Vietnamese elections in 1967. From 1966 to 1968 he was on
the Select Commission on Western Hemisphere Immigration.

He was the co-author of several books, among them ''A Student Guide to Campaign
Politics,'' with Jack Peltason; ''Essays on the Legislative Process,'' with
Jesse Unruh; ''American Party Politics, Readings and Essays,'' with Gerald
Pomper, and ''Politics is Your Business,'' with William Baumer.

Mr. Herzberg was born in Orange, N.J., and was a graduate of Wesleyan University
and the Maxwell School of Syracuse University.  He is survived by his wife, the
former Barbara Smith Schelling; three children of his marriage to the former
Marlene Grey, Joan, Max and John; three stepchildren, Melissa Schelling, Andrew
Schelling and Timothy N. Schelling, and a brother, Richard. A funeral service
will be held at 3 P.M. tomorrow at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton,
N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 14, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. UNIFORMS ON YOUTHS STIR ANGER IN SOVIET

BYLINE: By ANTHONY AUSTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 552 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Aug. 13


The subway train stopped and a young man got on.  He wore a fashionably
weathered pair of blue jeans, with an American ''Wrangler'' trademark, and a
khaki shirt with the insignia, in English, of ''U.S. Air Force.'' A pocket
sported a multicolored ribbon.

''Excuse me, young man,'' said one of the passengers, unable to contain himself,
''but what is your name?'' ''Viktor,'' the youth replied. ''Why?'' ''Tell me,
Viktor,'' the man said, ''where did you get that fine shirt?'' ''From out there.
It was brought in.'' ''I see. And do you know, Viktor, that this is an American
military uniform?'' ''Sure. So what?'' ''And do you know how much blood has been
spilled in the past decade because of the people who wore that uniform?'' ''This
is a democracy - I wear what I want,'' muttered the young man, and got off at
the next stop.

Fad Among Young People Assailed

Komsomolskaya Pravda, the paper of the Young Communist League, reported the
episode today as an example of the fad of wearing handme-down American clothes
against which the Soviet guardians of public morality have long waged
intermittent battle.

The attacks mount in summer, when safely socialist outerwear is discarded and
the corrupting influence of American garments acquired from Western tourists is
on the increase. Last summer, the targets were T-shirts with slogans and
pictures deemed an offense against the Soviet way of life.

But wearing American military uniforms, Komsomolskaya Pravda made clear today,
is going a bit far.  Do the youths who flaunt these Air Force uniforms, with
their rows of ribbons, know what they stand for, the paper asked. Suppose the
decoration worn by the young man in the subway was awarded in the Vietnam War?

Vignettes of Vietnam War Evoked
With a series of word pictures, Komsomolskaya Pravda sought to evoke memories of
that war:

''The roaring engines of a B-52 ... the heart-rending howl of American bombs
hurtling down toward the Vietnamese earth ... the wailing of a grief-stricken
young Vietnamese mother.

''A Vietnamese boy without his left leg and with a scar in place of his right
eye ... and monsters in shirts with the insignia 'U.S. Air Force' taunting the
boy by sticking a lighted cigarette in his mouth and snapping pictures.

''Does the 'fashionable' youth in the subway know about the 'exploits' for which
American warriors won their decorations?  ''The United States Army has long been
the symbol of a threat to peace, the symbol of war. Not for nothing does
American youth today refuse to submit to the military registration process
demanded by the Carter Administration.''

The vogue for American uniforms may affect just a few among the young, the paper
said, but it is ''outrageous, foolish and incomprehensible,'' reflecting a want
of Soviet patriotism and it raises questions about the way these erring youths
were raised.

''After all,'' Komsomolskaya Pravda continued, ''these young men are either
students or workers, they may even belong to the Young Communist League. It
would seem that those who should have explained the folly of their behavior were
not able to do so.

''A fashionable article with a militaristic label is a deliberate advertisement
for a society that is alien to ours. Just remember that when you select a
'stylish' article of clothing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 382 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 15, 1980 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'WILLIE AND PHIL' 3 LIVES, SORT OF SHARED

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Weekend Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1062 words


IT is 1970 in Greenwich Village. Willie (Michael Ontkean), who is young, Jewish
and ambitious, is a high school teacher who wants to be a jazz pianist. Phil
(Ray Sharkey), who is young, Italian and ambitious, is a commercial photographer
who wants to be a big success. One night, Willie and Phil meet coming out of the
Bleecker Street Cinema after having seen ''Jules and Jim.'' Phil, the extrovert,
wants Willie, the introvert, to ask him about his recently ended love affair.
Willie does, and Phil answers, at length, thus to begin a lifelong friendship.
As the film's narrator tells us, Willie and Phil share a sense of humor, a
hatred for the Vietnam War and a love for the films of Francois Truffaut.

They are not alone. Paul Mazursky, whose new film is titled ''Willie and Phil,''
also loves the films of Truffaut. Too well.

Not long after they discover each other, Willie and Phil meet Jeannette (Margot
Kidder), a pretty, spirited, independent young woman, who has come to New York
to make her fortune and, instead, has run out of money. With Jeannette's
approval, the two men toss a coin. Willie wins, and Jeannette moves in with him.
Willie and Jeannette, to simplify arrangements and to clear the air, become
lovers.

Phil loves Jeannette, too. On a night when the three drop acid together, Phil
and Jeannette wind up in bed as Willie sits in the next room, smiling and
picking out a tune on the piano. Says the narrator, ''Watching Phil and
Jeannette make love made Willie very happy.''

''Willie and Phil,'' which opens today at the Baronet and the Little Carnegie
Theaters, stands in relation to - and basks in the glow of - ''Jules and Jim''
much in the way that Mr. Mazursky's earlier ''Alex in Wonderland'' evokes
Fellini's classic ''8 1/2.''

''Willie and Phil'' is alternately infuriating and funny as it follows Willie,
Phil and Jeannette through the 1970's, through their never-very-permanent
sleeping arrangements and their searches for fulfillment. Jeannette marries one,
has a baby and then begins to live with the other. While Phil is busy in
Hollywood becoming a big success as a director of television commercials, Willie
and Jeannette try life on a farm in Upstate New York. Later Jeannette and Zelda,
her baby, move into Phil's California beach house while Willie goes in search of
truth, first to a commune in Hawaii, later to the banks of the Ganges.
''India,'' Willie writes his two best friends, ''is like Coney Island on Labor
Day.''

I'm still no more sure about what Mr. Mazursky is up to in ''Willie and Phil''
than I was about ''Alex in Wonderland'' (which featured appearances by Fellini
and by Jeanne Moreau of ''Jules and Jim'').

''Willie and Phil'' is clearly an unembarrassed tribute to ''Jules and Jim,''
but after recognizing that, I become confused. Within the film, Willie, Phil and
Jeannette also love ''Jules and Jim,'' but is that the reason they form their
threesome? Is life imitating art, or art imitating art?

I suspect that Mr. Mazursky wants us to take Willie, Phil and Jeannette
seriously, to believe them when they talk earnestly about how much they love one
another, which would mean, I guess, that art is imitating art. Because they
never actually say ''like Jules and Jim and Catherine,'' I assume that we are
meant to respect the emotional pitch at which they live, but it's impossible.
Willie, Phil and Jeannette are lightweights.

Mr. Mazursky (''Bob & Carol and Ted & Alice,'' ''Blume in Love,'' ''Harry and
Tonto,'' ''An Unmarried Woman'') works best when he is skewering the fads and
fancies of a semiliterate world that thinks itself hip. When he attempts to go
further, as in ''Next Stop, Greenwich Village,'' his compassion has a way of
turning to sentimentality.

''Willie and Phil'' is most appealing and funniest, not when Willie and Phil and
Jeannette are moving into one another's heads, but when the film is inventorying
the manners of the 70's -the back-to-nature movements, the experimentation with
drugs, the pursuit of truth all the way to India.

The film's most charming interlude seems almost accidental to the movie, when
Jeannette takes Willie home to Kentucky to meet her mother and sister, neither
of whom appears to have met a real, live, New York Jew. ''Willie and Phil'' is
at its best when it forgets Truffaut and pursues its own satiric identity.

When it is mooning around in the manner of ''Jules and Jim'' - when, for
example, the three principals sing an off-key, completely serious, a-cappella
''What Is This Thing Called Love?'' - I find it difficult to resist saying rude
things to the screen, like, ''Why don't you make your own movie?''

Though Mr. Ontkean and Mr. Sharkey are nice actors, their characters are not
especially believable or even appealing. Unlike Oscar Werner and Henri Serre,
who play the title roles in ''Jules and Jim,'' their performances aren't
transformed by the vision of an extraordinary film maker. They are functions of
Mr. Mazursky's purloined idea for a movie. Much more successful is Miss Kidder,
whose Jeannette, though no match for Jeanne Moreau's Catherine, is a young woman
of substance and humor and even mystery, someone you can believe without ever
understanding completely.

Like all Mazursky films, ''Willie and Phil'' is impeccably cast: Jan Miner and
Tom Brennan as Willie's parents, Julie Bovasso and Louis Guss as Phil's parents,
Kathleen Maguire and Kaki Hunter as Jeannette's mother and sister.

Sven Nykvist was the cameraman, and the glowy, romantic look of ''Willie and
Phil'' simply emphasizes a softness of heart toward the film's characters that
I, for one, cannot share.

Three's a Crowd

WILLIE & PHIL, written and directed by Paul Mazursky; director of photography,
Sven Nykvist; edited by Donn Cambern; music by Claude Bolling; produced by Mr.
Mazursky and Tony Ray; released by 20th Century-Fox. At the Baronet, Third
Avenue at 59th Street. Running time: 115 minutes. This film is rated R.

Willie . . . . . Michael Ontkean
Jeannette . . . . . Margot Kidder
Phil . . . . . Ray Sharkey
Mrs. Kaufman . . . . . Jan Miner
Mr. Kaufman . . . . . Tom Brennan
Mrs. D'Amico . . . . . Julie Bovasso
Mr. D'Amico . . . . . Louis Guss
Mrs. Sutherland . . . . . Kathleen Maguire
Patti . . . . . Kaki Hunter
Rena . . . . . Kristine DeBell
Zelda No. 4 . . . . . Alison Cass Shurpin
Zelda No. 3 . . . . . Christine Varnai


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of scene from movie

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOR A NEW PARLEY ON INDOCHINA;
by Leonard Unger

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: MEDFORD, Mass.


More than five years after the end of America's direct involvement in
Indochina's wars, there is an uneasy peace for some peoples in that region. For
others, there is starvation, exile, oppression. The independent, neutral regimes
prescribed earlier by the Geneva accords for Cambodia and Laos have been
extinguished.

The partners in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Thailand, Malaysia,
Indonesia, Singapore, the Philippines - fear the explosive pressures building in
Indochina that at any time could shatter the peace and rob them of the orderly
development they seek.  Nor can China ignore the ''Cuba'' on its southern
borders that Vietnam represents for it today.

For the United States, Southeast Asia tends to be dismissed as the place where
we mistakenly involved ourselves in the Vietnam War but where we really have
neither responsibilities nor significant interests. On the contrary, we have
both.

Through Southeast Asia runs Japan's oil lifeline, on which South Korea and
Taiwan also depend. The members of ASEAN together represent the fourth most
populous entity in the world, and will rank third in another decade. Southeast
Asia represents the ''soft underbelly'' of China, which the Soviet Union would
like to neutralize or control; Indochina is already in that condition. And the
United States has solemn security commitments to the Philippines and Thailand.

For Southeast Asia the present danger is the complex of problems along the
Indochina-Thailand border zone. Hostilities in that area would mean trouble for
the ASEAN partners and China and Japan and the super-powers; nor could
Australia, New Zealand and India be indifferent.

What can be done to begin to restore a measure of peace and stability to
Indochina and the rest of Southeast Asia? Bilateral conversations may provide
limited solutions. Most of the problems that threaten the region's future are
complex, however, and directly involve several countries, and their solutions
often require processes over a period of time, not one-time actions. (Nor will
those solutions be lasting unless they are made against the background of a
strong United States ready to act to protect its vital interests.)

While the Geneva conferences of 1954 and 1962 provided few permanent solutions,
they did dissipate mounting confrontations threatening broader warfare. Now a
somewhat different group of nations, pertinent to today's problems, might be
assembled by the United Nations or by other means once the necessary groundwork
has been laid. An early emergency meeting, addressing today's precarious
situation, could seek immediate compromises to begin to lead Southeast Asia away
from dangerous confrontations. The Indochinese and ASEAN states, the
superpowers, China and Japan all should be involved. Such a body might also
explore the feasibility of creating a continuing forum to monitor developing
crises in the Indochina region and seek to defuse them in their early stages.

Complicated, intractable and politically charged issues will not be resolved
just because a forum for considering them is opened. Nor for the sake of
agreement should America accept arrangements adversely affecting its friends.
Most or all of the nations involved, however, are concerned for their own
reasons about the fragility of the present situation and should be ready to
consider negotiated solutions. The most bitter differences are, in fact, those
between the Chinese and Soviet Communist camps.

What is needed is a conference to address the whole range of Indochina issues
with the participation of all concerned parties in order to permit the
trade-offs that must underlie immediate solutions, and to explore the
feasibility of a continuing forum to work on the problems and situations that
can be resolved only over a period of time and perhaps in stages.

A broadly based neutral regime for Cambodia would be one objective. Workable
arrangements are needed for distributing medicine and food, and getting
agricultural production restarted. A consortium may be required for providing
economic-development assistance to Vietnam.  Defusing the tensions along the
Thai-Cambodian frontier, including refugee issues, calls for a forum for
resolving problems before they become explosive. An international peace-keeping
commission to defuse the growing tensions along the Mekong River border of
Thailand and Laos might be useful. The neglected Lower Mekong Development
Project, long a promising multilateral development program, might be
reactivated. The resettlement of refugees in their former homes - voluntarily,
of course - might be assisted.

The jobs are more numerous than those mentioned here and their scope, complexity
and perils have only been suggested. They involve issues so intricately
interconnected that a process by which all issues may be put on the table at
once may offer the only chance of finding solutions. Otherwise, we may see them
grow in gravity until they get out of hand and lead to the open conflict that
all wish to avoid.

Leonard Unger, former Ambassador to Laos, Thailand and Taiwan, is professor of
diplomacy at The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
INSIDER AT THE WHITE HOUSE: WALTER FREDERICK MONDALE

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1880 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 14


Since the Presidential campaign began last September, he has visited 36 states,
traveled 125,000 miles, given 210 speeches, attended 150 receptions and meetings
and held more than 225 news conferences, interviews and editorial sessions - all
in behalf of President Carter.

At the end of the campaign speeches, he tells voters that if they ''do what I
know you're going to do - renominate Jimmy Carter - just to show you how much we
appreciate what you've done for him, your party and your country, we're going to
give you a gift: We're going to throw Walter F. Mondale in free! No charge!''

With this sort of exuberance, Vice President Mondale, who last night accepted
his renomination by the Democratic National Convention, has toiled this year for
Mr. Carter while making it clear that he is also working for himself.

As a politician who once counted himself among the band of openhearted liberals
in the Senate and as a close ally and friend of Senator Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts, Mr. Mondale this year found himself preaching President Carter's
gospel of fiscal restraint and military preparedness.

Selling to Both Sides

He has played a key role in helping to sell Mr. Carter's policies to
disenchanted colleagues and pushing for liberal approaches within the White
House. In the process he has achieved greater influence in the Administration
than perhaps any other Vice President in recent history.

Mr. Carter has proclaimed Mr. Mondale his full partner in many policy areas, and
so have more neutral observers, including many in Congress and labor unions.

It was Mr. Mondale who worked with Douglas A. Fraser, president of the United
Automobile Workers, to fashion a package to save the Chrysler Corporation and
aid the automobile industry.

It was Mr. Mondale who advised Mr. Carter last spring to oppose a budget
compromise worked out in Congress that would have contained sharp increases in
military spending. And he was the first member of the Administration to call for
a boycott of the Olympic Games in Moscow this summer.

In 1976, when he was a Senator from Minnesota, Mr. Mondale withdrew as a
Presidential candidate because, he said, he did not have the ''overwhelming
desire to be President which is essential for the kind of campaign that is
required.''

More recently, as he was selling the Carter Administration to disaffected
Democrats, the President's tumble in public opinion polls continued and some
Democrats suggested Mr. Mondale as an alternative.

Indeed, a New York Times/CBS News Poll found last week that Mr.  Mondale trailed
Ronald Reagan by 12 percentage points, while Mr.  Carter trailed by 20 points, a
finding that seemed to bear out the feelings of these party professionals.

'You Could Have It Both Ways'

''I think if the Carter ship goes down, Mondale may survive,'' Representative
Morris K. Udall, the liberal Democrat from Arizona, said last year. ''He's a
figure around whom people could rally. You could have it both ways - not turn
your back on the Carter-Mondale Administration. But here's a guy in good with
labor, blacks, educators.''

As recently as a couple weeks ago, Mr. Mondale found that he had to ask
supporters to drop their effort to draft him for the nomination.  If there was
ever a Mondale boomlet in this political season, it seems to have had a genesis
in the tension at the White House a year ago, when relations between the Vice
President and the President - and, more precisely, between their staffs - were
at a low point.

This period followed President Carter's ''domestic summit'' at Camp David, Md.,
in which he conferred with a range of public figures and emerged to call for
Americans to heave off their ''crisis of confidence'' and join in a crusade to
conserve energy.

The Vice President's Absence

Mr. Mondale was not in Washington then and was indeed conspicuous by his
absence. But it became clear in subsequent weeks that he personally thought
little of the idea of addressing the problem of lines at gasoline stations by
talking of crisis of the American spirit.

The internal tension that arose then dissipated, however, as Mr.Mondale began
campaigning for Mr. Carter's renomination. ''If anything, the role which I'm
permitted to play in the Carter Administration is broadening and deepening,'' he
asserted last December.

As it had before, that role gives him unlimited access to every official
document sent to the President's desk. Aside from Mr.  Carter's wife, Rosalynn,
Mr. Mondale is the only member of the White House inner circle who lunches alone
with him every week.

He also attends Mr. Carter's weekly breakfasts with foreign policy advisers and
has weekly meetings with Adm. Stansfield Turner, the Director of Central
Intelligence, as well as Cabinet and other staff meetings. Early in his term of
office, Mr. Mondale was given the assignment of relations with Africa. Since
then that function has grown to include other areas of the globe.

No. 1 Domestic Program

He and his staff are permitted to intervene in agency matters, and it was Mr.
Mondale who headed an interagency task force that produced the $2 billion youth
employment initiative that Mr. Carter describes as his No. 1 domestic program
this year.

In his first couple of years as Vice President, Mr. Mondale retained his warm
relations with liberals in the Democratic Party, including Senator Kennedy. Mr.
Mondale had, after all, been one of their number in his 12-year career in the
Senate, where he was a protege of his fellow Minnesotan, Hubert H. Humphrey.

Strains developed with Mr. Kennedy, however, as Mr. Mondale hewed to the
President's effort to fight inflation by balancing the budget and cutting
certain domestic programs. Among other things, that meant deferring plans for
comprehensive national health insurance, which Mr. Kennedy has advocated for
years.

His critics said that Mr. Mondale was trimming his liberal sails in order to
remain loyal to the White House and advance his own career, much as Mr. Humphrey
had muffled his criticism of the Vietnam War under President Johnson.

The criticism angers Mr. Mondale, who now counts himself among those liberals
who came of age in the 1960's but now find that there is no longer a cornucopia
of resources to pay for the programs they thought could be enacted.

''Each Democratic administration, at its peril, must look at problems as they
really are,'' Mr. Mondale told a political group this year. ''And fellow
Democrats, it is the unhappy but certain and obvious fact that the Democratic
Party must face up to the problem of inflation.

''If we don't, we will be driven out of public office,'' he added, ''just as our
predecessors were for failing to stand up to the problem of the Vietnam War.
We've got to deal with it.''

Theme for Liberals

This was a principal theme that Mr. Mondale carried to potential Kennedy
supporters this year, but it was not until foreign policy issues came to the
fore that the relations between Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Mondale broke into open
recriminations.

After saying for months that Mr. Kennedy had ''no rationale'' for his candidacy,
apparently because the Senator had previously supported so many Administration
programs, Mr. Mondale accused him in January of playing ''the politics of the
moment'' by opposing the restriction on grain exports to the Soviet Union.

In one speech, Mr. Mondale said that supporting the curb, aimed at punishing the
Russians for intervening in Afghanistan, would be ''patriotic.''

''I don't think I or the members of my family need a lecture from Mr. Mondale or
anyone else about patriotism,'' Mr. Kennedy shot back. Many other Democrats
joined in the criticism, asserting that Mr.  Mondale had come to play the role
of ''hatchet man'' in the campaign.

As the campaign proceeded and Mr. Kennedy continued his heated attacks on the
Carter Administration, Mr. Mondale told friends that the Senator's persistence
seemed rooted in psychological as much as political factors. And so the Vice
President led the move within the White House not to call for Mr. Kennedy's
withdrawal, lest that stiffen his resolve.

Mr. Mondale never talks about the advice he gives the President; on the other
hand, he does not deny that he has had his share of disagreements. ''The
administration that tries to tell you that everything is sweetness and light and
that there are no differences and no debates is trying to defraud the American
people,'' Mr.  Mondale has said.

After the election in 1976, when Mr. Mondale wanted advice about how to survive
in the job of Vice President, he turned to Mr.  Humphrey and to Nelson A.
Rockefeller. Both told him that there was only one important key to success in
the job: maintaining a strong personal relationship with the President.

Two Small-Town Boys

Perhaps surprisingly, it has apparently not been hard for Mr.  Mondale to do
just that. Both he and Jimmy Carter grew up in smalltown, rural America in
religious surroundings. Both love to hunt, fish and play tennis, and to read
books about government and politics. Both have a wry sense of humor, although
Mr. Mondale, with his easygoing disposition, is the one more often unable to
resist a joke.

Once, after Mr. Carter returned from a weeklong overseas trip, Mr.  Mondale
welcomed him with mock solemnity: ''When you left, Mr.  President, you asked
those of us who stayed behind to take care of things. These have been nine
successful days in the history of our country, and we are proud of it. We have
avoided war. We have continued Government services with no increase in taxes.''

''Maybe I should have stayed gone longer,'' Mr. Carter replied, laughing.
Walter Frederick Mondale was born Jan. 5, l928, in Ceylon, Minn., a small town
in the southern part of the state. His father, a minister of Norwegian descent
with deep social commitments, was a Republican before the Depression but later
switched to Minnesota's Farmer-Labor Party, later to become the
Democratic-Farmer-Labor Party.

While a 20-year-old student at Macalester College in St. Paul, Fritz Mondale
joined the Senate campaign of Mr. Humphrey, who was then Mayor of Minneapolis.
They would develop a very close relationship over the years.

After serving as a corporal in the Korean War, Mr. Mondale graduated from the
University of Minnesota Law School and then practiced law for four years before
Gov. Orville L. Freeman appointed him state Attorney General.

He was later elected to that job, but his subsequent posts were also appointive.
He was appointed to the United States Senate in 1964 to fill Mr. Humphrey's seat
when Mr. Humphrey became Vice President, and in a sense Mr. Carter appointed him
Vice President in 1976.

In the Senate, Mr. Mondale achieved a record of liberal accomplishments, but he
also had a reputation for caution and perhaps lack of zeal. It was a reputation
that became harder to shed after he dropped out of the Presidential race in
1976.

In 1974, Albert Eisele, a journalist from Minnesota, wrote that when the
Senator's appendix was removed, some Democrats said ''they hoped the surgeon
inserted some guts before sewing him up.'' Mr.  Mondale later appointed Mr.
Eisele as his press secretary. ''I wanted to take him out of journalism,'' he
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF CARTER'S SPEECH ACCEPTING HIS RENOMINATION AT PARTY CONVENTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4603 words


Following is a transcript of President Carter's speech to the Democratic
National Convention last night accepting its nomination for President, as
recorded by The New York Times:

Fellow Democrats, fellow citizens: I thank you for the nomination you've offered
me. And I especially thank you for choosing as my running mate the best partner
any President ever had -- Fritz Mondale.

With gratitude and with determination, I accept your nomination.  And I am proud
to run on a progressive and sound platform that you have hammered out in this
convention.  Fritz and I will mount a campaign that defines the real issues, a
campaign that responds to the intelligence of the American people, a campaign
that talks sense - and we are going to beat the Republicans in November.

We'll win because we're the party of a great President who knew how to get
re-elected - Franklin Delano Roosevelt.  And we're the party of a courageous
fighter who knew how to ''give 'em hell'' - Harry Truman. And as Truman said, he
just told the truth and they thought it was hell.

And we're the party of a gallant man of spirit - John Fitzgerald Kennedy. And
we're the party of a great leader of compassion - Lyndon Baines Johnson. And the
party of a great man who should have been President and would have been one of
the greatest Presidents in history - Hubert Horatio Hornblower - Humphrey. I
have appreciated what this convention has said about Senator Humphrey - a great
man who epitomized the spirit of the Democratic Party. And I would like to say
that we're also the party of Gov. Jerry Brown and Senator.  Edward Kennedy.

The Role of Senator Kennedy

I'd like to say a personal word to Senator Kennedy.  Ted, you're a tough
competitor and a superb campaigner - and I can attest to that. Your speech
before this convention was a magnificent statement of what the Democratic Party
is and what it means to the people of this country -and why the Democratic
victory is so important this year. I reach out to you tonight and I reach out to
all those who supported you in your valiant and passionate campaign.

Ted, your party needs - and I need you. And I need your idealism and your
dedication working for us. There is no doubt that even greater service lies
ahead of you - and we are grateful to you and to have your strong partnership
now in the larger cause to which your own life has been dedicated. I thank you
for your support. We'll make great partners this fall in whipping the
Republicans.

We're Democrats. And we've had our differences, but we share a bright vision of
America's future - a vision of a good life for all our people - a vision of a
secure nation, a just society, a peaceful world, a strong America - confident
and proud and united.

And we have a memory of Franklin Roosevelt 40 years ago when he said that there
are times in our history when concern over our personal lives are overshadowed
by our concern for ''what will happen to the country we have known.''

This is such a time - and I can tell you that the choice to be made this year
can transform our own personal lives and the life of our country as well.
get 1st add

During the last Presidential campaign, I criss-crossed this country and I
listened to thousands and thousands of people - housewives and farmers, teachers
and small-business leaders, workers and students, the elderly and the poor -
people of every race and every background and every walk of life. It was a
powerful experience - a total immersion in the human reality of America.

And I have now had another kind of total immersion - being President of the
United States of America. Let me talk for a moment about what that job is like -
and what I have learned from it.

I have learned that only the most complex and difficult tasks come before me in
the Oval Office. No easy answers are found there, because no easy questions come
there.

I have learned that for a President experience is the best guide to the right
decisions. I am wiser tonight than I was four years ago.  And I have learned
that the Presidency is a place of compassion. My own heart is burdened for the
troubled Americans. The poor, the jobless and the afflicted -they have become
part of me. My thoughts and my prayers for our hostages in Iran are as though
they were my own sons and daughters.

The life of every human being on earth can depend on the experienceand judgment
and vigilance of the person in the Oval Offfice. The President's power for
building and his power for destruction are awesome. And the power is greatest
exactly where the stakes are highest - in matters of war and peace.

And I have learned something else -something that I have come to see with
extraordinary clarity. Above all, I must look ahead - because the President of
the United States is the steward of the nation's destiny.

He must protect our children - and the children they will have - and the
children of generations to follow. He must speak and act for them. That is his
burden - and his glory.

And that is why a President cannot yield to short-sighted demands no matter how
rich or powerful the special interests might be that make those demands. And
that's why a President cannot bend to the passions of the moment, however
popular they might be. And that's why the President must sometimes ask for
sacrifice when his listeners would rather hear the promise of comfort.

The President is the servant of today. But his true constituency is the future.
That's why the election of 1980 is so important.  Some have said it makes no
difference who wins this election. They are wrong.  This election is a stark
choice between two men, two parties, two sharply different pictures of what
America is and what the world is.  But it's more than that.
get 2d add

It's a choice between two futures. The year 2000 is just less than 20 years away
- just four Presidential elections after this one.  Children born this year will
come of age in the 21st century.

The time to shape the world of the year 2000 is now. The decision of the next
few years will set our course -perhaps an irreversible course - and the most
important of all choices will be made by the American people at the polls less
than three months from tonight.

The choice could not be more clear -nor the consequences more crucial.  And one
of the futures we can choose - the future that you and I have been building
together - I see security, and justice and peace.  I see a future of economic
security -security that will come from tapping our own great resources of oil
and gas, coal and sunlight - and from building the tools, technology and
factories for a revitalized economy based on jobs and stable prices for
everyone.

And I see a future of justice - the justice of good jobs, decent health care,
quality education, of full opportunity for all people regardless of color or
language or religion; the simple human justice of equal rights for all men -and
for all women, guaranteed equal rights at last - under the Constitution of the
United States of America.

And I see a future of peace - a peace born of wisdom and based on the fairness
toward all countries of the world - a peace guaranteed both by American military
strength and by American moral strength as well.

That is the future I want for all people - a future of confidence and hope and a
good life. It's the future America must choose - and with your help and with
your commitment it is the future America will choose.

On the Republican Program

But there is another possible future.  In that other future, I see despair
-despair of millions who would struggle for equal opportunity and a better life
- and struggle alone.

And I see surrender - the surrender of our energy future to the merchants of
oil; the surrender of our economic future to a bizarre program of massive tax
cuts for the rich; service cuts for the poor; and massive inflation for
everyone.

I see risk - the risk of international confrontation; the risk of an
uncontrollable, unaffordable and unwinnable nuclear arms race.  No one, Democrat
or Republican, consciously seeks such a future.  And I do not claim that my
opponent does. But I do question the disturbing comitments and policies already
made by him and by those with him who have now captured control of the
Republican Party.

The consequences of those commitments and policies would drive us down the wrong
road. It's up to all of us to make sure America rejects this alarming, and even
perilous, destiny.

The only way - the only way to build a better future is to start with the
realities of the present. But while we Democrats grapple with the real
challenges of a real world, others talk about a world of tinsel and
make-believe.

Let's look for a moment at their make-believe world.  In their fantasy America,
inner city people, and farm workers and laborers do not Women, like children,
are to be seen but not heard.  The problems of working women are simply ignored
The elderly do not need Medicare. The young do not need more help in getting a
better education. Workers do not require the guarantee of a healthy and a safe
place to work.

In their fantasy world, all the complex global changes of the world since World
War II have never happened. In their fantasy America, all problems have simple
solutions. Simple - and wrong.
pick up 3d add CARTER TEXT

It's a make believe world. A world of good guys and bad guys, where some
politi-cians shoot first and ask questionslater No hard choices. No sacrifice.
No tough decisions.  It sounds too good to be true - and it is.  The path of
fantasy leads to irresponsibility. The path of reality leads to hope and peace.
The two paths could not be more different.  Nor could the futures to which they
lead. Let's take a hard look at the consequences of our choice.

You and I have been working toward a more secure future by rebuilding our
military strength - steadily, carefullly and responsibly. The Republicans talk
about military strength, but they were in office for eight out of the last 11
years and in the face of a growing Soviet threat they steadily cut real defense
spending by more than a third.

We've reversed the Republican decline in defense. Every year since I have been
President we have had real increases in our commitment to a stronger nation -
increases which are prudent and rational.

There is no doubt that the United States of America can meet any threat from the
Soviet Union. Our modernized strategic forces, a revitalized NATO, the Trident
submarine, the Cruise missile, the Rapid Deployment Force - all these guarantee
that we will never be second to any nation. Deeds, not words - fact, not
fiction.

We must and we will continue to build our own defenses. We must and we will
continue to seek balanced reductions in nuclear arms.

Arms Control Policies The new leaders of the Republican Party, in order to close
the gap between their rhetoric and their record, have now promised to launch an
all-out nuclear arms race. This would negate any further effort to negotiate a
strategic arms limitation agreement. There can be no winners in such an arms
race - and all the people of the earth can be the losers.

The Republican nominee advocates abandoning arms control policies which have
been important and supported by every Democratic President since Harry Truman
and also by every Republican President since Dwight D. Eisenhower. This radical
and irresponsible course would threaten our security and could put the whole
world in peril.

You and I must never let this come to pass.  It is simple to call for a new arms
race. But when armed aggression threatens world peace, those - tough-sounding
talk like that is not enough. A president must act - responsibly.

When Soviet troops invaded Afghanistan, we moved quickly to take action. I
suspended some grain sales to the Soviet Union, I called for draft registration,
we joined wholeheartedly with the Congress and I joined wholeheartedly with the
Congress and with the U.S.  Olympic Committee, and led more than 60 other
nations in boycotting the big propoganda show in Russia - the Moscow Olympics.

The Republican leader opposed two of these forceful but peaceful actions and he
waffled on the third. But when we asked him what he would do about aggression in
Southwest Asia, he suggested blockading Cuba. Even his running mate wouldn't go
along with that.

He doesn't seem to know what to do with the Russians. He is not sure if he wants
to feed them, or play with them, or fight with them.

As I look back in my first term, I am grateful that we have had a country with a
full four years of peace. And that is what we're gonna have for the next four
years - peace.

It is only common sense that if America is to stay secure and at peace, we must
encourage others to be peaceful as well.  As you know we have helped in
Zimbabwe, Rhodesia, where we stood firm for racial justice and democracy. And we
have also helped in the Middle East. Some have criticized the Camp David accords
and they've criticized some delays in the implementation of the Middle East
peace treaty.

Well before I became President there was no Camp David accord and there was no
Middle East peace treaty. Before Camp David, Israel and Egypt were poised across
barbed wire, confronting each other with guns and tanks and planes. But
afterward, they talked face to face with each other across a peace table, and
they also communicated through their own ambassadors in Cairo and Tel Aviv.

Now that's the kind of future we are offering of peace to the Middle East if the
Democrats are re-elected in the fall.  I am very proud that nearly half the aid
that our country has given to Israel in the 32 years of her existence has come
during my Administration. Unlike our Republican predecessors, we have never
stopped nor slowed that aid to Israel. And as long as I am President, we will
never do so. Our commitment is clear: security and peace for Israel, peace for
all the peoples of the Middle East.

But if the world is to have a future of freedom as well as peace, America must
continue to defend human rights. Now listen to this.  The new Republican leaders
oppose our human rights policy. They want to scrap it.

They seem to think it is naive for America to stand up for freedom and
democracy. Just what do they think we should stand up for?  Ask the former
polictical prisoners who now live in freedom if we should abandon our stand on
human rights.

PICKUP 4th ADD

Ask the dissidents in the Soviet Union about our commitment to human rights.
Ask the Hungarian-Americans, ask the Polish-Americans. Listen to Pope John Paul
II.  Ask those who are suffering for the sake of justice and liberty around the
world.  Ask the millions who've fled tyranny if America should stop speaking out
for human principles.  Ask the American people. I tell you that as long as I am
President, we will hold high the banner of human rights and you can depend on
it.

Here at home, the choice between the two futures is equally important.  In the
long run, nothing is more crucial to the future of America than energy - nothing
was so disastrously neglected in the past.  Long after the 1973 Arab oil
embargo, the Republicans in the White House had still done nothing to meet this
threat to national security of our nation.  Then, as now, their policy was
dictated by the big oil companies.

We Democrats fought hard to rally our nation behind a comprehensive energy
policy and a good program, new foundation for challenging and exciting progress.

Now, after three years of struggle we have that program.  The battle to secure
American energy future has been fully and finally joined. Americans have
cooperated with dramatic results.  We've reversed decades of dangerous and
growing dependence on foreign oil.

We are now importing 20 percent less oil. That is 1.5 million barrels every day
less than the day I took office. And with our new energy policy now in place, we
can discover more, produce more, create more, and conserve more energy - and we
will use American resources, American technology and millions of American
workers to do it with.

Now what do the Republicans propose?  Basically their energy program has two
parts.The first part is to get rid of almost everything that we've done for the
American public in the last three years. They want to reduce or abolish the
synthetic-fuels program. They want to slash the solar energy incentives, the
conservation programs, aid to mass transit, aid to elderly Americans to help pay
their fuel bills.

They want to eliminate the 55-mile speed limit, and while they are at it, the
Republicans would like to gut the Clean Air Act. They never liked it to begin
with.

That's one part of the program. The other part is worse.
get 5th add...

To replace what we have built, this is what they propose: to destroy the
windfall profits tax, and to ''unleash'' the oil companies and let them solve
the energy problem for us.

That's it. That's it. That's their whole program. There is no more.  Can this
nation accept such an outrageous program? No! We Democrats will fight it every
step of the way and we'll begin tomorrow morning with a campaign for re-election
in November.

A Heavy Load of Problems

When I took office, I inherited a heavy load of serious economic problems
besides energy - and we've met 'em all head-on. We've slashed government
regulation and put free enterprise back into airlines, to trucking and the
financial systems of our country, and we are now doing the same thing for the
railroads.

This is the greatest change in the relationship between government and business
since the New Deal. We've increased our exports dramatically. We reversed the
decline into basic research and development. And we have created more than eight
million new jobs, the biggest increase in the history of our country.

But the road's bumpy, and last year's skyrocketing OPEC price increases have
helped to trigger a worldwide inflation crisis.  We took forceful action, and
interest rates have now fallen, the dollar is stable and, although we still have
a battle on our hands, we are struggling to bring inflation under control.

We are now at the critical point - a turning point in the economic history of
our country. But because we made the hard decisions, because we have guided our
nation and its economy through a rough but essential period of transition, we've
laid the groundwork for a new economic age.

Our economic renewal program for the 1980's will meet our immediate need for
jobs and attack the very same long-range problems that caused unemployment and
inflation in the first place. It will move America simultaneously towards our
five great economic goals - lower inflation, better productivity, revitalization
of American industry, energy security and jobs.

It's time to put all America back to work - but not in make-work, in real work.
And there is real work in modernizing American industry and creating new
industries for America as well.  Here are just a few things we will rebuild
together and build together: - New industries to turn our own coal and shale and
farm products into fuel for our cars and trucks, and to turn the light of the
sun into heat and electricity for our homes.

- A modern transportation system of railbeds and ports to make American coal
into a powerful rival of OPEC oil.  - Industries that will provide the
convenience of futuristic computer technology and communications to serve
millions of American homes, and offices and factories.

PICK UP 6th ADD...1131PM jat

Where is the conscience of Lincoln in the party of Lincoln? What has become of
the traditional Republican commitment to fiscal responsibility? What has
happened to their commitment to a safe and sane arms control?

Defense of Democratic Record Now I don't claim perfection for the Democratic
Party. I don't claim that every decision that we have made has been right or
popular. Certainly they have not all been easy. But I will say this:

We have been tested under fire. We have neither ducked nor hidden.  And We have
tackled the great, central issues of our time the historic challenges of energy
and peace which have been ignored for years. We have made tough decisions and we
have taken the heat for them. We have made mistakes, and we have learned from
them. But we have built the foundation now for a better future.

We have done something else -perhaps even more important. In good times and bad,
in the valleys and on the peaks, we have told people the truth - the hard truth
-the truth that sometimes hurts.

One truth that we Americans have learned is that our dream has been earned. For
progress and for peace. Look at what our land has been through within our own
memory -a great Depression, a World War, a technological explosion, the civil
rights revolution, the bitterness of Vietnam, the shame of Watergate, the
twilight peace of nuclear terror.

Through each of these momentous experiences we have learned the hard way about
the world and about ourselves. But We have matured and we've grown as a nation.
And we've grown stronger.

We have learned the uses and the limitations of power. We have learned the
beauty and the responsibility of freedom. We have learned the value and the
obligation of justice - and we have learned the necessity of peace.

Some would argue that to master these lessons is somehow to limit our potential.
That is not so. A nation which knows its true strengths, which sees its true
challenges, which understands legitimate constraints - that nation - our nation
- is far stronger than one which takes refuge in wishful thinking or nostalgia.
pu eighth add sub carter text

- Job training for workers displaced by economic changes.  - New investment
pinpointed in regions and neighborhoods where jobs are needed most.  - Better
mass transit in our cities and in between cities.  - And a whole new generation
of American jobs to make homes and vehicles and buildings that will house us and
move us in comfort - with a lot less energy.

And this is important too - I have no doubt that the ingenuity and dedication of
the American people can make every single one of these things happen. We are
talking about the United States of America - and those who count this country
out as an economic superpower are going to find out just how wrong they are.

We're going to share in the exciting enterprise of making the 1980's a time of
growth for America.The Republican alternative is the biggest tax giveaway in
history.  They call it Reagan-Kemp-Roth. I call it a free lunch that Americans
cannot afford.

The Republican tax program offers rebates to the rich, deprivation for the poor
and fierce inflation for all of us. Their party's own Vice-Presidential nominee
said that Reagan-Kemp-Roth would result in an inflation rate of more than 30
percent. He called it ''voodoo economics.'' He suddenly changed his mind toward
the end of the Republican convention, but he was right the first time.

Along with this gigantic tax cut, the new Republican leaders promise to protect
retirement and health programs and to make massive increases in defense
spending, and they claim they can balance the budget.

If they are serious about these promises - and they say they are - then a close
analysis shows that the entire rest of the government would have to be abolished
- everything from education to farm programs to the G.I. Bill to the night
watchman at the Lincoln Memorial. And the Federal budget would still be in the
red.

The only alternative would be to build more printing presses to print cheap
money. Either way the American people lose. But the American people will not
stand for it.

Achievements in Social Justice

The Democratic Party has always embodied the hope of our people for justice,
opportunity, and a better life. And we've worked in every way possible to
strengthen the American family, to encourage self-reliance, and to follow the
Old Testament admonition: ''Defend the poor and the fatherless: give justice to
the afflicted and needy.'' (Psalms 82:3.) We've struggled to assure that no
child in America ever goes to bed hungry, that no elderly couple in America has
to live in a substandard home, and that no young person is excluded from college
because the family is poor.

What have the Republicans proposed? Just an attack on everything that we've done
in the achievement of social justice and decency that we've won in the last 50
years - ever since Franklin Delano Roosevelt's first term. They would make
Social Security voluntary.  They would reverse our progress on the minimum wage,
full employment laws, safety in the work place and a healthy environment.

Lately, as you know, the Republicans have been quoting Democratic Presidents -
but who can blame them? Would you rather quote President Herbert Hoover or
Franklin Delano Roosevelt? Would you rather quote Richard Nixon or John
Fitzgerald Kennedy?

The Republicans have always been the party of privilege, but this year their
leaders have gone even further. In their platform, they have repudiated the best
traditions of their own party.
get 7th add

On a Vision of America

The Democratic Party - and the American people - have understood these
fundamental truths.  All of us can sympathize with the desire for easy answers.
There is often a temptation to substitute idle dreams for hard reality.  The new
Republican leaders are hoping that our nation will succumb to that temptation
this year but they profoundly misunderstand and underestimate the character of
the American people

Three weeks after Pearl Harbor, Winston Churchill came to North America - and he
said: ''We have not journeyed all this way across the centuries, across the
oceans, across the mountains, across the prairies because we are made of sugar
candy.''

We Americans have courage.  Americans have always been on the cutting edge of
change. We have always looked forward with anticipation and confidence. I still
want the same thing all of you want - a self-reliant neighborhood, strong
families; work for the able-bodied and good medical care for the sick;
opportunity for our youth and dignity for our old; equal rights and justice for
all people.

I want teachers eager to explain what a civilization really is - and I want
students to understand their own needs and their own aims, but also the needs
and yearnings of their neighbors. I want women free to pursue without limit the
full life of what they want for themselves.

I want our farmers growing crops to feed our nation and the world, secure in the
knowledge that the family farm will thrive and with a fair return on the good
work they do for all of us. I want workers to see meaning in the labor they
perform - and work enough to guarantee a job for every worker in this country. I
want the people in business free to pursue in boldness and freedom new ideas.
And I want minority citizens fully to join the mainstream of American life, and
I want from the bottom of my heart to remove the blight of racial or other
discrimination from the face of our nation and I'm determined to do it.

I need for all of you to Join me in fulfilling that vision. The choice - the
choice between the two futures - could not be more clear. If we succumb to a
dream world then we'll wake up to a nightmare. But if we start with reality and
fight to make our dreams a reality - then Americans will have a good life, a
life of meaning and purpose in a nation thats strong and secure.

Above all, I want us to be what the founders of our nation meant us to become -
the land of freedom, the land of peace, and the land of hope.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Carter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING:HISTORY VIA TAPE RECORDER

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 794 words


ORAL history is a relatively new technique in the creation of books. It sounds
like a shortcut for an author: you turn on the tape recorder, let your subject
or his friends and enemies speak, then patch it all together into a book. Or you
go to one of the institutions with taped memoirs - for example, Columbia
University, where Allan Nevins and other scholars pioneered the Oral History
Project three decades ago - and get typescripts of recollections instead of
doing the legwork yourself.

But like other writing tools, the tape recorder requires a human behind it,
preferably one with narrative skills, such as Merle Miller, author of
''Lyndon,'' an oral biography of President Johnson published by G.P. Putnam's
Sons.

Mr. Miller proved himself a master of the technique several years ago with
''Plain Speaking,'' his oral biography of Harry S. Truman.  The reader can turn
to Mr. Miller's new biography as an example of lively information about a great
political personality and of the oral history technique itself.

''Oral history is a particularly good way of dealing with someone like Lyndon
Johnson,'' Mr. Miller says. ''He almost never stopped talking about himself. And
then he was the sort of subject who people loved or hated. Either way, everybody
had stories about him. Johnson himself turned out to be so many different
characters, he could have populated all of 'War and Peace' and still had a few
people left over.

''I had the usual hesitation about doing a Johnson biography. Like many of my
friends, I was so against the Vietnam war and his role that I overlooked the
essence of Johnson. Here was an honest-to-God radical, with some great social
legislation passed during his Administration. Truman was one-dimensional, but
L.B.J. had no protective coloring. He was an ideal subject.''

Mr. Miller only met his subject once, in 1940, when he was a Texas Congressman.
Mr. Miller was 21 years old and working for The Philadelphia Record.

''He struck me as Uncle Cornball and I didn't particularly take to him,'' says
Mr. Miller, who later become an Army correspondent and editor of Yank magazine
in Europe. He has written novels and that wonderful parody of sitcom television,
''Only You, Dick Daring!''

In addition to his 180 interviews, he made use of 276 oral histories in the
Johnson library, plus other Presidential libraries.  Easy? No, again. ''The
proper preparation for an interview takes at least three days,'' Mr. Miller
says. ''You have to know as much as possible about the subject and the
interviewee's relationship, you have to ask the right questions and then hear
the answers instead of getting caught up in the tape recorder's machinery.''

Who is next on Mr. Miller's agenda?  ''Not a person,'' he replied. '' 'Lyndon'
took five years, and there aren't many around like him. Andrew Jackson was a
simple man compared to Johnson. I'm thinking of doing an oral history of my home
town, Marshalltown, Iowa.''

The Miller book is not, of course, the last word on L.B.J. Knopf plans to
publish a definitive biography by Robert Caro, who wrote ''The Power Brokers,''
that remarkable, lasting study of Robert Moses and his methods for good and ill.

From those wonderful folks who brought you ''The Kent Family Chronicles'' by
John Jakes, the phenomenally successful series of eight paperback volumes of
novelized Americana, now comes ''The Borodins,'' a four-volume saga by Leslie
Arlen about an aristocratic Russian family ''amid the sabled court of the
tsars.'' It is published by Jove Books.

The first volume, with the title printed in raised gold lettering, is ''Love and
Honor,'' which is only one letter longer than ''War and Peace.'' The second book
will, in fact, be called ''War and Passion,'' the third, ''Destiny and Desire,''
the fourth ''Vengeance and Hope.'' They will be published every six months or so
between now and 1982.

Here are some of the ''Borodin'' characters in the inimitable words of the
jacket copy: ''Ilona ... she was a princess of Russia. Her destiny was to rule.
Her desire was to love. The American ... his kiss ignited Ilona's young world
and hurtled it off its ancient course. The Prince ... the man she must marry to
fulfill her imperial birthright. The Servant ... his passion was an enslavement
-more binding than chains. ... ''

Jove is backing the series with a $1 million promotional campaign.  Jove's
publisher, William R. Grose, says the promotion will include a tie-in using a
specially created dessert to convey the opulence and sweep of the series. The
dessert, called the Borodin Crown Delice, combines three traditional Russian
dishes - kisel (a kind of gelatin), kulich ( a cake) and strawberries Romanoff.
If nothing else, the series may make critics eat their words.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 15, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


By John Leonard
LYNDON: An Oral Biography. By Merle Miller. 645 pages. G.P. Putnam's.  $17.95.

MERLE MILLER has managed to write the book about Lyndon Johnson that Johnson
himself, in his memoirs, failed to write. The real man - who seemed variously to
impersonate Gargantua and Goliath and Peter the Great and King Lear - all size
and energy and cunning and ultimate disappointment - is more to be found in the
pages of ''Lyndon'' than in the pages of his own book, ''The Vantage Point.''
Something about the nature of presidential memoirs turns every President into a
stuffed eagle, with buttons for eyes and no heart.

The Lyndon of ''Lyndon'' has a heart as big as every other part of him, and a
mouth to match. He is coarse and ambitious, ribald and weepy, a populist and a
womanizer, full of rhetorical wind and obsessed with the grubby details, the
glad hand that twists the arm and the sexual magnet who worries aloud that he
isn't handsome, that he doesn't look as good in his new double-breasted suits as
John F.  Kennedy managed to look, even though Lyndon's suits are just as
expensive as Kennedy's. He really did care about blacks and other minorities,
even though he opposed almost every piece of civil rights legislation introduced
into Congress until the beginning of the 1960's. He needs a Shakespeare.

Shakespeares being in short supply, Merle Miller will do. For ''Plain
Speaking,'' Mr. Miller's earlier oral biography of Harry S.  Truman, he had
merely to interview Mr. Truman. For ''Lyndon,'' he spent five years interviewing
hundreds of people - family, friends, neighbors, political associates, political
enemies, anybody who would sit still for a tape recorder - and reading everybody
else's interviews of the same people, not to mention the pertinent books. He
consulted the living and the dead. ''Lyndon'' is a long book and yet too quick,
like a conversation that has to stop at 3 in the morning because the brains and
the feet are asleep.

A Colorful Career

Here is the first-born and the favorite child in the Texas hill country, the
young wheeler-dealer, the part-time teacher of Mexican-American children, the
legislative aide in Washington, the impulsive and insistent beau of Lady Bird,
the New Deal zealot who worshipped Franklin D. Roosevelt, the driven bureaucrat
who cared about education, the first-term Congressman who delivered electric
power to his rural district, the first-term Senator who probably didn't steal
any more votes in the Texas Democratic primary of 1948 than his opponent did,
the egalitarian liberal who trimmed his sails on behalf of Big Oil, the leader
of the minority and the majority, the accidental President, the man who fell on
the sword of Vietnam.

The anecdotes confound. Hubert H. Humphrey, Lyndon's principal victim, talks too
much, as usual; Mr. Humphrey must have gone to his grave wondering about this
man. Benjamin Bradlee of The Washington Post describes the ''Johnson
treatment'': ''You really felt as if a Saint Bernard had licked your face for an
hour, had pawed you all over.'' And: ''When he was in the Senate, especially as
majority leader, it was like going to the zoo. He never just shook hands with
you. One hand was shaking your hand; the other was always someplace else
exploring you, examining you.''

We are told what he did to try to humiliate Douglas Dillon and John N. Garner,
how he horned in on a photograph of Speaker Sam Rayburn and Franklin Roosevelt,
his use of the telephone as a kind of long distance viper even as doctors did
unspeakable things to his body - what poor health he had, from the gall bladder
to the heart, smoking three packs of cigarettes a day, eating hot dogs and
drinking whisky in tumblers that got darker -his wily maneuverings against
Senator Joseph R. McCarthy and the Bricker amendment, his brief descent into
red-baiting, the Silver Star and the electrocardiogram he carried with him
almost every day of his life. It is also nice to know that before Bill Moyers
became Bill Moyers he was Billy Don Moyers, a Texas journalism student.

More Than a Southerner

Johnson was a Southern politician who intended from the beginning to be more
than Southern. His Great Society, for all its faults, represented everything the
Democratic party has stood for, from his revered Roosevelt until this week in
New York. Vietnam destroyed him, among many others. But what drove him? Why the
rage? Surely something more had to be going on in his psyche than simple
resentment of the aristocratic Georgetown set, many members of which planned the
war as though they were playing Dungeons and Dragons.

Mr. Miller doesn't know, or isn't asking. He likes the Lyndon he has found, and
his liking of him makes his book agreeable. It is not a book of analysis,
however. Oral historians tend to leave the analysis to somebody else, later on.
Perhaps we should be harder on oral history. Then again, if an oral historian,
like Mr. Miller, sums up Senator Robert S. Kerr as ''a man of intense vulgarity
and greed,'' and leaves the analysis at that, perhaps we should insist that oral
historians say nothing at all in their own voices.

I don't mean to be churlish. Johnson was not a packaged President; he was too
big, and when the package burst, there was blood all over the place. Mr. Miller
makes one begin to like him a little bit. Only his mother and Lady Bird could
understand him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Merie Miller

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 16, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPAIGN REPORT;
Groups Protesting Sex Bias And Draft Lift Nominations

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 137 words


By United Press International
Vice-Presidential nominees representing antidraft forces and the Gay Alliance
made their views known, then withdrew their names from consideration Thursday at
the Democratic National Convention in New York City.

Patricia Stone Simon, a peace activist from Newport, Mass., whose son was killed
in Vietnam, withdrew her nomination after denouncing draft registration.

Mrs. Simon, who got 11 votes in the roll-call that renominated Vice President
Mondale, termed the draft ''one of the cruelest and most destructive
institutions we have ever experienced in our country.''

Melvin Boozer of Washington, president of the Gay Alliance, got 49 votes. He
said he represented ''20 million Americans who love this country and long to
serve it in the same freedom that others take for granted.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE REAL J.R.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4133 words


William K. Stevens is chief of The Times's bureau in Houston. By William K.
Stevens he brim of a sweat-stained Stetson shading his lean, leathery
frontiersman's face, J.R. Parten, 84 years of age, urges his Buick along the
trail that Davy Crockett followed on his way from Tennessee to the Alamo. Oaks
and pecans, pines and redbuds flash by as Parten rides across the gently
billowing landscape of lush East Texas - from the oil wells he has been drilling
near his home in Madisonville, past the little town of Midway, where his
grandfather settled after fighting in Sam Houston's army, toward the family
cattle ranches just beyond the Trinity River.

Oil and cattle. The combination has enriched many a Texan, and it has earned
millions for Jubal Richard Parten, too. Some say he could have built a financial
empire rivaling that of the late H.L. Hunt, but for the fact he was too busy
doing other things. Crossing swords with the House Un-American Activities
Committee, for instance, or fanning the sometimes flickering flame of liberalism
in conservative Texas. Organizing the mammoth World War II ''Big Inch'' pipeline
for Franklin D. Roosevelt or introducing John B. Connally to Lyndon B.  Johnson.
Serving as a regent of the University of Texas or as chairman of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas.

Parten is a study in seeming contradictions: a Texas millionaire whose
soft-spoken, courtly ways shatter the familiar, flamboyant stereotype; a man who
has played a major role in state and national Democratic politics for
generations yet has managed to stay out of the limelight; an oilman, one of a
breed known for its conservatism, who has impeccable liberal credentials. This
last may seem the biggest contradiction of all. An economic conservative, Parten
is nonetheless a firm believer in liberal social principles. One phrase holds
the key to understanding this philosophy: ''the Republic.'' And one vision
animates that thinking: Thomas Jefferson's. J.R. Parten is a Jeffersonian
Democrat whose watchword is ''Get the Government staff off the people's backs''
-out of their lives and, as much as possible, out of the economy as well.

There was a time, in an earlier, simpler age, when many Americans thought that
way. But Parten has spent most of his life in the industrial era, and
Jeffersonian thought has seemed out of sync with the times. Now, in the ninth
decade of his life, he might be expected to sit back, relax and enjoy his first
grandson, aged 9 months. He is enjoying, though he is hardly sitting back and
relaxing. For one thing, along with his 31-year-old son, he is drilling oil
wells at a brisk pace. For another, he has a sense that the Republic to which he
has devoted his life is threatened by the kind of economic distress and social
turmoil he has not seen since the Great Depression. Parten has lived long enough
to see the start of a move in his philosophical direction. Many other Americans
have come to embrace his brand of democracy, to maintain their beliefs in human
rights and civil liberties while turning away from the New Deal faith that
Government programs and spending will solve all problems. But is it too late?
Will the Republic survive the coming strains?  The magic two-word phrase comes
up for the first time soon after the hurtling Buick crosses the Trinity River.
Parten makes it clear that the Republic is not the same thing as the nation,
that vast collection of people and wealth and power that makes up the physical
body of the United States. It is, rather, a continental community founded on a
set of ideals, codified largely in the Bill of Rights, which decrees that the
Government shall respect the freedom, integrity and privacy of the individual.
Without that code, you might have an American Empire, perhaps, but not an
American Republic. It is the main thing, J.R. Parten firmly believes, that makes
the United States essentially different from every other society on the planet,
past and present. ''And we're trying to throw it away,'' Parten says as he
drives through the luminous spring morning. His chief fear: ''a constant,
constant chiseling, chiseling, chiseling away'' of the Bill of Rights.  Parten
has slowed up a mite since he started drilling oil wells 60 years ago. But he
still drives the 100 miles down Interstate 45 from Madisonville to Houston each
Monday, checks into the Lamar Hotel, works at his Houston office each day, then
drives back to his comfortable but by no means opulent home in Madisonville on
Thursday afternoon. And he still takes a back seat to no one when the time comes
to stake out a new drilling site.

Striding along in scuffed cowboy boots and old clothes, pacing off the distance
between two stakes, ''J.R.'' (as close friends and relatives call the 6-foot-1
oilman; everyone else calls him ''Mr.  Parten'' or ''Major Parten'' or ''Mr.
J.R.'') is usually several paces ahead of his small army of bearers who vainly
try to keep up.  Oil is not the only commercial game that fascinates him. Cattle
ranching does, too. That's clear as he drives across a pasture on the Greenbriar
Ranch (one of three he either owns or in which he has an interest), bouncing
along toward a herd of floppy-eared, hump-backed Brahman cattle (called Brahmas
in the business) that bear the ''J.R.'' brand on their shoulders. ''I teach my
boys, you can make Brahma cattle just as wild as you want to,'' he says, while
the Brahmas themselves hustle over thinking they're in for a feed. ''We want
them gentle. If you treat 'em right, two people (on horseback) can handle this
herd of cattle. One in front, one behind can take 'em anywhere.'' But hunting
for oil is his first love, at once his main work and main recreation. ''You feel
like you created something when you go out here and get a good well,'' he says,
''especially if it's been turned down by some experts before you.'' utside
Madisonville, he shows off an oil field that gave him just such a good feeling.
Around the perimeter of an underground geological structure called the ''Day
Dome'' he has drilled 12 successful wells during the last five years, 10 of them
producing oil and two producing natural gas. Some time ago, when crude oil was
plentiful, Sun Oil Company geologists had abandoned the Day Dome when they
failed to strike oil easily. Today, with domestic supplies sinking and prices
soaring, much of the oil game involves a second effort with such once-tried
prospects.  Parten strides over to a ''Christmas tree,'' the collection of
valves and meters that controls oil coming up out of the ground.  ''Listen,'' he
says, ''you can hear it flowing.'' And you can hear it, a definite hiss-rush
that spells money. Parten won't say how much money he's made over the years. He
allows that his peak production, some years ago, was 20,000 barrels of crude a
day, taken from wells in Texas, Louisiana and Canada - and millions of barrels
of crude add up to millions of dollars of income. But he insists, ''I don't hold
myself as a big, rich oilman. I'm just a solid, hard-workin' oilman.''

Since 1973, the price of newly discovered domestic oil has increased nearly
tenfold, helped by the decontrol measure passed in June 1979. That spells
bonanza for those who produce oil, the giant major oil conglomerates and the
roughly 10,000 independent producers like Parten, the backbone of the
oil-and-gas production industry.  Everybody's out there now drilling for oil at
the most furious pace in two decades.

But Parten worries that governmental regulation, plus the windfallprofits tax
recently levied on crude oil, in the long run may dampen not only the will to
explore for oil so actively, but the will to go into the oil business at all.
The new tax falls heavily on the independents, he says, because getting oil out
of the ground is their only ball game, while the major oil companies have a
variety of other activities unaffected by the tax. He fears that the oil
business will go the way of the auto business, a handful of huge companies the
only survivors.

Such a trend toward monopoly can only hurt the consumer in the long run, Parten
feels. ''The chief thing the Government should do for industry,'' he says, ''is
to see that fair competition is preserved.'' He considers welfare, Social
Security and food stamps necessary, given the inequalities of the
free-enterprise system, but let there be no mistake - J.R. Parten is basically
an economic conservative. He rails, for example, against what he calls the
''spend-and-spend-and-spend, elect-and-elect'' philosophy of some of the
''socialist'' politicians whose policies, he believes, are largely responsible
for the country's dangerous, long-term inflationary surge.

Some of this may sound like J.R. Ewing, the unscrupulous wheelerdealer
oil-and-cattle baron of the television soap opera ''Dallas.'' But by all
accounts, J.R. Ewing shares little with J.R.  Parten except his initials.

The Jeffersonian Parten sees no inherent clash between this economic
conservatism and a passion for civil liberties, equal rights and opportunities
and basic constitutional guarantees. Neither does a growing number of Americans
whose political attitudes have lately moved in the same direction.

This shift seems most evident in California, that bellwether of shifting moods
and trends. Michael Barone, Grant Ujifusa and Douglas Matthews in ''The Almanac
of American Politics 1980'' put it this way:

''The conventional wisdom about American politics since the New Deal has been
that it is best to be liberal on economic issues and conservative on social
issues. This was Roosevelt's formula and Truman's and Kennedy's; it was also the
liberal Republican formula of Eisenhower and the Nelson Rockefeller-influenced
Richard Nixon of 1960. What California suggests is that the more successful
formula in the future will be liberalism on social issues and conservatism on
economic issues.''

That is just where J.R. Parten has been all along, though he's not made much of
a public show of it. There is, indeed, a certain Victorian reserve, almost an
asceticism, about the man. He doesn't write articles or make speeches, though he
reads constantly. He has never sought office. How, then, has Parten made his
influence felt?  Through half a century of associations with powerful people and
institutions -and through the money he has given them.  J.R. Parten's life has
bridged much of the history of the Lone Star State -from a mostly poor land of
ranchers and hand-to-mouth cotton farmers to the world's greatest oil producer
at midcentury to an industrial and commercial colossus 30 years later. Born in
1896, only 60 years after the siege of the Alamo, he learned his political
philosophy at the Madisonville dinner table of his farmer-merchant father. His
parents, in turn, got it directly from the source. ''They took their democracy
from the book of Thomas Jefferson,'' says Parten. ''They never went to college,
but they read.''

His father, Wayne, was the orphaned son of a Confederate soldier from Alabama,
brought to Texas as a boy in the post-Civil War wave of migration from the
ravaged Old South. His mother, Ella May Brooks, was the daughter of an early
Texas settler, originally a Virginian, who was granted land for his service in
the Texas Revolution under General Houston.

These ''Anglos'' who migrated to Texas in the 19th century tended to be fiercely
laissez-faire in their attitudes, a strain of thought still common to Texans,
Democrats and Republicans alike. At the same time, they were outraged by the
economic oppression of small farmers by the big railroads. Populism was born out
of these independent impulses and boiling anger, and it eventually led to
today's populisttinged brand of Texas liberalism.

Wayne Parten ran a general store in Madisonville and grew corn and cotton on
land outside town. J.R. was the sixth of 11 children. He remembers how his
parents talked about Jeffersonian principles, explicitly identifying them as
such, and about fair treatment for blacks ''because they're human beings and
they have rights just like you do.'' Parten says those teachings left him with
''no problems'' coming to terms with desegregation when it became the law of the
land. Friends say that he doesn't go out of his way to violate the close-to-home
racial taboos of Madisonville, but he has spoken out about black rights often in
the larger forum.

J.R. majored in government at the University of Texas, planning to become a
lawyer, but World War I intervened. (Commissioned as an artillery officer along
with J. Frank Dobie, the writer, he was on his way to France when the war
ended.) Then his father-in-law wanted to go into oil and challenged J.R. to go
along. ''My classmates that finished the University of Texas with me got their
law licenses and went to work in Houston for $75 a month,'' he says. ''I figured
I could beat that.''

The heyday of the Texas oil business was just beginning. As Parten admits,
between 1922, when he organized the Woodley Petroleum Company in Shreveport,
La., and 1960, when he was forced to sell out, he made ''a hell of a lot of
money.'' The loss of Woodley was, in a sense, the price that Parten paid for his
determination to have a child. He had divorced his first wife because, he says,
she was unable to bear any. The settlement had included splitting half his
interest in the company with her, and some years later, when the majority
stockholders voted to sell the company, he couldn't prevent it.

At age 64, when other men might simply have retired and played golf, Parten
formed another company and began drilling for oil again. The second company ''is
just now getting to the takeoff point,'' says John Randolph Parten, his only
child, who has joined J.R. the elder in business.  The entry of J.R. Parten into
the big leagues of public policy came in the 1930's and was over an issue that
combined two of his most central concerns, the oil business and big Government.
Because of a glut in the booming East Texas oil fields, the bottom had dropped
out of the price of crude. Most oilmen, in a panic, were crying for Federal
salvation, and a Federal office was proposed to regulate oil and gas production
nationally. Parten opposed it on the ground that it was an unwarranted and
dangerous assumption of states' power by the Federal Government.

In what proved to be the start of a long-standing association, Parten enlisted
Sam Rayburn in the cause. ''I was very close to Rayburn,'' Parten says of the
late Speaker of the House of Representatives. ''He visited me in Madisonville, I
visited him in Bonham. He was a great statesman, God bless him. I miss him every
day. Every decision he made was on the basis of what is consistent with
constitutional principles, No. 1, and No. 2, what is good for the people in the
country at large. He never played cheap politics.'' The battle over the Federal
oil office was resolved, according to Parten, when Rayburn ''saw the wickedness
of that damned legislation from the standpoint of the Republic'' and bottled it
up in his committee.

In the late 1930's, Parten served as a trustee and later chairman of the board
of the University of Texas, an institution that was then, and is now, considered
as being somewhat hamstrung by political interference. Parten was perceived as a
bulwark against such interference.

It was during his time with the university that Parten met Lyndon Johnson, then
making his first run for Congress. ''Fine, Lyndon, what's your platform?''
Parten asked. ''Oh, I'm going to help Roosevelt pack the (Supreme) Court,''
Johnson answered. Parten recalls: ''I'd been through the university and had
studied political science and the value of the separation of powers, and I gave
him a moral lecture that you shouldn't interfere with the Court. He went right
on, though, ran on that platform and won.''

Not long afterward, at a chance meeting in the Austin Hotel, Johnson said he was
looking desperately for some campaign talent.  Parten suggested that he look up
John Connally, a ''swashbuckling young man'' who had been the president of the
student body at the university. Thus Connally was hired and launched on his
public career.

These days, Parten doesn't much hold with Connally's politics in many ways,
though he says the two get along well. Not long before Connally dropped out of
the 1980 Presidential campaign, Parten commented over lunch at Maxim, a downtown
Houston restaurant, that ''John would make a good dictator.'' But he offered the
opinion goodnaturedly and without malice, as a serious appraisal of Connally's
political qualities.

During the Roosevelt Administration, Parten was appointed director of
transportation for the Petroleum Administration for War. His main job was to
organize the building of the Big Inch and the Little Inch, twin pipelines from
Texas to New York without which, some historians have said, World War II could
not have been won. They were among the biggest engineering feats ever. Parten
describes his job as that of the Government's ''chief arm-twister'' in getting
the project organized and completed.

Most of Parten's political involvement, however, has come in nonofficial or
nongovernmental ways - as a board member of organizations he considered worthy,
as a contributor to causes and politicians, as a participant in the war councils
of the Texas Democratic Party. (He has come down on the liberal side ''maybe 90
percent of the time,'' according to Billie Carr of Houston, a leader of the
state party's liberal wing.)

In the early 1960's, Parten was a board member of the Fund for the Republic
(which evolved into today's Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions).
The fund had sponsored and published an investigation of political blacklisting
in the entertainment industry, which outraged the House Un-American Activities
Committee.  This Congressional bete noire of civil libertarians, heir to the
spirit of McCarthyism, threatened to investigate charges that the fund's report
was Communist-inspired and to take away the fund's tax-exempt status.

Parten went to Washington and called upon Rayburn. As Parten recalls, he told
Rayburn: ''I've decided that somebody working for the committee is being paid
money by somebody to prosecute the Fund for the Republic, and I'm going to spend
some of my money and stick around here for a few days, and I'm going to find out
who's doing it.'' Some three days later, Parten's investigator discovered that a
writer employed by H.L. Hunt's Facts Forum, a John Birch-style rightwing organ
of the time, was working for H.U.A.C. as an investigator.

As Parten later learned, Rayburn got the man dismissed before sundown, and then
went on to conduct his own investigation of H.U.A.C. Rayburn eventually
convinced the House Democratic Caucus that the committee should be phased out,
and it was. ''I got a great deal of satisfaction out of that,'' Parten says,
''knowing that the beginning of the end of the committee was its false attack on
the Fund for the Republic.''

In 1966, Parten was passing through Washington with his wife, Patsy, and son and
was invited to the Johnson White House for dinner. This was long before most of
the country had turned against the Vietnam War, but Parten says he told the
President to get the United States out of Vietnam. ''If you don't,'' he said to
Johnson, ''the people are not going to stay with you on it.'' As Parten recalls,
Johnson said, ''Well, how will I do it?'' and Parten responded, ''Well, you're a
smart man. You can get it over with if you make up your mind you want to, but
first you've got to make up your mind.''

The conversation continued, Parten recalls, along these lines: ''I said
something like, 'I'll tell you one thing. If you don't get this war over, you're
going to perpetrate a great tragedy on the people of this nation.' He said,
'How?' I said, 'You're going to be responsible for electing Dick Nixon
President.' ''

By 1972, his Presidential prediction having come to pass, Parten was
contributing more than $40,000 to the George McGovern campaign - not so much
because he liked McGovern as because he feared what the Nixon Administration
might be doing to the Bill of Rights. ''Got in trouble for it, too,'' he says.
He wound up on the Nixon ''enemies list.'' (Informed of it, he commented, ''I'm
honored.'') At age 84, does J.R. Parten feel any awareness that the end of the
trail may be near? ''I don't think about it a bit,'' he says with a grin. ''Life
is a lot of fun. I have a philosophy that a man makes a mistake by retiring and
just sitting down. If you want to die quickly, that's the way to do it.'' His
health is good. He has his three tumblers of hot water in the morning instead of
coffee, perhaps one Scotch and water at night. Some evenings, he'll have friends
over for chicken-fried steak, eaten at one end of the dining-room table whose
other end is piled high with the maps, papers and drilling records that Parten
has been poring over earlier in the day. There, talk of the Republic dominates.
It is an exercise in eternal vigilance, Texas style.

Randy Parten and his wife, Lynne, say that since Jeremy was born last fall, J.R.
has seemed warmer and more open. He is almost grandmotherly with his grandchild,
says Lynne.

Randy and his father are hardly carbon copies. J.R. is lanky and blue-eyed while
Randy is shorter, with his late mother's dark eyes.  J.R. is flinty, formal,
sometimes distant; his son is informal and outgoing. Randy's interests range
beyond oil, cattle and public affairs to acting and carpentry. And while the
elder Parten lives in the small-town setting of his ancestors, Randy and his
family reside in an old, inner-city house they have restored in Houston. Randy
rides a bicycle to work, skis in Colorado and likes parties.

Yet the Partens share a basic view of the world. Randy, for example, supported
the American Civil Liberties Union's defense of the American Nazi Party because
of its free-speech implications. He supported The Progressive magazine in its
right to publish hydrogenbomb plans. (His father has helped bankroll The Texas
Observer, an iconoclastic, liberal-progressive journal, since its inception.)

Both Partens fear that the foundations of the Republic are threatened. ''We're
in deep trouble,'' J.R. Parten believes. Economic instability of the long-term
kind now plaguing the United States has frequently led to social and political
instability, and in such a circumstance anything might happen to bring the
Republic down. One way in which it might happen, Parten says, is that as
economic fear persists, and as people's confidence in the Government dwindles,
pressure will mount for a savior on a white horse. He feels that Congress is
increasingly perceived as costly and ineffectual, a high-priced obstacle to
action. ''I'm afraid that some day a consensus might arise in this country to
just do away with the Congress and have a benevolent dictator,'' Parten says.
''There's no such thing as a benevolent dictator.''

Farfetched? Parten harks back to the days of the Great Depression when -as some
historians would have it -Franklin Roosevelt, with a blend of Government action
and capitalist economics, saved the United States from such a scenario. ''We
need a Roosevelt now,'' says J.R.  Parten, the Jeffersonian, ''and we haven't
got one. We're living in dangerous times.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of J.R. Parten

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BLOODY END OF A 60'S DREAM

BYLINE: By David Harris; David Harris is a regular contributor to this magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 35, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6585 words


They met as dean and student two decades ago at Stanford University.  The older
man was the assistant dean of men, a political-science teacher who sought out
and attracted bright young men who lived in an age of American life when
idealism flourished, when it was thought possible that personal commitment could
make life better for the downtrodden. It surprised no one when the dean became
mentor to the bright 18-year-old freshman.

Years later, after a period in American life that would indelibly change both
men and their relationship, one would murder the other.  In 1961, Allard K.
Lowenstein, the Stanford dean, had already developed, at the age of 32, those
qualities that would make his career in public life. His intelligence was
obvious, his exuberance evoked intimacy and his appetite for all-consuming
endeavor was voracious. He dominated as a matter of course. Politically
precocious as a child in New York, his heroes were Eleanor Roosevelt and Norman
Thomas and, throughout his life, he saw himself as the modern champion of
post-New Deal social democracy. Typically, both of his childhood heroes
ultimately became his friends. A graduate of Yale's Law School, he spent his
20's in a political apprenticeship, first as president of the National Student
Association, and later as national head of Students for Stevenson and as an aide
to Hubert Humphrey.  Lowenstein seemed to know everyone. That immense network of
acquaintanceship, coupled with his personal charisma, would be responsible for
making him a figure without whom no anthology of the decade stretching ahead of
him at Stanford would be complete.

Back then, student life was marked by a preoccupation with penny loafers and
beer kegs. In contrast, the assistant dean's telephone rang regularly with calls
from the likes of Ralph Bunche and Adlai Stevenson. The effect on undergraduates
who were looking for inspiration and for guidance was one of irresistible
attraction, even though Lowenstein himself didn't have the look of an apostle.
With a head that seemed too small for the body he had honed during his
collegiate wrestling days, he might have appeared ugly and mouselike except for
the presence he exuded. His eyes were hidden behind lenses as thick as
Coke-bottle bottoms. His standard wardrobe ran to khakis, skintight T-shirts,
and a ''Yale'' jacket. His tie was always askew.  But no one paid much attention
to any of this once he opened his mouth. To this day, Allard Lowenstein is
remembered by many who listened to him as the most convincing human being they
had ever heard.

One of those he persuaded to his thinking about the issues of the time was
Dennis Sweeney, a scholarship student from Portland, Ore., a former varsity
basketball player and the class-day speaker at his graduation from Clackamas
High School. Six feet tall, topped with thick brown hair, he had a cherub's face
in those days. An only child whose natural father had died in a military plane
crash when he was just a youngster, Dennis arrived at Stanford self-conscious
about his working-class origins. The assistant dean of men was one of those
responsible for pulling the shy young man out of his initial state of
intimidation. Throughout his life, Allard Lowenstein singled young people out of
the crowd to become his proteges. Dennis was among the first. By 1963, he had
become an interdisciplinary honor student and speaker of the Stanford Student
Congress. His Stanford contemporaries remember him as ''sweet,'' ''endlessly
sincere'' and ''devoted to Al.'' owenstein left the Stanford dean's office after
a year, but the distance did not affect his connection to Sweeney. As he would
in hundreds of other locales throughout his life, Lowenstein returned to visit
Stanford regularly, and Sweeney often drove him around, between appointments, in
a borrowed car. The burning issue then was racial justice in the American South,
and Lowenstein's passion on the subject was immediately shared by Sweeney. What
is now remembered as ''the 60's'' was about to begin, and if Allard Lowenstein
was not exactly a father figure, he was at least the role model that Dennis
Sweeney had been looking for.

I, too, had been a Lowenstein protege during that decade and a friend and
roommate of Dennis Sweeney's for two years after that.  Eventually, all of us
broke away from each other over politics. It seemed inconceivable that the
culmination of the Lowenstein-Sweeney relationship would occur 17 years later
with a 51-year-old Allard mortally wounded and Dennis holding the murder weapon.
Back in the early 60's, dreams of making the world better were still envisioned
as simple things that were inevitably redemptive for both the country at large
and for the individuals who exercised them. No one had yet seen visions warp
under the weight of the reactions they would produce. That experience was still
over the horizon, waiting at the end of a decade that would leave Allard
Lowenstein a legend and Dennis Sweeney a caricature of the person he could have
been.

The horror of that eventual culmination has by now frozen both the accused and
the victim in stereotype: Allard K. Lowenstein as the liberal champion of
selfless democratic principle who deserved much better than he got, and Dennis
A. Sweeney as the vindictive flotsam of a failed revolution who had become
irretrievably lost along the way. In fact, both were too singular to define so
pattly. To varying degrees, the realities that were both men have been obscured
in the myth-making process. Allard Lowenstein lived a life that defied easy
definition: He was at once both insider and outsider, selfless and yet
self-obsessed, while Dennis Sweeney was both victim and executioner, a man whose
madness might have derived as much from a medical tragedy - a random biological
accident - as from the weight of experiential overload. The intersection of
their lives, and of the history they shared, is a story of irony - of mutual
respect and painful enmity, of obsessional truth and homicidal consequence.
There are no neat packages here: Neither man succeeded, and neither man failed.
Nothing changed, but everything was different.  By 1963, the focus of the
politics of Lowenstein and Sweeney had become the state of Mississippi.
Lowenstein had first traveled there the previous year. One of the connections he
made was with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, the shock troops of
the freedom riders and the predominant civil-rights organization in the state.
S.N.C.C. distrusted white liberals; Lowenstein epitomized them. That they came
together at all was a tribute to the needs of the moment. S.N.C.C. was
considering plans to bring in Northern white students and, through his campus
connections, Lowenstein was in the best position to supply them. The result was
the Mississippi Summer Project of 1964, a pivotal event in the civil-rights
movement out of which grew the Freedom Democratic Party. Lowenstein's role in
the project was to recruit and to advise. His differences with S.N.C.C.  along
the way eventually framed the Lowenstein-Sweeney divergence as well.

Sweeney was one of Lowenstein's first recruits. Allard arranged for Dennis to
work in the S.N.C.C. office in Jackson. Dennis spent portions of the 1963-64
school year driving in and out of Mississippi with his mentor. In those days,
Allard and Dennis were the closest they would ever be.  That closeness had
totally disintegrated by the time the Summer Project was over. Even before the
project had begun, Lowenstein's breach with S.N.C.C. had become so wide that he
had initially decided to stay out of the state altogether. He changed his mind
when the first three civil-rights workers were killed. By then, his protege
Dennis Sweeney had been designated to accompany regular S.N.C.C.  staff members
into McComb, Miss., to work in the heart of Klan country.

Only the bravest went anywhere near McComb, whose reputation among civil-rights
workers throughout Mississippi was that of a rabid dog.  The reality of McComb
greeted Sweeney shortly after he arrived. He and the rest of the S.N.C.C.
workers were asleep in the Freedom School, where they had been living, when a
bomb was tossed into the front room. Dennis was closest to the explosion, but he
was saved by a thick plywood bed board. The next issue of the local McComb
Enterprise-Journal ran a front-page picture of the 21-year-old Northern invader
named Sweeney. The face it showed was handsome, the expression intense. The only
visible imperfections were the teeth.  They had spaces between them, and one
seemed damaged.

After five more years of intense civil-rights work, Dennis would look remarkably
unchanged - except for those teeth. The front ones had been replaced with
immaculate bridgework donated by a New York dentist who, like Sweeney, had
volunteered to go South at the urging of Allard Lowenstein.

But by 1973, the bridgework, which had been anchored to dental crowns, had been
torn out by Sweeney's own furious hand, leaving little more than filed-down
stubs, a sight that Sweeney would try to hide by keeping his upper lip pulled
down like a shade over the unsightly gap.  To those who experienced it, the
terror of McComb was stangely reinforcing. It established a tight bond that was
closer than anything Dennis Sweeney would ever experience again. One of the
consequences was Dennis's increasing attachment to S.N.C.C.'s style of
Jacksonian participatory democracy, to the exclusion of Allard's post-New Deal
social democracy. The culmination of that distancing occurred during the 1964
Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City. The Mississippi Freedom
Movement came North to demand that the Democrats unseat the ''whites only''
Mississippi delegation in favor of an integrated one. It was a move that Allard
had long supported, arguing that the future of civil rights for blacks should
and would be decided in the political process. In the end, the Democrats offered
the integrated delegation two of Mississippi's dozen seats, which the Freedom
Movement delegates refused. Dennis Sweeney, like many young white volunteers,
felt that the Democratic Party's failure to seat the delegates was perceived by
the black student activists as evidence that the political process was part and
parcel of what was wrong in America. To Allard, it was a sign only that the task
was difficult. The disagreement exemplified a fissure that ran through the
entire civil-rights movement, and Dennis and Allard quickly took positions on
opposite sides. The split marked the end of the specialness of their
relationship.

The dissolution of Sweeney's protegehood was hard on both parties.For Dennis,
the pain was that of abandoning a role model and setting out on his own. Instead
of returning to Stanford, he stayed in the caldron of McComb for another year as
a S.N.C.C. staffer, earning $10 a month; his commitment was total. He would be
arrested twice and harassed repeatedly. In the process, he felt betrayed, if not
by Allard the person, then certainly by Allard's politics. They were, in
Dennis's view, responsible for distorting and manipulating the Mississippi
Project to the ends of Northern white liberals and the Democratic Party.

That Lowenstein also felt personally betrayed is a matter of public record. By
now, his split with S.N.C.C. had moved into the open. He accused S.N.C.C. of
undermining ''the viability of American society.'' According to him, S.N.C.C.
had become ''destructive,'' ''radical,'' ''increasingly racist'' and
''insufficiently anti-Communist.'' One of the voices challenging him in the
controversy was that of Dennis Sweeney.

The way Allard remembered it, a little less than three years before his murder,
''Since Dennis and I had been quite close friends, it became a very, very
personal thing. ... During the period when I was becoming the ... villain in
their eyes, (he) became very much the spearhead of their campaign against me.''

According to several of Sweeney's S.N.C.C. contemporaries, Dennis disagreed with
Allard, but he never served as any kind of ''spearhead.'' They say that Allard
had a way of taking political difference as personal assault. In their eyes, his
later description of events was both ''paranoid'' and ''self-serving.''

Eventually, when Dennis left the South and S.N.C.C., Allard described what had
happened. Dennis, as he saw it, had been ''thrown out of S.N.C.C. because he was
white. ... They ended up accusing him of all the things that they had accused me
of. ... It very, very badly damaged him.'' Without commenting on the question of
damage, Sweeney's contemporaries again disagree. They say that a consensus was
reached that whites ought to return to their own communities and organize there;
they say that expulsions didn't begin until long after Sweeney had left
Mississippi.

There is no disagreement that by the summer of 1965 the community in which
Dennis Sweeney had found himself had dissolved. The civilrights movement had
turned toward black power, and young whites began focusing on the war in
Vietnam. Sweeney spent that last summer in Natchez working with a film maker on
a documentary, and preparing himself to return with his civil-rights-worker
fiancee to life at Stanford University as a married student.

That same summer, Allard Lowenstein visited Bogalusa, La. He and another student
protege, who was driving with him, talked about Sweeney. To Allard, Dennis was a
symbol of what had happened in Mississippi. Allard said he was going to write a
book about his relationship with Dennis, and the two different directions they'd
taken. Allard pictured it as a sad story and, for the first time, he referred to
his former protege and future assassin as a ''victim.'' In retrospect, it would
seem that Lowenstein's 1965 picture of Sweeney was at least premature. The
Vietnam War increasingly dominated all other issues, and Sweeney certainly
involved himself in it. After the quick breakup of his marriage, Sweeney
committed himself full time to the draft-resistance movement. Lowenstein was
uneasy with all disobedience to conscription, but by now his positions weren't
often discussed by Sweeney and his friends.

One of the few times that Lowenstein's name came up was when Ramparts magazine
in 1967 exposed the connection between the Central Intelligence Agency and the
National Student Association. Neither the story in Ramparts nor any subsequent
published investigation ever alleged that Lowenstein was party to the deception.
But he had been N.S.A. president in 1951 - the year preceding the inception of
the connection - and he had been a dominant force in N.S.A. politics then, and
ever after. That history was considered to be sufficient evidence to Sweeney and
his friends that Lowenstein had known what was going on.

Throughout his life, Lowenstein laughed off the C.I.A. charges. ''I was the one
they hid it all from,'' he would explain. To him, the allegation was just one
more piece of ''distorted'' flak from the left. That direction always spelled
conflict for Lowenstein, and in many cases it involved former proteges.

Despite a lifetime spent trying to alter its product, Allard Lowenstein saw
himself as champion of the two-party electoral process. In 1967, he set out to
prove that the system could correct its mistakes. He planned to unseat an
incumbent Democratic President and to seat a new one who was opposed to the war.

It is a tribute to the breadth of his influence that Lowenstein could even
attempt the effort, which he called the ''Dump Johnson'' movement. He moved
endlessly back and forth across the country, sleeping in 15-minute intervals,
subsisting on poundcake and Coca-Cola, fetching his tie out of his bag for one
more rumpled appearance among his 15 of the day. His unremitting energy, and his
belief in his plan, inspired a chain of other believers and engendered a
movement that began multiplying into a series of front organizations and student
groups by the fall of 1967. Lowenstein tried to get Robert F. Kennedy and George
McGovern to run, but neither one was willing. By November, Eugene McCarthy was
in the race, backed by Lowenstein's youthful shock troops, among others.  Within
four months, Lyndon Johnson had an-nounced that he would not run for
re-election. The toppling of Johnson, though not entirely his handiwork, would
become Allard Lowenstein's landmark in American political history.

It is somehow typical of both Allard Lowenstein and the decade he did so much to
shape that success only seemed to produce a new dilemma: Whom was he to support
now that Bobby Kennedy had made a belated entrance into the Democratic
primaries? The move had left Lowenstein stranded in a political no man's land.
On the one hand, he was a public supporter of McCarthy. On the other, his heart
belonged to Bobby. Lowenstein tried to sidestep the worst of the political
crossfire by returning to New York, where he and Jennifer, his wife of two
years, bought a house on Long Island, and he announced himself to be a candidate
for Congress.

Lowenstein was in the midst of his Long Island campaigning when Bobby Kennedy
won the California primary. Kennedy tried to reach Lowenstein before going down
to his victory celebration in Los Angeles's Ambassador Hotel, but missed him. He
left a message, and told an aide that they would phone Allard again as soon as
the celebration was over.

But the call that came from Los Angeles was with news that Bobby had been shot.
Allard caught the first plane to Los Angeles.  The events of that night pitched
Lowenstein into as deep a sense of personal loss as anything in his adult life.
The story was one he would tell regularly to friends throughout the next decade.
He reached the hospital and passed through the Secret Service cordon into
Kennedy's corridor just as the doctor announced the death.  Lowenstein and
several others accompanied the body down to the ground floor in an elevator.
Everyone was crying. As Lowenstein would later tell it, he turned to Ted Kennedy
during the ride and said all he could think to say, ''You're the only hope we've
got left, and you're not good enough.''

Lowenstein would always feel cheated by Bobby's death. He blamed the
assassination for robbing the country of Robert Kennedy's leadership.

For the rest of the year, Lowenstein mostly concentrated on running for
Congress. That November, he won his first and only succesful bid for elective
public office. It was the personal highlight of his political career. While in
Congress, he recruited a number of young Republicans to Democratic causes;
several were even persuaded to change their party affiliation.  Meanwhile,
Dennis Sweeney's life hit bad, and headed for worse. The draft-resistance
movement had spent itself by the time Allard Lowenstein was sworn into Congress,
and Sweeney and several others moved into an apartment in San Francisco. At
first, Sweeney drove a taxi late at night, mostly hauling tourists to houses of
prostitution. The work disgusted him, so he tried for a job in the post office.
Shortly after he was hired, he was visited by two F.B.I. agents. They just
wanted to tell him, they said, that they knew where he was and that they
wouldn't bother him as long as he kept his nose clean.

The Nixon years were beginning, and hatches were being battened down everywhere.
In something of a tribute to the coming decade, the signs of Sweeney's
deteriorating mental condition were at first hidden by the suspicious shared by
nearly everyone participating in anti-Government protests. Until he finally
talked about it, no one noticed.

Sweeney first revealed the bizarre nature of his emotionalinstability in a park
in San Francisco during the spring of 1970. He was planning to move to Boston
and went to the park with a woman to say goodbye. They made small talk until
Sweeney mentioned, in a calm and offhand manner, that he thought someone might
have planted an ''electrode'' in his body in order to monitor and control him.
The woman shrugged his words off as a bad joke.

Later, in Sweeney's accounts to friends and acquaintances, this ''electrode''
would acquire transmission qualities, and would flood his head with messages for
increasingly longer periods of the day.

After Lowenstein's assassination, Sweeney was typified as a casualty of the 60's
who eventually broke under the weight of traumatizing experiences and bitter
disappointments. The principal shortcoming of this characterization is its
divergence from the uncertainties and working conclusions of modern psychiatry.
All known analyses of Sweeney's disorder thus far have concluded that he is a
paranoid schizophrenic of the chronic type.

The diseases symptoms are extraordinarily alike in all victims: hallucinations;
the unwilling visitation of the afflicted by voices; delusions of persecution,
and the development of elaborate and convoluted logic systems to explain all the
symptoms. Two present theories speculate that the cause of the disorder is
either a combination of genetic predisposition and/or enzyme malfunction, which
may or may not be triggered by stress, or a virus of the central nervous system.

The meaning of Sweeney's progress from protege to assassin breaks the easy
stereotype. As much as being someone who finally cracked under the weight of
emotional battering and 60's malaise, Sweeney was a person whose procession of
bad luck was topped with a random calamity.  Typically, in any one random month
out of Lowenstein's 30 years of adult life, he might have given speeches in 15
cities in 10 states. A thousand phone calls would be sandwiched in between, as
he touched base with dozens of proteges and old friends. Allard Lowenstein
managed to rush headlong through three decades without slowing down.

Such enormous energy is indicative of a driven quality. Lowenstein was generous
and caring to a fault, yet found it difficult to sustain an interest in
conversations he didn't dominate. He had absolute faith in the superiority of
his own judgment, but always made everyone else's case better than he made his
own, in failed political races and the adoption of lost causes. He cared little
for titles, but spent much of his life pursuing them. Selfless server of causes,
he arranged his life so that 95 percent of the situations he encountered
centered on his own presence.

In most cases, a resume might provide additional perspective in the
comprehension of a public figure's life, but in Allard Lowenstein's, it proves
to be woefully limited. Son of a doctorturned-restaurateur, Lowenstein eschewed
the Ivy League after the Horace Mann School and attended the University of North
Carolina in order, among other reasons, to compete on the wrestling team.  After
his N.S.A. presidency, he enlisted in the United States Army.  Later, he was an
assistant dean of men at Stanford and a lecturer at several universities, served
one term in Congress from Long Island, and did brief duty as an ambassador for
special political affairs at the United Nations.

A more complete understanding of Lowenstein's importance on the American
political scene relies on information that is apocryphal and told in anecdotes:
He introduced John Kennedy to Eleanor Roosevelt at the 1960 Democratic National
Convention. Adlai Stevenson broke away from a crowd of admirers to greet a
strolling Allard on the Atlantic City boardwalk in 1964. Allard would have been
Bobby's right-hand man, some claimed. Allard smuggled himself into Biafra in a
last-ditch personal attempt to negotiate an end to the civil war.  Allard
bragged he was No. 7 on Richard Nixon's ''enemies list.'' On one occasion,
Allard apologized for being late, saying he'd been in Northern Ireland and it
had taken him longer to find a ''solution'' than he'd expected. Allard was the
only Democrat William F. Buckley ever supported for Congress, or anything else.
At the age of 46, Allard was still going down to Chapel Hill to work out with
the University of North Carolina wrestling squad. The variety of the tales told
by him and about him is endless.

Just exactly who and what Allard Lowenstein really wanted to be is an
unanswerable question. The record suggests an ambivalence not uncommon among
extraordinarily talented people. Like all historical creatures who are nine
parts presence and only one part position, Lowenstein will probably be
appraised, finally, as much by his reflection in those he touched as by his
individual achievements. In that accounting, Lowenstein shows signs of faring
quite well.  Already, more than 50 young people who were introduced to politics
by him sit in state legislatures.

Lowenstein, like Dennis Sweeney, suffered when the 60's ended.  After being
redistricted in his first bid for re-election, he lost.  After that, he ran for
Congress twice within four months in Brooklyn, and lost both times.  Then he
returned to Long Island, and lost again. After that came a divorce, and then he
entered two Congressional races in Manhattan within a year, both of them
defeats.

For the first time in almost a decade, Allard Lowenstein saw the man who
eventually killed him during one of his campaigns in 1974.  Dennis Sweeney came
to Lowenstein's house. There was a noticeable gap in Dennis's mouth, where the
bridgework had been torn away. He told Allard that someone had wired his false
teeth so that they picked up messages from outer space. It was an encounter, not
a confrontation.  By then, Dennis Sweeney had clearlyslipped his tether. Since
the onset of his illness, the voices in his head were speaking with increasing
frequency; it was difficult for him to concentrate. When the voices didn't stop,
Sweeney shared his dilemma with his mother and his stepfather. They attempted to
have him committed to an Oregon state mental hospital in 1973. He was held there
for part of a week, but the diagnosis was insufficient to warrant confinement.

Afterward, it was obvious to Dennis that the forces trying to prevent him from
removing his transmitter were greater and more sinister than he had first
thought. Certainly the C.I.A. had some kind of hand in it, he told friends. In
Portland, he concluded that he would have to leave the United States to find a
doctor who was willing to buck these powerful enemies. Before leaving, he wrote
letters to a number of old movement friends.

''I am at the lowest ebb of my life now because of the psychological warfare
that is being made on me,'' he wrote one of them. ''... I am simultaneously
attuned to and programmed electronically ... (unable) to sort out my own
thoughts from the impulses running through my skull. I am fairly certain that I
have software I wasn't born with.''

Sweeney made it as far as Paris but, when he couldn't find work, quickly
returned to Boston. There he ran the grill at a hamburger stand, and then worked
in a mattress factory. Sweeney's social contacts were limited, but he got in
touch with a few old friends living in Massachusetts. Among them was the film
maker with whom he had worked in Mississippi during the summer of 1965. When the
voices in Dennis Sweeney's head began to be identifiable as those of real
people, the film maker's would be the first he would set out to track down.

That he had been unsuccessful at eluding his demons was obvious in a 1975 phone
call he placed to Allard Lowenstein in New York. His tone was much more hateful
than it had been the last time. There were people watching him, Dennis said, and
Allard was responsible. He told Allard to call his dogs off.

''Dennis,'' Allard pleaded. ''Let me help you. I know people who can help you. I
want to put you in their hands.'' ''So - you too,'' Sweeney growled in response.
It was the last conversation between them before they kept an appointment in
Manhattan late on the afternoon of March 14, 1980.  In between, Dennis Sweeney
became obsessed with the Natchez film maker, then in Boston. There now seemed to
be lethal edge to his actions. The film maker noticed it as soon as Dennis
arrived for his next visit. That 1975 meeting remains the fullest available
picture of the former civil-rights worker's rapidly escalating paranoia.

Sweeney entered the film maker's office like a snarling dog. For the next four
hours, the film maker would be too frightened of provoking Sweeney to ask him to
leave. Sweeney said he had had it.  The film maker, the film maker's wife, even
the film maker's 5-yearold son, had been broadcasting to him 24 hours a day. He
''knew'' the film maker was part of the ''killer elite, on the run since
Watergate.'' It was an ''international Jewish conspiracy.'' The film maker,
Dennis halluncinated, was trying to force him to ''marry a Jewess.''

He hadn't had a woman in years, Sweeney said, because the voices were
''exhausting'' him. He couldn't understand why they were doing all this.
Sometimes, he told the film maker, he became ''radioactive,'' other times,
''transparent.'' His thoughts were being ''communicated to other people'' and
the voices in his head kept telling him to do ''terrible things.''

As soon as Dennis Sweeney left, the film maker, who had been a guncontrol
advocate, bought a pistol. He briefly left Massachusetts; on his return, he kept
his address a secret and got an unlisted telephone number. All the while,
Swee-ney kept making regular telephone calls to the film maker's office. The
film maker finally decided that the only way to get Sweeney off his back was to
meet him face to face. They arranged to do so on a street corner in Cambridge;
the film maker brought two friends along as protection.

Sweeney approached directly and, when he was within arm's length, ordered the
film maker to take his glasses off. Then Sweeney began pummeling him. When the
film maker's friends pulled Sweeney off, the former civil-rights worker made no
move to resume. Instead, he issued a warning.

''The next time you've got a message for me,'' he screamed, referring to the
imaginary transmissions inside his head, ''deliver it to my face.''

With that, he turned and headed for the subway.  Thoroughly terrorized, the film
maker attempted to send a warning message through intermediaries to Allard
Lowenstein to avoid Dennis Sweeney.

The effort, apparently, came to naught.  Sweeney's explosion on the Cambridge
street corner evidently redirected his obsession from its focus on the film
maker and sent it reeling even more deeply into his past to single out Allard
Lowenstein. Sweeney moved to Mystic, Conn., and lived there for the next two
years, earning his way doing carpentry jobs. He kept to himself, but once told a
fellow boarder that he picked up signals ''from Mars.''

In July 1979, he moved to a rented room in nearby New London. His stepfather
died of a heart attack at the end of February 1980, and by the time Sweeney
returned from the funeral in Portland, he seemed to be under the impression that
he could detect Lowenstein's hand in the death.

On March 11, Sweeney walked into Raub's Sporting Goods in downtown New London
and made application to purchase a seven-shot Llama .380 semiautomatic pistol
costing $120. He signed forms attesting that he had never been convicted of a
felony and had never been committed to a mental institution. Five days later, he
picked up the weapon and a box of ammunition. By then, he had told his landlady
he would be leaving Connecticut soon. He also made an appointment to see Allard
Lowenstein at his office in the law firm of Layton & Sherman in New York City at
4 P.M., Friday, March 14.

That Lowenstein made room on his schedule to see Sweeney is both tragic and
typical. Lowenstein felt uncomfortable in abandoning anyone. When he was with
people he'd known as a Stanford dean, he made it a point to mention Dennis
Sweeney and the madness that had descended upon him.

Certainly Lowenstein could have easily told Sweeney he was too busy to meet with
him. In 1980, he had not slowed down. For the first days of his last week, he
was in New Hampshire campaigning for Ted Kennedy. He returned to New York on
Wednesday with the usual circles under his eyes. His assistant met him at La
Guardia Airport, and during the drive to Manhattan, Lowenstein looked over his
mail. One of the enclosures was a picture from a kaffeeklatsch which he had
attended several days earlier.

''I look like Frank Graham (United States Senator from North Carolina) did a
month before he died,'' Lowenstein said. ''Do you think I've only got a month
left?'' The assistant filed the remark away with a lot of similar speculations
about his own death that Lowenstein had made in the past few years. It was a
trait that was shared by many men fresh to their 50's.

Lowenstein showed no signs of unease about his scheduled appointment with
Sweeney. Afterward, he expected to meet with a man running in the upcoming
Congressional race on Manhattan's East Side; he planned to tell him he would be
in the race as well.

By noon in New London that Friday, Dennis Sweeney had finished packing all his
possessions. Later, when police searched his room, everything was neatly stored
in boxes for transporting, and there was a fresh change of clothes laid out on
his bed. Sweeney drove his pickup truck onto the lawn of his rooming house to
load it more easily. But when he came back outside, wearing Levi's, boots, a
plaid shirt and a blue nylon windbreaker, he got in without loading a thing and
drove off. Later that same day, police would find the truck abandoned in midtown
Manhattan.

As he sat in Lowenstein's Rockefeller Center waiting room, Dennis was remembered
as being expressionless and seemingly calm. He had, apparently, hidden the Llama
.380 in his jacket. He and Lowenstein shook hands before disappearing into the
office behind a closed door.

There is no record of the two men's final conversation. Some of those in the
waiting room think it lasted more than 10 minutes. What is known from the
fragments pieced together by the police after questioning Sweeney is that, after
their talk, Dennis stood up and shook his former mentor's hand again. Allard, no
doubt, thought that Dennis was about to leave. Instead, according to police
sources, Dennis announced:

''Al, we've got to put an end to this obsession.'' Then he pulled his $120
pistol.  Allard shouted, ''No!'' and threw his left arm up in an effort to
protect himself.  Dennis Sweeney fired all seven rounds. Five shots hit Allard
Lowenstein. Sweeney then walked back into the waiting room, laid the empty
weapon in the receptionist's letter tray, took a seat, and lit a cigarette. He
said not a sin-gle word, just sat there.  By the time the ambulance arrived,
Lowenstein was unconscious, bleeding profusely, but still alive.  ''He's been
controlling my life for years,'' Sweeney finally told the police. ''Now I've put
an end to it.'' Allard Lowenstein was never one to give up early in any battle,
and the one he waged with death was no different. As usual, the odds were long.
Lowenstein arrived at St. Clare's Hospital with his left arm broken and his
entire left lung shot away. Two slugs had pierced his heart, one leaving a hole
an inch and a half across. It took five and a half hours to sew him back
together. He survived all of that. There was hope in the waiting room, and among
those in the crowd on the street, when hours passed and people remembered
Lowenstein's indomitable will and his wrestler's body. But this time, these
would not be enough. After half an hour in the recovery room, Lowenstein's heart
stopped pumping. When news of his death reached the sidewalk outside the
hospital, sobbing was heard on all sides. It was said that Allard Lowenstein had
died a hero's death, fighting every inch of the way.

That stature seems confirmed by his final resting place. On March 19, Allard
Lowenstein, a former Congressman, was buried with full military honors at
Arlington National Cemetery, about as close to John Kennedy's grave as is
Kennedy's own brother Robert's grave.  Dennis Sweeney is currently imprisoned at
the Rikers Island detention center in New York's East River, charged with
second-degree murder. The corridors at Rikers are lonely and mean, but they pale
in comparison with the madness into which Dennis Sweeney first stumbled 10 years
ago. He has pleaded not guilty, by reason of insanity, and is being kept under
medication in the mental observation unit at Rikers, awaiting the judgment of a
psychiatrist as to when, or whether, he will stand trial. His hair is still
thick and luxuriant, his body trim. Only the teeth give him away. They sit in
his face like relics from an age of trench warfare.

Despite the charges against him, Sweeney still doesn't think his victim is dead
and claims Allard's voice continues to echo in his head.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of Allard Lowenstein and Dennis Sweeney

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NONFICTION IN BRIEF

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1679 words


STATES DYCKMAN American Loyalist.  By James Thomas Flexner.  Illustrated. 238
pp. Boston: Little, Brown & Co. $15.95.

Boscobel, a pretty neo-Palladian house gazing over the Hudson like a toy
theater, was saved from wreckers 25 years ago, and with it the papers of the man
who built it. They hold the key to far grander houses in Britain and to the
colossal fortunes that built them. But who ever heard of States Dyckman, the
''nobody'' who assured those fortunes?

He was humbly born in New York but grew up with a snob's finicky taste and
during the Revolution was employed as a clerk by the British Quartermaster
Department in Loyalist New York. His real job was to cover, with inspired
accountancy, the whacking sums of money the quartermaster generals pocketed in
the operation of a clever little racket. Land transport for the British
expeditionary force was provided by 4-horse teams and wagons hired from their
owners; though nobody said so, the owners were the quartermaster generals
themselves. Each took in an annual profit around 10,000 (add a couple of zeros
to get the modern equivalent). Though they were expected to look out for
themselves, this was perhaps overdoing it.  Should a commission of inquiry
decide it was, they might at worst have had to repay excess profit, without
interest; yet a bill for 200,000 when it was already spent could be a nuisance.
First in New York, later in London, Dyckman ingeniously cooked the books, using
such ploys as artfully repeated charges for the loss of horses ''shot for
glanders.''

He had his own modest rewards, returning from his first tour of duty in 1789
with such goodies as 1,400 books bound in matching leather and six dozen pairs
of satin pumps. His open-handedness swiftly impoverished him, and he was obliged
to resume his fantastic bookkeeping in London. When the investigation was
concluded after 25 years, Dyckman's second fortune was made: a modest eight
percent of what he had saved his employers (around $28,500). He went home to die
in style, age 51, leaving a mark of his taste on the Hudson Valley.

James Thomas Flexner, who knows the high and mighty of the period well, draws a
lively picture of the obscure and indispensable States Dyckman, who, when it
came to being treated like an underling by noblemen he had enriched, found
himself a better democrat than he was in 1776.
THE WAYS OF MY GRANDMOTHERS By Beverly Hungry Wolf.  Illustrated. 256 pp. New
York: William Morrow & Co. $9.95.

Mrs. Rides-at-the Door, an old holy woman of the Bloods, a tribe of the
Blackfoot Nation, blames the behavior of young people on the fact that they were
not ''natural nursed - they were raised on all kinds of milk, and they don't
know how to listen and they have no pity on their fellow man.'' Beverly Hungry
Wolf has been listening carefully to what such old women say - her grandmothers,
she calls them. Though Beverly spoke only Blackfoot as a child, school and
travel made her a worldly English-speaker. But she has returned to the reserve
and set about learning the Indian customs from the grandmothers.

Though she and her family live in a cabin and get around in a pickup truck, the
children started life laced up on cradleboards; she dries jerky and cooks Indian
delicacies like berry soup; she keeps her family in hand-sewn moccasins and
wears, instead of tight jeans or fringed miniskirts, the long cotton dress and
modest shawl under which old Indian women, bullied by generations of
missionaries, still hide themselves.

But the grandmothers are far from being wooden-faced drudges. These old Blood
women have sharp recollections and strong opinions. Mary One Spot believes the
Government didn't really want to educate the Indians when she was young, nor
today either. She remembers living on wild food and drinking melted snow.
''Nowadays you can't even drink it because you'll get poisoned.'' Stories of
their grandmothers celebrate guts and guile. They have taught Beverly how to tan
hides, sew buckskin, prevent conception (mostly by faith and magic); they have
told her their legends, in which animals and people change identity as easily as
masks; they have made her understand and revere their holy initiations and
prayers. Paula Weasel Head says: ''We have to stick by the wisdom of our
ancestors, and not try to outsmart them in talking about the Creator, and all
that is created.''
A BROWSER'S DICTIONARY And Native's Guide to the Unknown American Language.  By
John Ciardi.  429 pp. New York: Harper & Row. $16.95.

John Ciardi, who takes delight in words, has written a dictionary to ''reawaken
an awareness of the root depths of words.'' He tells us that ''dark horse'' was
coined by Disraeli; that jersey sweaters and cows owe their name to Caesar, for
whom the Isle of Jersey was called Caesarea; that ''dapple'' comes from
''apple,'' that brass hats were bicornes (worn by Wellington and Napoleon) to be
tucked flat under the arm (bras); that army parlance is of Norman origin, naval
of English; that ''jingo'' is a Basque word, ''big cheese'' from the Hindi, and
''galoshes'' from laced-up Gaulish sandals.

But his enthusiasm for his own interpretations is immediate. The reader may not
agree that ''beaver'' (beard) relates to drooling rather than fur; that a
''tucker'' (as in bib and tucker) is a feather boa, and not, as other
dictionaries have it, a linen neckpiece; that bucket seats are ''popular in
sports cars for the flamboyant young,'' not just everybody's compact car; that
''grass widow'' comes from a German word for ''straw widow'' rather than the
French veuve de grace; that ''nincompoop'' means ''female relative of a fool,''
or that ''morganatic'' describes the marriages of the Duke of Windsor to ''an
American widow'' (sic), Prince Rai-nier's to Grace Kelly and Princess Margaret's
to Tony Armstrong-Jones: None of these was a morganatic marriage.

Mr. Ciardi tells us that the verb ''to roger'' (meaning to fornicate) occurs in
no dictionary, yet it is cited in that sense in Grose's ''Classical Dictionary
of the Vulgar English Tongue.'' There is excessive reference to women as sex
objects, and many derogatory remarks about wives and marriage - so many that
after the slurs on such individuals as Edward Kennedy and a host of fellow
writers cunningly incorporated in his examples of usage, the disobliging
references to Mrs. Ciardi and their son are superderogatory.
PHOTOGRAPHY & SOCIETY By Gisele Freund.  Illustrated. 231 pp. Boston: David R.
Godine. $15.

''From today, painting is dead,'' said a Frenchman in 1839 on seeing the first
photographs. He was dead wrong, of course: the Impressionists were babies then;
so was Degas, who was to make brilliant use of the photograph, with its
foreshortening, arbitrary framing and insight into the mechanics of motion. But
what couldn't have been anticipated was that literacy had suffered a blow; for
Niepce's original phantasmic photograph of roofs and a pear tree was the
forefather of television. Society has been as radically affected by his innocent
invention as by movable type.

Gisele Freund belongs to a generation of photojournalists whose specialty was
made obsolete by television. At the Sorbonne she wrote a doctoral thesis on
19th-century photography; 45 years later it does duty as the first half of this
book; the second half is a history of photojournalism, with emphasis on Life
magazine, that happy haven for photographers like herself who were uprooted by
Hitler.

If the first part has the categorical manner of a youthful thesis, it is good on
early French and German photographers: the great Nadar, whose portraits of
fellow artists were both intimate and profound; the fertile Disderi, whose
invention of the multiple cartede-visite in 1852 gave the middle class a
ravening taste for possessing handy photographs of themselves and loved ones,
celebrities and naked women; Atget, whose images of empty Parisian streets and
sunless gardens have the stillness of the surreal; the German Zille, who caught
the man in the street off guard, a protophotojournalist.

She calls her fellow photojournalists, who were in their heyday around World War
II, ''incorruptible'' (though Robert Capa's most famous photograph - a Loyalist
soldier falling dead - is rumored to be a fake), and regrets the death of Life,
where nobody questioned spending a quarter of a million 1965 dollars on 17
photographers and a flying darkroom for Churchill's funeral. The burden of
photography as an instrument of information and persuasion has been taken over
by television, for better or worse, but (a question she doesn't ask) does the
moving picture ever carry the moral impact of a still, like that most
unforgettable picture of the Vietnam War, the little girl running toward us in
flames?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Blood Indian women

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT WESTCHESTER

BYLINE: By Lynne Ames

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 2, Column 1; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1240 words


NORTH TARRYTOWN ABEARDED man stepped lightly through a grove of trees. In one
hand he carried an old wooden recorder, on which he played a mysterious, lilting
tune. As he walked, children followed, and when he sat down under a big oak
tree, they gathered at his feet.

The beginning of a folk or fairy tale? No, the man with the beard and the wind
instrument was Jehan Clements, a professional storyteller. On this recent
Sunday, he was weaving a spell for youngsters at Kingsland Point Park here,
trying to induce, amid their restless giggles and short attention spans, a sense
of wonder or at least of fun.

''If I did not bring a book with me, then where will I get my words?'' he asked
his audience of a dozen, wrinkling a forehead so high it made him appear far
older than his 34 years.

''From your mind,'' answered one of the children, who were between the ages of 4
and 11.  ''That's right. Today we'll use a word that begins with I.''
''Imagination,'' chorused the group. ''Imagination.''

Mr. Clements, who lives in New York City, is under contract from the Westchester
County Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation as a summer services
entertainer to perform at parks, recreation centers and day camps throughout the
county. A tall man who wears his light brown hair in a waist-length braid, he
sees himself as a sort of benevolent version of the Pied Piper of Hamelin - ''I,
of course, want to charm, not harm, my young listeners,'' he said - and his
goal, he maintains, is to promote actively the oral tradition.

''Storytelling is one of the oldest, perhaps the oldest, form of
entertainment,'' he explained to an adult visitor at the park. ''It has been
with us since prehistoric times, when men gathered around the fire to tell tales
of the hunt. Then there was Homer and Aesop and the Dervishes who told folk
tales throughout the Middle East and, during the Renaissance, the wandering
troubadours. As printing became more prevalent, the old tradition waned, but it
did not die. As recently as the 1950's, there was a surge of storytelling to
children by librarians in public libraries.

''Today,'' Mr. Clements continued, ''there are only a handful of professional
storytellers like myself. I feel a sense of responsibility, to know the
traditional stories and to be able to create new ones, to convey through
fluctuations of voice, facial expressions and gestures the full meaning of the
words.''

His own odyssey into storytelling began when he became involved with Sufism, a
form of Islamic mysticism that preaches contemplation and the achievement of
personal awareness. He began reading the hundreds of Sufi stories collected by
Idris Shah, and became intrigued with the central figure in these parables, a
mullah named Nasrudin. This interest he coupled with a penchant for performing
and his ability to play clarinet and saxophone. After telling Sufi stories in
coffee houses in Wisconsin, playing saxophone with an Army band in Vietnam,
working Greenwich Village clubs and acting as Santa Claus during two Christmas
seasons in New York, he decided to put together his own show of ''bearded
storytellers.''

''I composed a one-man show of bearded characters,'' he said.  ''These included
Nasrudin, Johnny Appleseed, Rip van Winkle, Sholom Aleichem, Hans Christian
Andersen, Aesop and others. I tell stories in which the characters were
participants, and I told stories that they had told.''

Further research into the characters, however, led Mr. Clements to believe that
all their adventures bore great similarity to those outlined in the Sufi tales
and to the varied exploits of Nasrudin. He chose to devote his time to relating
these folk tales of the Middle East, reworking some African stories, and
creating his own stories, and to performing them in as many places as he could.
Today his resume includes jobs at Central Park, Lincoln Center Library of the
Performing Arts, the American Museum of Natural History, and schools, libraries
and recreation centers throughout the New York metropolitan area.

At Kingsland Point Park his repertory consisted of two original yarns, a song
and three Sufi parables. Dressed in baggy brown slacks, sandals and an
embroidered top, Mr. Clements sat before a dozen children and told them two
tales of his own devising, ''Alfred the Ant'' and ''A Long Story About a Short
Fish.'' He punctuated the narratives with questions and personal asides to his
audience.

''What do people throw in the Hudson River?'' he asked, beginning a tale of some
pet fish who swim through the sewage system to the Hudson River, where they live
in an abandoned glass aquarium. ''Where do you put your fish when you clean your
aquarium overnight? In a little Tupperware bowl? What happens if one flops out
into the sink and goes down the drain?''

When the children had answered those questions and learned the outcome of the
story, Mr. Clements moved on to Alfred the Ant, who crawled into a Cracker Jack
box at Central Park, only to be almost fatally injured by soccer players who
kicked the box around during their game. ''The next time you go to the park,''
Mr. Clements advised, ''make sure you throw away your trash into the trashcan so
that Alfred will have a nice, safe dinner.''

The stories that seem to exert the strongest appeal were the Sufi tales. With
the children gathered closely around him, their faces wrinkled in concentration,
Mr. Clements related a paradox about lies and truths, a brief lesson concerning
hospitality, and a short poetic story called ''The Indian Bird.''

''There was an Indian merchant who kept a bird in a cage,'' he began. ''He was
going to India, the land the bird came from, and he asked whether he could bring
anything back for it. The bird replied, 'My freedom,' but the merchant
refused.''

Mr. Clements continued the story, in which the bird then asked its owner to
announce his captivity to his kin in India. The merchant did so, and a bird just
like the one he had at home fell out of a tree, apparently dead. When the
merchant returned home, he told his own caged bird about the incident, and that
bird, too, fell over.  Saddened by what appeared to be his pet's death, the
merchant opened the cage door to retrieve the body - and the bird revived and
flew out a window.

''Thank you for bringing me the knowledge to attain my own freedom,'' the bird
said from his high perch, and flew away, free at last.

''Now what did you learn from that and the other stories?'' asked Mr. Clement
when he had finished. ''Did you learn anything?'' Taghrid Rabadi, 11 years old,
smiled. ''The bird had a secret way to get what he wanted, to be free,'' she
said quietly.  Taghrid, who lives in North Tarrytown, said she had been born in
Jordan. When Mr. Clements asked her if she had seen any of the old men who tell
stories in the marketplaces of her native country, she said no. ''But I like
these kinds of stories best,'' she said. ''I like stories that are pretty and
that I can learn from.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jehan Clements

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ON RIVER KWAI, BURMESE EXILES PLAN FOR REVOLT

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 741 words

DATELINE: THONG KANG YANG, Thailand, Aug. 13


In this upland valley of the River Kwai, near the Burmese border, a gentle
resistance movement has taken root. The villagers' target is not the Thai
Government, to which they are grateful, but the regime in Rangoon, which they
would like to overthrow.

The villagers are the Mons, a small minority people today but once the creators
of the first great civilization in the Burmese-Siamese area and, together with
the related Khmers of present-day Cambodia, the first dominant civilization of
continental Southeast Asia.

After having formed the main population of the region between Burma and Vietnam
in the early centuries of the present era, the Mon kingdom was conquered by the
Khmers in the 10th century. The Mons continued to dominate Burma during the
golden age of Burmese culture, and were not defeated by the Burmese until the
18th century.

Today, the Mon population, estimated at 500,000, lives largely in southern
Burma, centered in the Mon state, whose capital is Moulmein. Fewer than 100,000
descendants of prisoners of war of the centuries of Burmese-Siamese conflict
lived in Thailand when Gen. Ne Win seized power in Rangoon in 1962.

Many Mons Cross the Border

While a number of minority groups along Burma's borders heightened their
rebellions against the central Government, more oppressive under President Ne
Win than it had been under U Nu, his predecessor, the Mons tightened their
ethnic unity without rising in rebellion.  But large numbers crossed the border
into Thailand, angered by the Rangoon Government's intensified centralism and
the shrinking of economic opportunities under President Ne Win's personal brand
of socialism.

The exodus, estimated by leaders of the exiled Mons at 100,000 in the last 15
years and continuing, has not been brought to public knowledge. Since the Mons
have been crossing into a sparsely populated region of Thailand, the Government
in Bangkok accepted the refugees implicitly. The Mons do not look strikingly
different from the Thais, although they are generally taller, and they practice
the form of Buddhism that is dominant here.

About 3,000 Mons live in this mountain village, which they carved out of the
jungle. It is situated on land long owned by a wealthy Chinese-Thai businessman
in Bangkok. The villagers raise their own crops, mainly rice for their
consumption, and cultivate the rest of the land as laborers for a company in
which the landowner holds the principal interest.

They produce cotton, corn, coconuts, ginger, sesame and vegetable crops. Their
village is reminiscent of a company town. It has a dispensary that is run by a
Mon medical student who broke off his studies at Rangoon University to go into
exile and is underwritten by the company.

'We Want Pure Democracy'

''Our people came here with empty hands,'' said U Ba Oo, a leader, ''and now
they have motorcycles, cassette players and even motorcars.''

Mr. Ba Oo's opinions represent the moderate point of view among the Mons here.
He said that Mons should aspire to bring about, with other national insurgency
movements, a change of Government in Rangoon that would make the Union of Burma
- that is the country's official name - a genuinely federal state.''We want to
get pure democracy,'' he said.

Other Mon leaders have more radical goals. The abbot of the village monastery,
one of the six monks, all of whom are Mon refugees, said sharply, ''I want my
own country.'' Leading a visitor to a Burmese Government map on the temple wall,
he drew with a finger a line across central Burma.

''All this is Mon, including Rangoon,'' he said. ''We built the Shwedagon
Pagoda, we built the temples of Pagan.'' He referred to the principal glories of
Burma's age of gold, built under Mon dominance.

The abbot, Ven Wa Ra Lang Ka, has great influence among the young men of the
village and surroundings, because he teaches them not only religion but also the
Mon language and history and he inculcates Mon nationalism.

''If we have an army, I will change my robes and fight,'' the abbot declared.
An army does exist, the abbot and other leaders said. It is centered on the
Three Pagodas Pass north of here, a historic landmark of the region. Its numbers
appear to be small, but like other insurgent movements, it collects ''taxes'' on
the heavy black-market trade that meets Burma's consumer goods needs in return
for jade, gemstones, opium, timber and other resources that are smuggled out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Thailand

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Susan Fernicola, an Editor Is Married to Charles Kalan

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 148 words


Susan Yvonne Fernicola, community and women's editor for the metro life
department of The News in Paterson, N.J., was married yesterday to Charles
Kalan, manager of the Beacon Theater, where the Rev.  Melvin Hawthorne, a
Baptist minister, performed the ceremony on the stage.

The bride, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Ralph A. Fernicola of Paterson, is a
graduate of William Paterson College. Her father owns R.A.F.  Food Products,
distributor to food stores.

Mr. Kalan, son of Rebecca Klitzner of Allentown, Pa., and the late Isadore
Klitzner, has taken his surname legally. An Army veteran of the Vietnam War, he
received a bachelor's degree in theater arts from the University of Miami and is
a candidate for a master's degree in theater management at Columbia University.
His former marriage ended in divorce. His father was general manager of the Two
Guys From Harrison store chain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 19, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THAIS BACK POL FORCES IN U.N.

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 492 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 18


Thailand is mounting a major diplomatic offensive to persuade Western countries
to maintain their support of the deposed Cambodian Government of Pol Pot, now
headed by Khieu Samphan, by voting to seat its delegation at the United Nations
General Assembly next month.

Last year, the Assembly voted 71 to 35 to seat the delegation of Democratic
Kampuchea, the official name of the regime headed by Mr.  Pol Pot, who was its
Prime Minister. The Assembly went on to adopt, by 91 to 21, a resolution
demanding that Vietnam withdraw its troops, which ousted Mr. Pol Pot in January
1979 and occupied most of Cambodia.

Forces loyal to the fallen Prime Minister continue to harass Vietnamese troops
and the Vietnamese-supported regime of President Heng Samrin from strong points
in Cambodia along the Thai border. The Pol Pot forces, however, control no
populated areas or population centers.

It is expected that at the General Assembly's annual meeting the Soviet Union,
which supports Vietnam, or one of its Eastern European allies will challenge the
Cambodian delegation's credentials in an effort to seat the Heng Samrin regime.

Plea to Four Nations

The Thai Foreign Minister, Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila, will leave a week
earlier than necessary to lead his country''s delegation to the opening of the
General Assembly. He will spend that week in Western Europe, visiting Bonn,
Paris, Brussels and The Hague, to present the Thai case for continued
recognition of the Pol Pot regime. Marshal Siddhi will also discuss the issue at
the headquarters of the European Common Market.

Thai diplomats assert that Bangkok is not worried about the outcome of the
Assembly vote. But India's decision last month to confer recognition on the Heng
Samrin regime has caused concern that other nations that profess nonalignment
might follow suit.

Thailand is most directly affected by Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia, which
traditionally served as a buffer between it and the Vietnamese. The Thai
campaign is backed by the five-nation Association of Southeast Asian Nations, as
was last year's anti-Vietnamese resolution.

Thai diplomats expressed confidence that the United States would keep supporting
the Pol Pot delegation. Last year the United States, though it repeatedly
condemned the Pol Pot regime as the worst violator of human rights, voted to
support it.

Americans Hedge on Vote

American officials, from Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie on down, sidestep
direct questions on how the United States will vote.  Informed Americans suggest
that in the midst of a Presidential election campaign the White House would not
publicly commit itself to backing so unpopular a regime.

Recent Vietnamese troop movements in western Cambodia have heightened Thailand's
concern. Western diplomats with access to reliable intelligence report that
Vietnam has bolstered its forces near the Thai border by 5,000 to 10,000 combat
and support troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 19, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ST. MARK'S BELL SIGNALS CHURCH'S RISE FROM ASHES

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words


Marks/photo

By LAURIE JOHNSTON

As Peter Stuyvesant slept on in a vault below, Carlos Garcia, a 23-year-old crew
chief, began raising a new bell to the steeple of St. Mark's Church in the
Bowery yesterday, along with seven other hardhatted young workers from the
neighborhood trained in the church's Preservation Youth Project.

Then, amid the scaffolding and stacks of building materials that have filled the
181-year-old church since a 1978 fire, the bell was ceremonially positioned by
Henry Geldzahler, the city's Cultural Affairs Commissioner, and blessed by
Bishop Paul Moore of the New York Episcopal Diocese.

The 282-pound bronze bell, the first of four, was dedicated and inscribed ''for
the workers who helped rebuild this church.'' ''That's all of us here - those
who worked with their hands as well as those who have raised money and given
their other talents,'' said the Rev. David Garcia (no relation to Carlos), the
pastor of New York's second oldest church. He succeeded the Rev. Michael J. C.
Allen, known as ''the hippie priest'' when the St. Mark's area was the center of
the 1960's counterculture and now dean of Christ Church Cathedral in St. Louis,
whose three grown children were at the dedication.

Each Bell Has Inscription

The other bells, gleaming nearby, are inscribed ''for the artists who work
here,'' ''for the people of this community'' and - on the largest, at 595 pounds
- ''for peace on earth, these bells ring.''

Pulleys creaked and chains clanked as more than 100 neighbors, communicants and
guests peered up toward the steeple from the nativestone vestibule below. But
the bell was mute. The tintinnabulation will come later, for Thanksgiving or
certainly for Christmas, when the three others are installed and the $1.7
million restoration draws nearer to completion, perhaps by next year.

Calling St. Mark's ''a resource of hope for the people,'' Bishop Moore said,
''Migrations come and migrations go - the church ministers to them as they
pass.''

Commissioner Geldzahler invoked the names of Isadora Duncan, Edna St. Vincent
Millay, Allen Ginsberg, Ted Berrigan and other creative artists who found
audiences at St. Mark's, adding, ''I've had a lot of pleasure and a lot of
thrills from this church as a cultural center.''

St. Mark's and its neighborhood have had as many changes as there are notes on
any carillon.  By the 1920's, as affluent New York moved uptown, most of the
fashionable homes of the 19th century, with their gaslights and carriageways,
had become rooming houses, alongside the tenements. The ethnic mix widened to
include more Jewish, Italian, Ukrainian, Polish, Irish, Chinese, black and
Hispanic people.

Artists Flock to Area

Attracted by the same cheap rents, artists flocked to the area.  When Off
Broadway and Off Off Broadway began to flourish there, Theater Genesis, founded
at St. Mark's in 1965, began to produce early works by Leonard Melfi, Sam
Shepard, Murray Mednick, Michael McClure and others.

During the 25 months since the fire, when the roof collapsed, the church kept
its record as the city's oldest site of continuous worship. Sunday services,
along with the St. Mark's dance, poetry and silkscreen studio projects, were
moved outside or to the adjoining parish hall.

The annual New Year's Day marathon reading of the St. Mark's Poetry Project was
moved to the Entermedia Theater, two blocks north on Second Avenue at 12th
Street. Joseph Asaro, Entermedia's executive director, was there yesterday to
help celebrate.

So was Judy Volkman, the church's senior warden, who came to the neighborhood as
a student 10 years ago, ''walked in on a Sunday service and knew this was where
I was going to stay.''

''People were really happy here -they enjoyed each other,'' said Miss Volkman,
now a buyer for Montgomery Ward.

Stereotypes of the Sixties

Paul Acton, a sales executive who was taking pictures yesterday, joined the
church after moving from St. Louis in 1967. At that time, ''St. Mark's'' - in
reality, St. Mark's Place, a block away - was as much a synonym and stereotype
for barefoot, long-haired or bearded (and sometimes glassy-eyed) youth as ''the
Bowery'' was for an older set of dropouts.

''This congregation ranged from flower children to investment bankers and it was
doing things - community things, '' Mr. Acton said. ''It was exciting
theologically, too, and instead of laying on the service, they let it grow out
of the people participating.''

''I'm living in the neighborhood since 1961,'' said Roberta Davis, who has a
lingerie shop on First Avenue and was shepherding Father Garcia's 4 1/2-year-old
son, Andreas. ''Now the neighborhood is turning around again. The apartment
shortage is bringing us career women and men - not just young people on the
street looking for a handout.''

The new St. Mark's carillon will be programmed and operated electronically,
unlike the old bell, which was installed along with the tower clock in 1836. It
still tolled with a rope pull for the deaths of John F. Kennedy, Robert F.
Kennedy and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Since the King assassination,
the bell had rung only for the end of the Vietnam War.

Old Bell to Be Memorial

Cracked beyond repair by the heat of the 1978 fire, the bell sits on the
sanctuary floor and will be moved to the East Yard as a memorial to the
rebuilding of St. Mark's.

The steeple itself, relatively undamaged in the fire, had been the focus of a
renovation begun in 1975 and completed before the blaze.Carlos Garcia and scores
of his Preservation Youth Project colleagues worked through both
rehabilitations, gaining expertise in the restoration of old wooden pillars and
woodwork.

John Allen, 27-year-old son of the previous rector, recalled his years in the
rectory.  ''I wouldn't have grown up anywhere else,'' said Mr. Allen, a law
student at Northeastern University in Boston. ''It was a unique opportunity - to
be in the heart of what was happening in the cities rather than watch it on TV
from a suburban perspective.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of St. Marks Photo of new bell Photo of the inside
of St.

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 20, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SWEDEN'S LEFT IS EAGER TO SPRING ON A FALTERING FOE

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 933 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, Aug. 14


The Social Democrats, who governed Sweden for 44 years before losing the
elections of 1976 and 1979, seem to be poised for a comeback.

At a time when the left is on the defensive in many parts of Europe, the Social
Democrats here are benefiting from the economic difficulties encountered by the
coalition Government of Prime Minister Thorbjorn Falldin. With only a one-vote
majority in Parliament and deep disagreement among the coalition parties on
economic strategy, Mr. Falldin has been unable to give the country strong
leadership.

The latest survey by the Institute of Public Opinion, completed June 10, gives
the Social Democrats 46.5 percent and their Communist allies 5, a total of 51.5.
In electoral terms, that would give the Social Democrats their strongest
position since immediately after their victory under Prime Minister Olof Palme
in 1968.

Falldin May Try to Hang On

It is possible that Mr. Falldin will either be forced or will choose to call an
election before 1982, the scheduled date. But most politicians expect him to
hang on because a second failure by the coalition in five years to complete a
full term would undermine the credibility of all three of its constituent
parties, the Liberals, the Conservatives and the Center.

A Social Democratic victory would almost certainly mean the return to power of
Mr. Palme, the intellectual who outraged many Americans with his pronouncements
on the Vietnam War. He is still not as popular as the rest of the Social
Democratic Party with the electorate, but his standing has improved.

''Sweden has had its flirtation with the ordinary-man theory of government in
the person of Mr. Falldin,'' said the No. 2 man in the Socialist hierarchy,
Ingvar Carlsson, ''and it appears that they are ready to return to a more
intellectual leadership.''

If so, a principal reason will be the strikes and lockouts last May that brought
the economy to a standstill. It was the worst industrial conflict here since
1909, and it shook many people who had long thought that kind of thing was
impossible in Sweden, with its tradition of cooperation among employers, workers
and government in settling wage claims.

Inflation Is the Problem

The trouble grew out of the need to control inflation as a prelude to regaining
lost markets overseas. The strikes solved nothing and Sweden's biggest problem
remains its adverse balance of payments, almost $4 billion in the red on current
account. As a first step in solving the problem, Mr. Falldin has proposed a 3
percent increase in the national sales tax, known in Europe as the value added
tax. The tax already stands at 20.6 percent.

Even that would have only a modest effect. The budget deficit is approaching $14
billion and the increase in sales tax would provide less than $2 billion in new
revenues, according to government figures.

But the Social Democrats, whose support the Prime Minister feels he needs, are
resisting. In negotiations over the last 10 days they have made alternate
proposals, but so far there is no consensus on what should be done.

Looking for a Swedish Nixon

''Obviously,'' said Harry Schein, one of Mr. Palme's closest friends, ''a small
nation that lives by trade can't go on like this.  ''We have to decrease private
consumption and increase investment.  Palme will have to be our Nixon in the
sense that he will have to do things -recognizing China in Nixon's case,
restraining the trade unions and keeping taxes high in Palme's - that his own
constituency would never accept from any other government.

''There will have to be some reduction in the standard of living in Sweden. At
the moment the Japanese, the Swiss and the oil sheiks are paying for the Swedish
workers to go on vacation in Spain and Greece, but that can't last very much
longer.'' He was alluding to the deficit Sweden is running in its foreign
transactions.

In a new book, the journalist Marquis Childs puts the problem faced by Sweden in
a larger perspective and suggests a direction in which a Palme government might
move: toward worker ownership and away from concentration of ownership in a few
families.

Who Can Afford Welfare System?

''The dilemma Sweden presents today has significance far beyond the borders of
this small country in the north of Europe,'' he says in ''Sweden: The Middle Way
On Trial.''

''One way to put it is to ask whether a welfare system - cradle-tograve security
- as comprehensive as it is in Sweden can be sustained in the society where the
means of production are so narrowly held.

''Or does the existence of a privileged owning class make the full step to
socialism inevitable in a democratic state?'' It is thus not surprising that the
Social Democrats are beginning to say that the next election may be easy to win,
but that the next government will face almost unanswerable questions.

Mr. Schein estimates that Sweden is living about 7 percent beyond its means.
Cutting 7 percent from expenditures might seem easy, except that there are so
many fixed expenses that 7 percent represents as much as 35 percent of
discretionary spending.

Mr. Palme is determined to have a go at it. There have been suggestions, all
authoritatively denied, that he would like to head the World Bank or the United
Nations. He may, in fact, serve as chairman of a new disarmament commission on
which former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, Chancellor Bruno Kreisky of
Austria and former Foreign Secretary David Owen of Britain are at work. But he
remains more concerned with returning to power and finding new solutions for
Sweden's difficulties.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 20, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Judge in Garwood Case Denies Nixon Deposition

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Aug. 19


The judge in the court martial of Pfc. Robert Garwood of the Marines rejected
defense motions today for a deposition from former President Richard M. Nixon.

Mr. Garwood's lawyer, Vaughn Taylor, said that a statement from Mr. Nixon would
bolster the defense's argument that prisoners of war returning from Vietnam were
granted amnesty from prosecution for propaganda statements they made while in
captivity.

Mr. Garwood, charged with desertion and collaboration with the enemy, returned
to the United States last year after spending 14 years in Vietnam. If convicted,
he could be sentenced to life in prison.

Mr. Nixon's lawyer, Fred Mortenson, said the former President had no
recollection concerning amnesty for returning prisoners of war and could be of
no help in an interview with Mr. Garwood's attorneys, prosecutors said.

Phyllis Schlafly to Testify In Rights Amendment Case

SPRINGFIELD, Ill., Aug. 19 (UPI) -Phyllis Schlafly, a vocal opponent of the
proposed equal rights amendment, will testify in the trial of a woman accused of
trying to bribe a state legislator to vote in favor of ratifying the measure,
defense attorneys said today.

The attorneys for Wanda Brandstetter also said a state legislator was balking at
testifying about what the defense says was a plot to kill the measure in the
Illinois legislature. They said Representative Thomas Hanahan, Democrat of
McHenry, had refused to comply to a subpoena, saying he would be out of the
state.

Eight jurors were selected today for the trial before Associate Judge Jeanne
Scott of Sangamon County Circuit Court. Four regular jurors and two alternates
are still to be chosen.

Mrs. Brandstetter, 55 years old, a Chicago real estate agent, is accused of
offering a $1,000 campaign contribution to Representative Nord Swanstrom,
Republican of Pecatonia, in exchange for a vote to ratify the rights measure.
Her lawyers contend that Mrs.  Brandstetter was a victim of an entrapment plan.

The issue fell five votes short of passage June 18 in the Illinois House.  One
of Mrs. Brandstetter's attorneys, John Murphy, said Mrs.  Schlafly was scheduled
to testify Wednesday but would submit written testimony if the trial has not
moved to the defense stage by then.

National Anthem Is Halted At Theater on Navy Base

WAUKEGAN, Ill., Aug. 19 (AP) - The commander of the Great Lakes Naval Training
Center has suspended the playing of the national anthem at the base movie
theater because it drew catcalls, hisses and boos.

Rear Adm. Charles Gurney 3d, writing in the base newspaper, said, ''This is the
end of the national anthem at Ross Auditorium Theater for as long as I'm
commander here.''

Admiral Gurney earlier had temporarily suspended the playing of ''The Star
Spangled Banner'' before the evening feature because of jeers from the audience.
But he relented after some base personnel complained.

When the practice was resumed, the Admiral urged everyone to report catcallers.
But ''not one name was turned in to me,'' he wrote in the newspaper. ''Where
were all the patriotic people who abhor such behavior?''

Ex-Census Official Says Methods May Be Inaccurate

DETROIT, Aug. 19 (AP) - In the first court test of Bureau of the Census's 1980
count, a former census official testified today that a scientific sampling would
be more accurate than door-to-door checks.

Philip Hauser, former deputy director of the census bureau, testified in the
trial of a suit brought by the City of Detroit, which contends that thousands of
its citizens were missed in the April census.

Detroit says that the discrepancy will deprive the city and the state of Federal
aid and representation in Congress. Similar suits have been filed in New York,
Chicago, Philadelphia and Newark.

Studies have shown that blacks, who make up more than 60 percent of Detroit's
population, are missed by current census methods four times as often as whites.

''Detroit undoubtedly suffered from a disparate undercount'' in the 1970 census,
Mr. Hauser told Federal District Judge Horace Gilmore.  ''There would also be an
undercount in 1980 if the pattern of undercount continues - it's a matter of
simple arithmetic.''

Jury in Supper Club Case Faults Insulation Makers

CINCINNATI, Aug. 19 (UPI) - The jury in a suit over the Beverly Hills Supper
Club fire found today that polyvinyl chloride wiring insulation was not
dangerous in itself but that the manufacturers had a duty to warn of possible
hazards when it is heated.

The 1977 fire killed 165 persons at the club in Southgate, Ky. The current
trial, in Federal district court, is the second to stem from the fire.

Attorneys for the plaintiffs contend that polyvinyl-coated wiring emitted toxic
hydrogen chloride gas during the blaze, leading to many injuries and deaths. The
trial will now proceed to a second phase to determine if polyvinyl chloride was
responsible for any deaths or injuries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Column

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 20, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

V.A. Head Tells Legion Of More Aid to Veterans

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Aug. 19


Max Cleland, the head of the Veterans Administration, told the American Legion
convention today that the agency was making progress in aiding the nation's
veterans, particularly those who had served in Vietnam.

''We know that Vietnam veterans differ from their World War II counterparts in
what they need from the V.A. health system,'' said Mr. Cleland, who lost his
legs and an arm in Vietnam. ''The V.A. has been trying to see health care to
veterans as a much larger issue than just placing a veteran in a hospital bed or
institution.''

He spoke to the legion convention a day after Ronald Reagan, the Republican
Presidential candidate, told the Veterans of Foreign Wars that President Carter
had ''an antiveterans Administration.''

Mr. Cleland said that Vietnam veterans have taken greater advantage of G.I. Bill
education benefits than their predecessors did.  ''About 65 percent of eligible
Vietnam-era veterans have taken training under their program, compared with
participation rates of 50 percent for World War II,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 20, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DISPUTE STALLS TEXAS MEDICAID CONTRACT

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 471 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex. Aug. 19


An intense public dispute, involving threats of lawsuits and a charge of
improper lobbying, has broken out between a New York concern and H. Ross Perot,
the Dallas financier, over who should administer Texas's $2 billion Medicaid
contract.

Peter DelCol, chairman of the New York company, Bradford National Corporation,
vowed in a news conference today that he would take legal action, if necessary,
to prevent the award of the new four-year contract to National Heritage
Insurance Company, a subsidiary of Mr.  Perot's Electronics Data Systems Inc.

National Heritage holds the expiring contract, which involves handling
computerized receipts and billing for the governmentfinanced health program.

Texas's three-member Board of Human Resources, favoring its staff's
recommendation, voted July 15 to accept Bradford National's proposal.
Afterward, Mr. Perot and Morton Meyerson, president of National Heritage, met
privately with the board members. Another meeting involving Mr. Perot and Mr.
Meyerson was held July 18 with the state Commissioner of Human Resources, Jerome
Chapman.

On July 29, the chairman of the Board of Human Resources, Hilmar Moore, said at
a board meeting that final decision on the contract would not be made until Aug.
25. After the meeting he was quoted as having said: ''I and the board made a
mistake'' and ''would be better off'' by a decision to ''go with Perot.''

The Texas Administrative Procedures Act prohibits private discussions between
members of boards and interested parties in contested cases. Mr. DelCol said
today that Mr. Perot's action was ''certainly unfair'' and ''probably''
improper.

Attorney General Mark White of Texas said today that he was told by Mr. Perot
before the private meeting with board members that the session had been planned.
Mr. White did not say he gave permission for the meetings but said Mr. Perot was
''free to contact anyone he wants to.''

Mr. Perot reportedly has threatened to sue the state if Bradford is given the
contract.  After July 18, Commissioner Chapman sought additional information
from several consultants. They recommended that the contract go to Bradford
National.

Commissioner Chapman announced his retirement last Thursday, citing as factors
problems with the Medicaid contract and what he characterized as interference by
Gov. William P. Clements Jr. and his staff in operations of the department. The
Governor, who is considered a has said he will not take part in the controversy
over the contract.

Mr. Perot founded Electronic Data Systems in 1962 and reportedly became a
billionaire within six years. He financed a national advertising campaign in
support of President Nixon's Vietnam policies and says he financed a mob assault
on an Iranian prison last year that freed many inmates, including two of his
employees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of H. Ross Perot

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 20, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

REV. FALWELL INSPIRES EVANGELICAL VOTE

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1984 words

DATELINE: LYNCHBURG, Va.


When the Rev. Jerry Falwell strode toward his private Jet Commander that was
waiting to rush him to a rally in Harrisburg, Pa., he was already off schedule.
He had taken a long call from Representative George Hansen, Republican of Idaho,
one of a network of Congressmen with whom Mr. Falwell stays in touch, and had
squeezed in a telephone interview for a Christian radio program that is
broadcast on stations in Florida, Georgia and Alabama.

The evangelist is no stranger to the tricks and mechanical needs of television
filming, or to the power of the media to spread his views. And so, even though
he was running late, he smilingly obliged a cameraman by walking back to the
gate and then striding forth again.  And then, when his plane was in the air, he
instructed the pilot to make a cinematic turn to the right for the benefit of
the cameraman and his crew, from the British Broadcasting Corporation, who had
come from London to film an American phenomenon: the political awakening of
conservative Christians.

Mr. Falwell, who has built his popular influence by buying prime television time
to broadcast his ministry, now gets free exposure on the news because he has
come to symbolize the effort to create what his fellow evangelist, James
Robison, is calling ''the Christian vote.'' Its size and coherence are hard to
measure, but its most ambitious conference begins tomorrow in Dallas, where
10,000 pastors are expected for a ''national affairs briefing'' that Ronald
Reagan, the favored candidate of the conservative Christians, will address
Friday night.

All the important Congressional, clerical and lay leaders in the effort to shape
the Christian vote are expected to be

Last of four articles on the rise of conservative evangelical Christians as a
political force in the nation.
there, and Mr. Falwell is scheduled to speak tomorrow night. Edward E. McAteer,
head of the sponsoring Religious Roundtable, says the aim of the briefing is to
discuss issues, not politics.

The climate for the conference has been created largely on television, where Mr.
Falwell and other independent evangelists have used sophisticated programming to
develop huge new urban audiences in the last five years. Some of them, in the
last year and a half, have begun to shape their far-flung congregations into a
new political force. One measure of its strength is that the political lobby Mr.
Falwell founded just 14 months ago, The Moral Majority, asserts that it has
registered about 3 million new voters, many of them right in the church.

Mr. Falwell, who says he has the widest television syndication, is the most
visible example of the politicized broadcast evangelists. He looks like a
successful Baptist preacher; he is a man of rather large size, and voice, and
energies, given to dark vested suits and a deep concern about what he sees as
the moral decline of America.

His Headquarters in Lynchburg

His spreading brick complex here contains the Thomas Road Baptist Church, a
Christian academy, the Liberty Baptist College, and the headquarters of the
electronic Old Time Gospel Hour and of the newsletter, issues of which he sends
out by the hundreds of thousands.

He began his church in an abandoned building 24 years ago, with a congregation
of 35. Now, at the age of 47, he says the congregation numbers 17,000 and he has
to conduct five services on Sundays to accommodate them all.

The Old Time Gospel Hour, broadcast from those Sunday services, is carried on
304 television stations in this country and 69 abroad - ''100 stations more than
Lawrence Welk,'' as Mr. Falwell is fond of saying. Last year, his weekly pleas
for contributions brought in $56 million.

He also tapes a half-hour of Bible study for daily broadcasts on 300 radio
stations. In early June, Mr. Falwell began taping a fiveminute news commentary
carried on 130 radio stations three times a day -right after the morning, noon
and evening newscasts. Every week the Falwell organization spends $300,000, he
says, to buy radio and television air time.

Size of Audience Is Uncertain

That weekly expenditure makes the television program ''available to 98 per cent
of all Americans,'' the evangelist said in an interview that ranged from
Lynchburg that morning on into the Harrisburg rally in the Shriners' Zembo
Temple that night. His biggest audience markets, he said, are not in the South,
''which is already heavily churched,'' but in Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Boston
and New York, in that order.

His national audience has been reported to number as much as 15 million, though
some say 6 million is a more reliable figure. On the other hand, and this is
typical of the television and radio ministries that have come to be called ''the
electric church,'' he said he did not know how many people actually watch. ''No,
I sure don't,'' he said.

On Wednesday nights, Sunday mornings and Sunday nights, Mr. Falwell ministers to
this flock, and most of the rest of the time he is gone, covering up to 5,000
miles a week by jet, to keep an agenda of hundreds of rallies and meetings he
has scheduled to shake the grass roots with patriotic songs and sermons before
the general election.  This he does in his capacity as founder and president of
The Moral Majority.

''We make no bones about it,'' he said. ''It is a political-moral
organization.'' Its avowed purpose is to awake, inform and register the
evangelical vote that Albert J. Menendez, in his 1977 book, ''Religion at the
Polls,'' called ''the sleeping giant of American politics.''

The Moral Majority's concerns are the same ones that finally persuaded Mr.
Falwell to become politically active in June 1979. It was then, with the
guidance of a group of New Right architects who operate out of Washington, that
he founded The Moral Majority.

Opposition to Abortion

It vigorously opposes abortion, the proposed equal rights amendment, civil
rights for homosexuals, and all who advocate these things. Its serious
legislative mission is to return voluntary prayer to the public schools. And The
Moral Majority is for Israel, a strong national defense and ''anything else that
relates to the sovereignty of this country,'' Mr. Falwell says.

To pursue these goals, the lobby works to mobilize evangelicals and to recruit
and trainpeople to run for political office.'' There is no doubt that The Moral
Majority borrows much of its strength from Mr. Falwell's television ministry and
its computerized list of contributors' names. Mr. Falwell's office reports that
The Moral Majority's national membership list now totals 400,000.

'Not a Minority Movement'

While he says it is wrong to think of The Moral Majority as a lilywhite club, he
counts only ''a couple of hundred'' black preachers in his membership.

''I'm not going to kid you that we have minorities running out our ears,'' says
Paul M. Weyrich, one of the New Right strategists who helped teach Mr. Falwell
how to organize the evangelicals. ''This is not a minority movement.''

In its first year, The Moral Majority drew contributions of $1.5 million
nationally. Mr. Falwell has also established a political action committee that
raised $200,000 in less than five months. It dispenses money to state and
national candidates he deems worthy, and Mr. Falwell intends to create similar
committees in each state, with a beginning political treasury of $100,000 each.

New Lines of Communication

Mr. Falwell's purpose is to try to fill a void with new lines of communication.
For decades, while black churches and main-line white Protestant denominations
were drawn into social activism in the civil rights and Vietnam eras, white
evangelicals shunned political involvement as they would the Devil's work.

And it may be, in the 14 months since he founded The Moral Majority, that Mr.
Falwell, as a preacher, has done something unprecedented in this nation's
political history. In organizing to arouse a particular electorate, to shape the
ways it views issues, to register its members to vote, to give it a common
language and means of communication, to use it to influence law and policy at
state and national levels, to raise funds to support certain candidates and to
select and train other candidates for public office, Mr. Falwell has created
something very siimilar to a political party.

''In many states, it is legally possible to register people right in the church
building,'' Mr. Falwell said. ''We feel that by October, we will have registered
3 to 4 million new voters who have never voted before.''

Counter to Democratic Platform

What the total will be, whether the voters will hang together on the chosen
issues at election time, and to whom their votes will go, are open questions.
Thus far, Mr. Falwellhas seemed unblushingly Republican. ''Obviously,'' he said
in the airborne interview, ''the position of The Moral Majority runs counter to
the present Democratic Party platform.''

Jimmy Carter, the first American President to win office as a proclaimed
born-again Christian, took 46 percent of the Protestant vote in 1976, more than
any Democrat in 25 years except Lyndon B.  Johnson.

''He cornered the total South last time, with the exception of Virginia, because
our people thought, 'Here's a breath of fresh air - a born-again Christian,' ''
Mr. Falwell said. ''But I'm afraid Mr.  Carter has alienated the evangelical
people who put him in office.''

The Republican Party has welcomed Mr. Falwell and his colleagues.  A
representative cluster of preachers from the various conservative Biblical
factions met three times through the year with Bill Brock, the Republican
national chairman. Mr. Falwell was in Detroit for the Republican National
Convention and went to Ronald Reagan's hotel suite on the day that Mr. Reagan
was deciding on his Vice-Presidential nominee, to warn him against choosing
George Bush.

Mr. Bush was chosen anyway, but the party adopted a platform that embraced
virtually all his concerns.  ''I am not a Republican, I am not a Democrat!'' Mr.
Falwell shouted to the cheering thousands who filled the castle-like Zembo
Temple in Harrisburg to its roof that night. ''I am a noisy Baptist!'' And then
he proceeded to tell them about the Republican platform. Next came a 90-minute,
$110,000 audio-visual presentation called ''America, You're Too Young to Die.''

Strong Images, Words of Gus Hall

''Please don't go!'' he implored the crowd, which was fidgeting in the hot night
air.  They stayed, and saw an America peopled with the repeated images of
Charles Manson, Times Square sex-film marquees, atom bombs exploding, young men
with their arms around each other and unbreathing fetuses lying in bloody white
ceramic hospital pans.

They stayed, to read the words of Gus Hall, former head of the Communist Party
in the United States, flashed on the screen: ''I dream of the hour when the last
Congressman is strangled to death on the guts of the last preacher.''

''Two years ago, the average evangelical couldn't tell you who their Congressman
was,'' Mr. Falwell said earlier in the day. If Mr.  Falwell and the others in
the movement have their way, the members of Congress and the President will be
chosen by an evangelical vote.

The effort to build that vote has come to be regarded as a direct attack by the
Carter White House, particularly since the recent disclosure that Mr. Falwell,
in a speech at a rally in March in Alaska, had said that he had met with
President Carter in January and asked him, ''Sir, why do you have known
practicing homosexuals on your senior staff here in the White House?''

Mr. Falwell told the Anchorage audience that the President had answered that it
was because ''I am President of all the American people, and I believe I should
represent everyone.'' But a tape recording of their meeting, provided to the
White House by Mr.  Falwell, showed that he had never asked that question.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article on Aug. 20 attributed to Gus Hall, general secretary of the Communist
Party, U.S.A., a statement he says he did not make. The statement - ''I dream of
the hour when the last Congressman is strangled to death on the guts of the last
preacher'' - was part of an audio-visual presentation of the Moral Majority, the
conservative organization. The presentation was put together by Life Action
Ministries, of Buchanan, Mich., which provides such services to conservative
groups. An official of Life Action said a search of the records could not
confirm the statement, thus it was being pulled from the presentation.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rev. Faiwell photo of Christians praying

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 20, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CALIFORNIA RIDES DEFENSE BOOM

BYLINE: By STEVEN RATTNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: EL SEGUNDO, Calif.


The nation may be in recession and enduring mounting unemployment, but a sign
outside North American Rockwell's complex hard by Los Angeles airport is
pleading with toolmakers, milling machine operators and heat treaters to come
inside and be hired.

All through this barren neighborhood of industrial complexes mixed with new
office buildings and fast-food strips, companies such as Hughes Aircraft, TRW
and Northrop are similarly advertising.

The common denominator is that all of these companies are major defense
contractors and that business is booming. For a clue as to how Federal spending
influences local economies, look no further than California, by far the largest
recipient of defense dollars.

''A few years ago, those signboards were blank,'' said Thomas K.  Lieser, an
economist at the Security Pacific National Bank.  ''Employment opportunities
were at a minimum.''

Effect of National Policies

The California example illustrates as well how no state economy is immune to the
vicissitudes of national economic policies. The economic crash of the spring
across America was apparent here as well, from auto layoffs to declining retail
sales.

''California is not recession-proof; it feels the impact of what goes on across
the nation,'' said Larry J. Kimbell, director of forecasting models at the
University of California at Los Angeles.  ''What causes us to deviate from the
national trend is aerospace.''

Accordingly, although the 1973-75 recession was worse nationwide than in
California, the 1970-71 recession was more severe in the state than elsewhere.
The difference was that, at the turn of the decade, military spending was ebbing
as the war in Vietnam was wound down.

In the 1979 fiscal year, which ended last Sept. 30, California received $12.3
billion in defense contracts. Texas was second, with $4.8 billion. And between
1978 and 1980, California's share of defense contracts is projected to rise to
20.5 percent from 19.6 percent, while the state has about 10.5 percent of the
nation's population.

9% Jobless Rate Forecast

The interplay of the military buildup and the effects of national economic
policies are expected to result in a decline in employment of only about
three-fifths the national rate of decline and an unemployment rate above 9
percent by year-end. In some areas, such as housing construction, which was
heavily affected by tight and expensive credit, the decline has been as large as
the national average. So-called durable goods, such as appliances, have also
been hard hit.

California economists see little prospect that their defense boom will abate.
After all, the debate in Congress has focused almost exclusively on whether the
increases should be larger, rather than on whether they are already too large.
Moreover, Congress loves buying equipment and doing research -both of which are
particular California strong points.

''Procurement and R.& D., that's where we are experts,'' said Joseph A. Wahed,
chief economist at the Wells Fargo National Bank in San Francisco. ''We get one
out of every five procurement dollars and one out of every two research and
development dollars.''

The decline in California has been mitigated not only by defense but also by
commercial airplane building, which continues to do well. The state also
receives about 40 percent of Federal spending on space projects. And California
has escaped much of the pain by having fewer of the heavily affected industries.

To be sure, the impact of the national recession on California can be seen in
the closed Ford plant in nearby Pico Rivera, where 1,670 workers were laid off,
or in the indefinite idling of 2,400 General Motors workers at its South Gate
assembly plant. But those reminders of the ills of the Middle West are isolated
curiosities here, encompassing perhaps 5,000 auto-related layoffs.

'Not a Heavy Industry State'

''We're not dependent on iron ore, steel or autos,'' said Michael S. Salkin, an
economist at the Bank of America. ''We're just not a heavy industry state.''

The view that California has the Department of Defense to thank for its relative
prosperity is not universally shared. The dissenters argue that a careful
compilation of defense industry employment would show only 200,000 jobs. Often,
they contend, an additional 400,000 fast-increasing electronics jobs are
mistakenly included.

''The strength of this economy has been way beyond what anybody thinks is
aerospace,'' said Robert Arnold, director of the Center for the Continuing Study
of the California Economy in Palo Alto. ''We think the state is very very strong
in a broad variety of areas.'' In the last year, despite the stagnant national
economy, employment in California's electronics and aerospace industries has
grown 8 percent.

Forecasts of the future of the California economy generally agree that the state
will continue to outperform the national economically but that the expected
sluggishness of the national recovery will slow California as well. ''Guarded
optimism,'' is how Mr. Lieser put it.  Substantial uncertainties remain over
future Federal economic policies. How tight will credit be? What kind of effort
will be made to improve worker productivity?

''Despite its unique size and vigor, the state's future is closely tied to that
of the nation, and indeed, the world,'' according to a recent study by the Wells
Fargo Bank. ''Broad economic issues, such as energy shortages, monetary and
fiscal policy dilemmas, defense spending priorities and international monetary
problems, will have a decided impact on the state's fortunes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME THE PRICE OF SECRETS;
by Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 861 words


The 40 Committee, which directed C.I.A. covert actions, met in the White House
on June 27, 1970, to consider what could be done about Chile and Salvador
Allende. Henry Kissinger started the discussion by saying:

''I don't see why we need to stand by and watch a country go Communist due to
the irresponsibility of its own people.'' Kissinger's statement was quoted by
Victor Marchetti and John Marks in their book, ''The C.I.A. and the Cult of
Intelligence.'' Or rather, it was quoted in their manuscript. C.I.A. censors cut
that passage, and 167 others, before the book was published in 1974.

The statement came out in other ways later and was printed widely in the press.
But the C.I.A. still refused to let Marchetti and Marks publish it. As recently
as last winter, when the censors withdrew their objections to some of the 168
items cut from the book, they still said no to the Kissinger quotation.

Now, after all those years, the C.I.A. has changed its mind. A new lawsuit was
filed under the Freedom of Information Act to seek release of all the censored
passages in the Marchetti book. And this month, in its answer to the suit, the
Government conceded that there was no security objection to publishing
Kissinger's words.

The episode tells us a good deal about the way censorship works.  The censors,
and the Justice Department lawyers who defend them, always talk about the need
to protect the national security. They make it seem as if publishing what they
want to ban would disclose our nuclear codes, or bring Soviet missiles down on
Washington. But almost always the real fear is that publication will embarrass
someone.

In this case it is hard to see how there could have been any real security
threat to the United States from publication. Allende was dead when the book
first came out, and the record of C.I.A. activity in Chile has long since been
explored by now.

The arrogance of Kissinger's words, when seen in print, was no doubt
embarrassing to him. But what he said at the meeting of the 40 Committee was
more than a personal matter. It reflected what was and had been for years a
prevailing attitude in the C.I.A. and the White House: an almost casual
willingness to intervene secretly in other countries with arms, money and
murderous plots.

Whatever one thinks of the need for covert action, it is clear that the practice
got out of hand - with blunders and excesses that hurt this country. It is now
under greater control, in the White House and in Congress, only because some
facts of what was going on leaked to the public.

Only an informed public can apply a defective pressure for change in failed
official policies. Censorship always tries to hide failure and abuse. It went on
trying to conceal those words of Henry Kissinger's for years after there was any
conceivable security reason to do so - and only gave up, one suspects, when the
bureaucrats figured that Kissinger was unlikely to be back in office soon, in a
position to punish them.

The danger is that we now have a system of official censorship: the first in the
peacetime history of the United States. Congress has not authorized it. The
Constitution, many believe, stands in its way. But the Federal courts, making
law to meet what they consider the C.I.A's needs, have allowed the agency to
censor what any former employee says for the rest of his life.

The latest incident in the development of this judge-made law of censorship
occurred last week. Frank Snepp, who wrote about official blunders in the last
days in Vietnam, gave the Government all he earned from his book, ''Decent
Interval.'' He wrote a check for $116,658.15 and promised to pay another $24,000
as soon as he can borrow it. He is now penniless.

Hardly anyone noticed the denouement of the Snepp case. But I think it was one
of the blackest moments ever for freedom of speech and press in America.

The Supreme Court's decree, carried out by the Justice Department with rigor,
took Snepp's gross income from ''Decent Interval'' with no allowance for living
expenses during the years he worked on the book. How many white-collar criminals
- or gangsters - have thus had their gross income taken for violating the law?
What politician or official has paid a fine of $140,000 for corruption or
deceit?

No one even claims that Frank Snepp disclosed any secrets in his book. But for
publishing without permission he has paid a penalty savage for him and dangerous
for the rest of us. The worst irony is the bland innocence of those who punished
Snepp and imposed on us a system of censorship: Supreme Court Justices who
decided the case without hearing argument, two Carter attorneys general and
their assistants.

After the Sedition Act of 1798 lapsed, a shamed Government remitted the fines of
editors who had been convicted under it. Some day a Government more sensitive
than this one should do the same for Frank Snepp.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN, IN SPEECH TO LEGION, SAYS CARTER HAS FALSIFIED MILITARY STATISTICS

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 663 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Aug. 20


Despite his decline in the polls and Democratic accusations that he is warlike,
Ronald Reagan stuck to his military preparedness theme today in a speech
accusing the Carter Administration of falsifying military statistics.

The Republican Presidential nominee told 4,000 American Legion members, who are
to hear from President Carter tomorrow, that Mr.  Carter had used ''untruthful''
and ''largely phony'' figures and accounting techniques to mask a decline in
military spending.

The United States is now second to the Soviet Union, Mr. Reagan said at the
veterans' convention, because Mr. Carter ''sees the maintenance of a robust
military capability as not only burdensome and unnecessary, but also troublesome
and provocative to the Soviet Union.''

President Kennedy Quoted

Mr. Reagan used what has become one of his favorite oratorical devices - quoting
from Democratic Presidents - to assert that the United States must be ''first,
period'' in armed might. ''Only then can we stop the next war before it
starts,'' Mr. Reagan said, quoting President Kennedy. ''Only then can we prevent
war by preparing for it.''

Mr. Reagan listed Mr. Kennedy among those he considered good Democrats on the
military issue. But the Carter Administration is dominated ''by the McGovernite
wing of the party,'' Mr. Reagan added in a reference to the antiwar views
espoused by Senator George McGovern in his 1972 Presidential campaign.

Today's speech marked the third day in a row that Mr. Reagan had spoken on
military matters. That is part of the Reagan staff's new strategy of ''theme
campaigning,'' with each week devoted to a single subject matter.

It is coincidence, Reagan aides insisted, that he is on the road this week with
a hard-line military preparedness message after a week in which Democratic
convention speakers characterized Mr.  Reagan's views as a threat to peace. ''We
had this planned a long time ago as our defense and peace week,'' said a key
aide.

The Reagan staff mebers also insisted that they were not playing into the
Democrats' hands by sticking to military themes. However, one adviser
acknowledged ''there were differences'' over the toughness of the speech that
Mr. Reagan gave Monday to the convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars in
Chicago. Those favoring a softer speech lost out, and the campaign staff was
taken by surprise at the sharp reaction to Mr. Reagan's pronouncement that the
Vietnam war was ''a noble cause'' and that the nation must prepare for another
arms race with the Russians.

Statistics Labeled Fraudulent

Mr. Reagan spoke more softly on military matters today and more harshly of his
opponent. He argued that ''peace through strength'' was a Republican principle
that Democrats were trying to appropriate through fraudulent statistics. He
accused Mr. Carter of misrepresentation in asserting that military spending
declined 35 percent under Republican Adaministrations from 1969 to 1975 and went
up 10 percent in the Carter Administration.

''As you know, there are two kinds of statistics,'' Mr. Reagan said today,
''those that you look up and those that you make up.'' In fact, he said, the
Republicans reduced defense spending by only 6 percent and those responsible for
the reduction were the ''Democrats who controlled the Congress, men like Walter
Mondale and Teddy Kennedy.''

A Reagan aide said that Mr. Reagan's 6 percent figure had come from a study of
military spending for the years 1971 to 1978. The Reagan campaign dropped the
last three years and assumed that the same percentage would apply for 1969 to
1975, the aide said.

In what aides denied was a direct reference to news reports that the
Administration planned a new Iranian venture, Mr. Reagan added: ''We must hope
that this Administration will not be tempted to take reckless actions designed
to reassure Americans that our power is undiminished. The facts are we lack the
capability to project our power to many areas of the world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Regan and his wife

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 21, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


By Anatole Broyard
THE PRESENT DANGER. By Norman Podhoretz. 109 pages. Simon & Schust- er. $7.95.
THE MORTAL DANGER. By Aleksandr I.  Solzhenitsyn. 71 pages. Harper & Row.
$8.95.

YOU might say that Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn is a hero of Soviet dissidence and
Norman Podhoretz is an antihero of American dissidence. While ''The Present
Danger,'' by Mr. Podhoretz, is a more temperate book than ''The Mortal Danger,''
by Mr. Solzhenitsyn, it will probably meet with more resistance. Something in
American life inclines us to listen to strangers.

Mr. Podhoretz, of course, is editor of Commentary magazine and author of
''Breaking Ranks, '' which is his ''Gulag Archipelago.'' Far from being
controversial, his arguments in ''The Present Danger'' seem almost
commonsensical. In fact, it may be this introduction of common sense into
international diplomacy that earned him a ''brilliant'' from Senator Henry M.
Jackson, an ''indispensable'' from Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and an
''impressive'' from former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger on the dust
wrapper of the book.

According to ''The Present Danger,'' the United States is losing the leadership
of the free world to the Soviet Union largely because we lack the will to oppose
with force its infiltration of other countries. We lack the will because we
consider ourselves to have been willfully wrong in Vietnam. As a result of that
disillusioning experience, Mr. Podhoretz says, we are ''Vietnamizing'' our past,
present and future, adding what Milovan Djilas calls ''moral disarmament'' to
the clamor for military disarmament.

Indigenous Paranoia

A new isolationism, he believes, has developed in this country.  Unlike the old
isolationism, which held that we were too good for international affairs, the
new feeling is that we are not good enough. Another recent conception argues
that it is no longer a question of West against East, or the United States
against the U.S.S.R., but of the North versus the South, the developed countries
of Europe and America against the undeveloped nations of Africa.

Our indigenous American paranoia, Mr. Podhoretz says, has changed the Communist
under the bed to a Central Intelligence Agency man.  Covert operations, the
unconscious mind, so to speak, of diplomacy, are now regarded as immoral. The
word confrontation, connoting old American virtues' frankness, is now a
pejorative, such as ''cold war'' is more reprehensible than a hot one.

Mr. Podhoretz's dispassionate review of American foreign policy is a lugubrious
affair. He reminds us that, paradoxically enough, it was President John F.
Kennedy, a liberal, who championed containment of the U.S.S.R. and President
Richard M. Nixon, a Republican, who moved the country decisively in the
direction of ''withdrawal, retrenchment and disengagement.'' He sums up with the
observation that a continued refusal to contain the Soviet Union will leave us
with only two alternatives: surrender or war.

Yet ''The Present Danger'' ends on a note of guarded hope. In 1979, Mr.
Podhoretz points out, 800 students attended a ''pro-American rally'' at San
Diego State University. And even our political sense of original sin has not
made palatable the detention of American hostages in Iran. We did boycott the
Olympics and we may yet reverse what Mr. Podhoretz calls the threatened
''Finlandization'' of America.

'Sorry Bumbling'

''The Mortal Danger,'' by Mr. Solzhenitsyn, carries as a subtitle this line:
''How misconceptions about Russia imperil America.'' According to him, our
foreign policy suffers from two major errors: we believe that we can coexist
peacefully with Communism; and we have allowed ourselves to be persuaded that it
is not Communism that is the enemy of the free world, but the ''tsarist''
tendencies of the Russian character itself.

In our ''sorry bumbling'' of the past 35 years, Mr. Solzhenitsyn says, we have
come to think that it is the spirit of Ivan the Terrible and Peter the Great
that we have to deal with, rather than a revolutionary government ''radically
hostile'' to us. We prefer Ivan and Peter because they were finite in their
ambitions and transparent in their greed. Rather loftily, Mr. Solzhenitsyn says
we should never have accepted Stalin as an ally in World War II.

''No reconciliation with Communist doctrine is possible,'' Mr.  Solzhenitsyn
asserts. Our best hope, in his view, is to support the Russian people against
the Soviet Government. According to him, Communist ideology ''inspires no one''
in the U.S.S.R.

Even if ''The Mortal Danger'' has the evangelical tone of an idee fixe, there is
no denying Mr. Solzhenitsyn's personal authority.  Though his manner is
hortatory and Mr. Podhoretz's is pragmatic, their books have one thing in
common: the word ''danger.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Alexander Solzhenitsyn

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 506 words


AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Navy Ships Rescue 137 Vietnamese Refugees

MANILA, Friday, Aug. 22 (UPI) - A United States Navy ship picked up 28
Vietnamese refugees early today, bringing to 137 the number of refugees rescued
by American military vessels in 24 hours.

A Navy spokesman said the rescue of 28 refugees on a 35-foot wooden boat was
made by the Seventh Fleet oiler Passumpsic in the South China Sea off the
southeast coast of Vietnam.

Yesterday two United States Navy ships rescued 109 Vietnamese refugees from two
dangerously overcrowded boats. The United States guided missile cruiser Truxtun
picked up 47 Vietnamese from a 25-foot fishing junk 210 miles southeast of Ho
Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, the spokesman said. Five hours later, the United
States destroyer Merrill pulled 62 refugees from a 50-foot boat 78 miles
northeast of Ho Chi Minh City.

Rights Group Reports Raid on Bolivian Village

LONDON, Aug. 21 (UPI) - Amnesty International said today that it had accounts
from witnesses describing how Bolivian troops rampaged through a mountain mining
town, killing, kidnapping and raping local residents opposed to the military
regime.

The human rights organization asserted that as many as 900 people might have
disappeared on Aug. 4 from the village of Caracoles, 18 days after military
leaders seized power in Bolivia. The organization said witnesses charged that
corpses were beheaded and loaded into three army trucks in the village, where
Government opposition was considered strong. The London-based organization said
soldiers were reported to have raped women and young girls.

9 Are Condemned to Death For Bombings in Angola

LISBON, Aug. 21 (UPI) - Angola condemned to death nine persons convicted today
of anti-Communist guerrilla activities, raising to 25 the number of death
sentences passed by the country's revolutionary tribunal in two weeks, the
official Angolan news agency reported.

The People's Revolutionary Tribunal sentenced the nine after they were found
guilty of city bombings that cost ''a high number'' of civilian casualties, an
agency dispatch said. Sentencing came after a weeklong trial in the city of
Huambo of 22 persons accused of being members of an insurgent movement that
opposes the Cuban-backed Government in Luanda.

Chinese Parliament Prepares to Convene

PEKING, Aug. 21 (Reuters) - The National People's Congress, China's parliament,
will be convened on Aug. 30, the New China News Agency reported today.

The news agency said the Standing Committee met today to prepare for the opening
of the Congress, which is expected to approve the retirement of a number of
leaders from state posts, including Prime Minister Hua Guofeng and Deputy Prime
Minister Deng Xiaoping. Most of those retiring are expected to retain their
positions in the Communist Party.

The committee session heard presentations on some of the legislation to be
presented to the Congress, including laws introducing individual income tax and
regulations for lawyers, the news agency said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 756 words


AROUND THE NATION;
Motion Is Denied to Drop Charges Against Garwood

CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Aug. 21 (UPI) - A military judge today denied a defense
motion to drop charges against Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps, who
is charged with desertion and collaboration with the enemy.

The decision by Col. R.E. Switzer ended eight months of pre-trial proceedings.
Jury selection is expected to begin Monday.  Colonel Switzer rejected the
argument that the charges be dropped because other prisoners of war from the
Vietnam era were not prosecuted for misconduct under an amnesty that Private
Garwood's attorneys said was declared by President Nixon. He also rejected
arguments that Private Garwood had been singled out for prosecution.

Private Garwood spent nearly 14 years with the Vietnamese before surfacing in
Hanoi in March 1979 with a request to come back to the United States.

Head of Consumer Group Asks Voluntary Ford Recall

WASHINGTON, Aug. 21 (UPI) - The head of a consumer group today urged the Ford
Motor Company to recall voluntarily vehicles that allegedly have defective
automatic transmissions, while a company official said Ford took ''unprecedented
steps'' to determine if there was a reasonable basis for the allegations.

Both men appeared before the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,

National news appears on pages A12, B5 and B6;

political news, B7-8.
which is trying to determine whether to make final a preliminary finding that
automatic transmissions in 26 million Ford vehicles can slip into reverse when
the gear selector is left in park.

Clarence Ditlow, executive director of the Center for Auto Safety, predicted
that product liability lawsuits could eventually cost Ford more a recall.

Herbert Misch, a Ford vice president, said the company took ''unprecedented
steps'' to investigate the allegations, but said the Government did not respond
to its findings.

Prosecution Rests Its Case In Rights Issue Bribery Trial

SPRINGFIELD, Ill., Aug. 21 (AP) -The Government rested its case today in the
bribery trial of a former volunteer for the National Organization for Women.

Associate Judge Jeanne Scott of Saganmon County Circuit Court refused a defense
request to order the immediate acquittal of Wanda Brandstetter, a 55-year-old
businesswoman accused of trying to bribe State Representative Nord Swanstrom to
vote for ratification of the proposed equal rights amendment to the Federal
Constitution.

While the trial was being delayed for the judge to confer with lawyers, one
juror was escorted from the courtroom by the bailiff.  Carol Wedding, the only
juror who said in jury selection that she favored the equal rights amendment,
appeared in court wearing green and white clothing, the colors often worn by
supporter of the amendment.

Navy Drops Case Against 4 Accused of Homosexuality

LONG BEACH, Calif., Aug.21 (UPI) -The Navy dropped charges today against four
sailors accused of homosexuality aboard the ship the Norton Sound.

Eight women had been charged with homosexuality, which is forbidden by the Navy,
and ordered to appear before administrative discharge hearing boards. Two of the
women were cleared of all the charges and discharges were recommended for two
others.

A spokesman for the Navy, Petty Officer Bill Bartkus, said the ship's captain
decided to drop the charges after consulting with prosecutors and reviewing the
testimony from four hearings.

Mr. Bartkus said Comdr. J.E. Seebirt had notified the four sailors that charges
had been dropped. The women are Norma Hohl, 20 years old, of Bell, Mo.; Sharris
Heusser, 25, of Pelican Rapids, Minn.; Louise Fitzmorris, 27, of Rumford, Me.,
and Carol Brock, 23, of San Jose, Calif.

Iranian Meeting in California Shaken by Two Explosions

BERKELEY, Calif., Aug. 21 (AP) -Two explosions occurred here last night at a
meeting of 500 Iranian students and their families.  The bombings occurred at
Berkeley High School at a meeting sponsored by the International Students
Association, a group said by the authorities to support Iran's Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini. One man suffered minor injuries.

The police evacuated the building after receiving two calls warning that the
bombs were about to go off. The calls came from persons identifying themselves
as members of the previously unknown Iran Liberation Army.

Boback Azad, secretary of the Conferedation of Iranian Students, said today that
the bombings were the work of ''counterrevolutionaries, left over from the
shah's regime.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 22, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Stephen F. Cohen;
HARD-LINE FALLACIES

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1235 words


Despite a long history of intellectual sterility, failures abroad, and ugly
consequences at home, the vaunted hard line toward the Soviet Union is ascendant
again. Cold warriors, bolstered by election-year excesses in Afghanistan,
dominate the Carter Administration and Republican opposition alike. President
Carter and Ronald Reagan race forward with new nuclear strategies and weapons
systems - all under the worn hard-line banners of countering the ''Soviet
menace,'' military superiority and ''credible deterrents.'' Support for the idea
that nuclear war is unthinkable, for parity, mutual constraint and SALT II is
lost in the clamor. Pro-detente politics, always unstable in the United States,
is in disarray.

It is time, before we rush into a cold war II and a newly escalated arms race
that portend new tragedies in the 1980's, to look more carefully at the
self-professed ''realism'' of this tenacious hard line. Many of its cherished
axioms, actually serious misconceptions about the nature of the Soviet Union,
are contradicted by a large body of scholarly knowledge. Five fallacies of the
hard line are especially important:

1. The Soviet Union is a revolutionary ideological-political system and
therefore an inherently aggressive force in the world.  In reality, the Soviet
Union has become one of the most conservative political systems in the world.
Many historical and contemporary factors have contributed to the deep-rooted
conservatism that permeates both the political regime and society. Even the
official ideology, Marxism-Leninism, plays a conservative role, having become an
exaltation of the Soviet status quo rather than a source of change. (If Soviet
''Communism'' professes anything substantive at home today, it is Russian
nationalism, law and order, cradle-to-grave welfarism, and mass consumerism.) A
conservative great power will, of course, zealously defend and seek to expand
its influence in the world. It can behave aggressively and obscenely, as the
United States did in Vietnam and Chile, and as the Soviet Union did in
Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan. But such actions spring from conservative,
fearful, hyperbolic notions of national security and international status, that
are, unlike revolutionary ideas, reasonable subjects of diplomacy.

2. The Soviet Union is an immutable ''totalitarian'' system that has not changed
significantly since the years of Stalin and cold war I.

In reality, Soviet political life has changed in fundamental and far-reaching
ways since Stalin died in 1953. Though the system remains highly authoritarian
and repressive, it no longer is a terroristic despotism. The end of mass terror
and other important reforms have made the Government more attentive to the needs
of the population and less oppressive. The lives of ordinary citizens, despite a
dearth of political liberties and consumer goods, are freer, more prosperous,
and more secure. The fact that the Soviet Union has a worse political reputation
in the United States today than it had when Stalin's terror was victimizing
millions of people tells us more about American perceptions than about the
Soviet Union itself.

3. Policy making in the Soviet Union is a monolithic process monopolized by a
handful of single-minded, united leaders.  A broadening and diversification of
Soviet decision-making has been one of the most important changes since 1953.
Domestic and foreign policies are now shaped by political competition among
rival interest groups, programs, ideological perspectives, and ambitions inside
Soviet officialdom. Meaningful conflicts exist, for example, between Soviet
conservatives and reformers, between Soviet hardliners and soft-liners. Various
factors, including our own foreign and strategic policies, can influence the
outcome of these policy struggles.

4. Only hard-line American policies can bring about improvements in Soviet
behavior at home and abroad.  This fallacy is twofold. First, liberalizing
change in Soviet policy cannot be imposed from outside the system, either by
foreign governments or Soviet dissidents. It can be carried out only by official
reformers inside the political Establishment, whose position is invariably
weakened by any deterioration in international, and particularly
Soviet-American, relations. Soviet reformers stand a chance at home only in
conditions of detente abroad. Second, hardline American ultimatums inflame the
conservative sensibilities of Soviet leaders and thus become counterproductive.
Such was the case, for example, with the Jackson-Vanik and Stevenson Amendments
and President Carter's campaign on behalf of Soviet dissidents. Such will
certainly be the case with any new American plan to acquire strategic
superiority. In short, the real present danger is not a ''soft'' line but an
unholy axis, even if inadvertent, between American and Soviet hard-liners, and a
renewed cold war and arms race that will undermine progressive forces on both
sides.

5. Detente is undesirable and impossible because the Soviet Union has gained a
superior position in the world.  Since the 1950's, the Soviet Union has grown
from a regional into a global power and achieved rough military parity with the
United States. (This development makes detente necessary and possible.)
Otherwise, the Kremlin, even disregarding its array of serious domestic
problems, can hardly share our hard-liners' view of its grand international
position. To the south and east, Moscow sees its great border enemy, China,
embarking on a strategic alliance with the United States. In Eastern Europe, it
sees a recalcitrant, potentially explosive, and increasingly costly empire - the
scene of major crises every decade. In the West, it sees the final
de-Russification of international Communism. The Soviet Union is excluded from
negotiations in the Middle East, where it invested so heavily; it is made uneasy
by the Islamic revolution just acorss its own frontiers; and it has fewer
admirers in the third world than a decade ago. While our hard-liners worry about
some remote ''arc of crisis,'' Moscow might reasonably imagine an impending
encirclement of crises.

The fallacies of our hard-liners are not, of course, solely responsible for the
perennial crisis in American-Soviet relations.  Equally serious misconceptions,
and dangerous strategies, are promoted by their Soviet counterparts. Moreover,
pro-detente American politicians have often damaged that cause by extravagant
promises and political gimmickry. But until a real understanding of the Soviet
Union replaces these fallacies in our policy discussions, the threat of cold war
II, and nuclear war I, will persist.
Stephen F. Cohen, professor of politics at Princeton, where he has also been
director of the Russian studies program, is author of ''Bukharin and the
Bolshevik Revolution: A Political Biography, 1888-1938'' and co-editor of ''The
Soviet Union Since Stalin.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 23, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

A VETERAN OF GUADALCANAL WILL FINALLY GET A MEDAL

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 497 words

DATELINE: WEST ISLIP, L.I., Aug. 22


The moment that Anthony Casamento had been dreaming about since 1942 came
yesterday - official word that President Carter had decided that the 59-year-old
former Marine corporal should be awarded the Medal of Honor for heroism at the
Battle of Guadalcanal during World War II.

''After 38 years,'' Mr. Casamento said today, ''the battle has at last come to
an end.'' But Mr. Casamento, sitting in the dining room of his West Islip home,
surrounded by framed proclamations bestowed over the years by three State
Assemblies and a number of local governments, said he did not feel like a hero,
despite the news from Washington.

He was wounded 14 times in the American assault on Guadalcanal in 1942. His
commanding officer cited him for extraordinary bravery - pointing out that he
had knocked out several Japanese machine gun nests despite his wounds - and
recommended him for the Medal of Honor. Mr. Casamento's injuries left him unable
to work after the war. He gets around with the aid of canes or a wheelchair.

Japanese Colonel Comments

Because all witnesses to Mr. Casamento's actions were thought to have died in
combat, he received no decoration. Then two Marine Corps colleagues said they
had seen him leading his squad of 29 men along a ridge near the Matanikau River
when enemy fire forced him to take over a machine gun and try to hold his
position.

Even the Japanese colonel who commanded the platoon that all but wiped out Mr.
Casamento's squad came to his support several years ago. In a six-page
statement, the colonel, Masao Tamura, praised the American corporal's
single-handed stand against the Japanese, who were under strict orders to
recapture Henderson Field, the airstrip that gave the United States control of
the air and sea around Guadalcanal.

The island is the largest of the Solomon group, in the South Pacific.
Guadalcanal was the scene of the first large-scale invasion of Japanese-held
islands during the war. The invasion began in August 1942 and the island was not
conquered until February 1943.

Sat Outside White House

Politicians lobbied on behalf of the silver-haired former marine, and he sought
to aid his own cause last year by sitting for more than six weeks outside the
White House in his wheelchair. He held an American flag and a sign that said,
''Alone on Guadalcanal, alone here.''

At last, the Board of Correction for Navy Records reversed the 1966 ruling. He
will receive the medal at a White House ceremony next month.

The news from Washington came on the 28th anniversary of the wedding of Mr.
Casamento and his wife Olivia, who have four daughters. Mr. Casamento said he
was not bitter that it had taken so long to gain the decoration. ''Can you feel
that way when so many people believe in what you're doing?'' he asked. ''The
House Armed Services Committee told me they had gotten more mail on Casamento
than on the Vietnam War. I don't want to think about the amount of mail they
received on the Vietnam War.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Anthony Casamento and Sheila Casamento,his wife

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 830 words


Quebec separatists are divided on tactics for re-election 3
Rightists in Brazil open terrorist campaign 3
Iraq-Syria feud deepens as diplo- mats are expelled 4
Around the World 5
Greece, nearing production in Ae- gean oilfields, seeks new sites 6
Booming Greece is hit hard by inflation 7
U.N. effort to smooth flow of Viet- nam's refugees seems stymied 8
South Africa's newly violent rebels have soft-spoken leader 11
How British recession changes a family's way of life 14
A Turkish ferryboat pursues com- mercial peace with Rhodes 17
U.S. seeks limited, realistic goals at U.N. development talks 21
Polish-Americans proud and anx- ious over strikes 22
Warsaw Pact nations plan maneu- vers in Baltic Sea 22

Government/Politics
An old warrior returns to New Hampshire's political battles 26
Dixy Lee Ray key issue in Wshing- ton primary 27
Reagan aides concede that cam- paign is off to a bumpy start 28
Anderson denounces Reagan and Carter foreign policies 28
Anderson workers take to New York streets in petition drive 32
Detroit suit over census watched by other cities 39
Judge takes Benedetto off Demo- cratic primary ballot in Bronx 41
Votes in Congress 45

Energy
Chrysler plans to outdo 1985 fuel economy standards 23
New York Power Authority offers new antipollution program 47
In upstate New York, a hydroelec- tric station come to life again 50
Troubles still stalling nuclear power plant on Coast 64

General
Around the Nation 26
Founder of Texas Monthly aims to save New West 40
Woman loses legs in fall between L.I.R.R. cars in Queens 48
Aura of Olympic Games draws tourists to Lake Placid 51

Industry/Labor
Architects, engineers and others press for separate city pact 42
Layoff of 2,200 teachers will stand, Koch says 43
New York City's first urban park rangers begin their rounds 54

Education/Welfare
Benefits seen in compromise bill on student loans 44
Fresh Air Fund children return from vacations in Virginia 56

Religion
Politics was plea at convocation of evangelical Christians 33
Churches in Florida begin adver- tising for priests 64
Mosque in Washington D.C. re- flects Islam turmoil 65

Arts/Entertainment
Bucky Pizzarelli and son team for guitar concert 67
Danes turn out for New York City Ballet 68
French film ''Make Room for Tomorrow'' opens 68
''The Adventures of Picasso,'' a film comedy, opens 69
George Daugherty offers a dance tribute to Anna Pavlova 69
Guthrie Theater plans to open a branch in New York 69

Style
Peter Townsend, at 65, settles in as a successful author 70

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FEW LEAVE VIETNAM UNDER U.N. REFUGEE PROGRAM

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 585 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 23


A program designed to allow Vietnamese to emigrate to join their families,
mainly in the United States, has led to only a trickle of departures and appears
to be stymied.

Under the plan, which was laboriously negotiated by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees with the Vietnamese Government early last year, only
647 Vietnamese have legally left for the United States since October although
requests for the emigration of about 60,000 have been made by relatives in the
United States. Most of those who left Vietnam flew on a few charter flights
organized by the United Nations refugee agency and some left on the weekly Air
France flights from Ho Chi Minh City, formerly called Saigon.

No United Nations flight has left Vietnam in almost a year. The protracted
negotiations between Washington and Hanoi to allow American consular officials
to examine applicants in Ho Chi Minh City are stalled, and the only American
assigned to the United Nations High Commissioner to screen applicants left Hanoi
this month after an eight-month stay without being allowed to visit Ho Chi Minh
City.

Blame Is Put on Hanoi

Although American officials here concede that cumbersome United States
immigration procedures have not facilitated the task and that bureaucratic
mixups have occurred, they and United Nations aides, speaking privately, blame
Hanoi, saying it has used the issue to pursue its larger political goals.

The program was negotiated by the United Nations shortly before the outflow last
summer of the so-called boat people, mainly ethnic Chinese forced to leave by
the Vietnamese authorities. When international pressure, culminating in the
Geneva conference of July 1979, caused Vietnam to promise to halt the flow, it
tried to get rid of the Chinese by grafting them onto the orderly departure
program.

Hanoi subsequently proposed 30,000 names for family reunification under the
United Nations program, almost all ethnic Chinese from Cholon, the former South
Vietnamese capital's Chinese quarter.  Checked by computer against the names
submitted by relatives in the United States, only 74 of the 30,000 appeared to
have any ties to Vietnamese in the United States. A recheck turned up 70 more
who might have a claim for admission.

Drive for Diplomatic Ties

The lists of names Hanoi submitted appeared to be the result of a block-by-block
registration of inhabitants of Cholon, an American official with long experience
in Vietnam said. An informant recently returned from Ho Chi Minh City reported
that it was common knowledge that many of the people on the lists were ethnic
Chinese who had paid the Vietnamese authorities to be expelled but were
prevented from leaving after the Geneva conference.

Vietnam is also accused of using the family-reunification program to press the
United States for diplomatic relations. After apparently agreeing to accept
temporary visits by American consuls assigned to the embassy in Bangkok to
screen applicants in Ho Chi Minh City, Hanoi declared that such consuls could
visit only when there was an American embassy in Vietnam.

The compromise of having American officials work in Ho Chi Minh City as members
of the United Nations refugee body led to the assignment of the American who was
prevented from performing his task. No replacement has been named.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE GANGS HARASS REFUGEES IN CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Aug. 23


When the six young Vietnamese men left the restaurant without paying for their
meals, the owner, who was also from Vietnam, decided to keep quiet.

But the six returned with clubs and knives, taking $400 from the cash register
and hitting a worker over the head with a hammer.  The owner told the police
that he feared retaliation, but that he had put up with enough trouble. With his
help, four adults and two juveniles were arrested, said Sgt. Bruce Beauchamp of
Garden Grove, the suburb where the incident occurred.

''We have not had that many reports of gang activity,'' Sergeant Beauchamp said.
''Whether it's because the people in the community are hesitant to talk with us,
we're not positive.''

Gangs Operate in Two Counties

Garden Grove is in Orange County, which has an Indochina population officially
estimated at 18,000 and unofficially put at 35,000. Its neighbor to the north,
Los Angeles County, has an estimated 110,000 Indochina residents.

In both counties, the police and members of the Vietnamese community report gang
activity but differ on how serious the problem is. Other Indochina minorities
apparently are not involved.

Although no one claims to know how many gangs there are, there is agreement on
the characteristics of the groups: They are composed of single men, 19 to 25
years old, many with training as soldiers in Vietnam.

The members of the gangs wear no uniforms and are loosely organized around
older, more sophisticated leaders. Their activities tend to be the extortion of
''protection'' money from businesses rather than gang wars. And rather than
claiming a turf, or specific area as its own, a gang may draw members from both
counties.

Occasional Fights With Chinese

The gangs operate where Indochinese Americans live, chiefly in central Orange
County from Westminster to Anaheim. In Los Angeles, the gangs frequent
Chinatown, where Vietnamese of ethnic Chinese descent sometimes fight with
Chinese gangs.

The gangs' names are descriptive. The Lun gang is made up of members who are
short in stature, and its name comes from a word that means ''short'' in
Vietnamese. The Frogmen has members who reputedly are former underwater
demolition experts for the Vietnamese Army.

Joe Marcel of the Indochina Social Service Project in Los Angeles said gang
members are motivated by loneliness and depression.  Mr. Marcel, a Vietnamese
who adopted a French name while living in Paris, said gang members rarely become
as violent as they did in the restaurant incident. But Detective Joe Bryan of
Anaheim said he has heard of retaliatory beatings.

Possibility of Violence Raised

''If nothing changes, one day they could become dangerous because they do have
experience with violence,'' said Mr. Marcel. ''They are very well-trained as
soldiers.''

Mr. Bryan said the police have trouble combating the gangs because of problems
gaining the confidence of the Vietnamese community. He added: ''It's a subtle
culture. We probably will never get a handle on it, not in this generation.''

Randy Quan of the Los Angeles Police Department's Asian Task Force said the
police use Chinese officers to prosecute Chinese and Vietnamese-Chinese gangs.
He said the threats made by gang members are very subtle, saying that ''if it's
literally translated in a court of law, it doesn't mean the same thing.''

Officials said there is a danger that the gangs may join organized crime. But
many believe the gangs will disappear as members find a constructive place in
society.

Mr. Marcel said: ''The more training programs we have, the less problems we
have. I don't see them as a bad part of society, but they are too active and
don't have enough to do. ''If we approach them right, they could make a good
contribution to this country. They are young, they have energy. They need to
learn to use that energy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN CAMPAIGN RUNS INTO UNEXPECTED OBSTACLES

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1250 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Aug. 23


For Ronald Reagan, it was a difficult end to an unexpectedly chaotic and in some
respects disappointing week.  First there was the plunge in the polls to a
virtual dead heat with President Carter, followed by the weeklong string of
statements in which Mr. Reagan's running mate appeared to be contradicting him
on the key question of relations with China. Then, last night in Dallas, poor
scheduling stranded Mr. Reagan on stage while a television evangelist famed for
his attacks on homosexuals delivered a fuming denunciation of politicians.

With 15,000 people looking on, the Republican Presidential nominee had no choice
but to applaud the minister's demand that the Government be run by people who
shared his religious values, whatever the Constitution might say about
separation of church and state. It was the sort of thing that could easily turn
up in Democratic commercials designed to portray Mr. Reagan as an extremist.

Earlier, there was the news conference in which Mr. Reagan, attempting to put
down the notion that his running mate, George Bush, had become a loose cannon on
foreign policy questions, mired himself more deeply in the China-Taiwan
controversy. Was he still for ''official relations'' with Taiwan, yes or no, a
reporter asked? ''I guess it's a yes,'' Mr. Reagan replied.

'Finding Something Sensational'

Finally, there was the scene on the campaign plane late last night. All week, in
a series of hard-line military speeches, Mr. Reagan tried to portray himself as
an advocate of peace through strength. In shirtsleeves, ignoring a junior aide
who kept urging him to quit talking, Mr. Reagan told reporters why, in his view,
the message was being distorted. ''Well,'' he said, ''that's because you fellows
every once in a while are more interested in finding something sensational than
in printing the facts.''

Such are the signs of frustration and disorganization in a campaign that ran
into unexpected obstacles to the new general-election strategy it unveiled last
Monday. That strategy, as defined by a variety of advisers, called for Mr.
Reagan to move away from his image as a highly ideological candidate and toward
a new stance as a pragmatic, unifying figure with broad-based appeal.

But in Washington, Democrats were putting out the word that Mr.  Reagan was
playing into their hands by going on the road with a hardline military message
and by allying himself with the 15,000 evangelical Christians who met in Dallas
to plan the merging of the political right and the religious right into a
theocratic force with which they hope to dominate American politics.

The central question was whether Mr. Reagan should have emphasized military
preparedness only a week after he was criticized at the Democratic National
Convention as a militarist whose election would threaten world peace.

An Undercurrent of Doubt

On the record, Mr. Reagan's senior staff aides gamely defended their strategy.
But privately, there was a faint undercurrent of doubt. ''You know how to ask
the tough questions,'' a key adviser sighed when asked if the Reagan campaign
had made a strategic blunder. ''In some respects, it's been a bumpy week,''
another adviser acknowledged.

''We figured we'd just hit it head on,'' a political tactician said of what some
Reagan people call ''the warmonger issue.'' ''It wasn't a question of we didn't
know what we were doing.'' He paused, then added, ''Maybe we were wrong.''

Some in the Reagan camp said they believed it was a mistake for him to move away
from the stirring, emotional stump speech that served him well in the primaries.
But the prevailing argument was that Mr.  Reagan, under attack by Mr. Carter as
the candidate of simple answers and quick fixes, had no choice this week but to
open his general election campaign with new speeches showing a detailed grasp of
major issues.

''You always run these risks,'' said Edwin Meese 3d, chief of staff of the
Reagan campaign. ''The risk is being so general you don't say anything, against
coming down so hard that you paint yourself into a particular position.''

Fewer News Conferences

Mr. Reagan apparently painted himself into a tight corner on the Taiwan issue.
This happened despite a new policy, acknowledged in midweek by Lyn Nofziger, his
press secretary, of reducing the number of news conferences.

In the first of only two news conferences he held in the last seven days, Mr.
Reagan said last Saturday that he would consider making the American liaison
office on Taiwan, now run by a private foundation, an office of the United
States Government as a means of having an ''official relationship'' with Taiwan.

But in midweek Mr. Bush, in China, was reportedly saying that this was not the
Reagan-Bush plan at all. Last night, in his second news conference of the week,
Mr. Reagan seemed to be backing off from his idea for the liaison office and
unsure that its status could be changed under the Taiwan Relations Act.

''I'm not talking a two-China policy,'' he said. ''I recognize that both
governments claim that they are the government of China.  That's a problem, as
was seen by Presidents before, for them to settle between themselves, and this,
I think, is, I think, perfectly clear. I think what has happened is, and I will
answer questions more specifically after George comes back, and so I don't think
there's much point in getting into it because there are many things I can't
answer.''

Growing Tension With Press

As for the question of whether Mr. Bush had contradicted him in conversations
with Chinese leaders in Peking, Mr. Reagan indicated that he did not trust the
dispatches to that effect from American reporters in China. ''I'm going to get
my news direct from George,'' he said. He and Mr. Bush are to address the China
matter in a news conference Monday.

There is, in fact, growing tension between the press and the Reagan campaign.
Mr. Reagan and his staff repeatedly complained this week that the peace aspect
of his peace-through-strength speeches was underplayed. They were particularly
chagrined at the stir over Mr.  Reagan's statement that the Vietnam War was ''a
noble cause'' - a sentiment that Mr. Reagan said he personally inserted in a
speech in Chicago at a convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars.

When Mr. Reagan's big lead in the polls spiraled down to one point with
whirlpool-like velocity, the candidate and his staff countered with some spot
polling, contending that Mr. Reagan was still leading by 5 to 10 points or more
in a Southern state - apparently Louisiana - and in a Plains state and an
Eastern state.

Still, there is general concern in the Reagan inner circle about the slipshod
advance work on many campaign appearances. Mr. Reagan is constantly confronted
with unpredictable, time-consuming and politically dangerous mix-ups, such as
his inclusion in the revivalistic preaching in Dallas last night.

So far, Mr. Reagan has avoided every trap laid for him by his advance teams.
That is, a Reagan insider agreed, a tribute to his skills as a campaigner. But
the Reagan man added that the question was, ''Can he do that forever?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of Ronald Reagan

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EVANGELICALS HEAR PLEA; POLITICS NOW

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 33, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Aug. 23


Until recently, the Rev. Lou Brown says, he saw America sliding toward moral
disaster but ''sat on the sidelines saying nothing could be done.''

As he and thousands of other evangelical Christians milled about Reunion Arena
this week at a meeting called the National Affairs Briefing, however, it was
evident that a new day had dawned. The preachers and the lay ministers were
heeding the call to get out of the pulpits and into politics.

For Mr. Brown, pastor of the First Baptist Church in nearby Cottell, Tex., the
convocation, organized by the Roundtable, a Washington-based group of leading
evangelicals, was his first exposure to the attempt to knit ''born again'' faith
with political causes. In his 15 years of ministry, the soft-spoken pastor says,
he had never before attended a religious revival directed toward such aims as
voter registration and the use of ''moral scorecards'' to rate politicians'
positions on such issues as abortion, homosexuality and the proposed equal
rights amendment.

But even as he listened to a steady procession of speakers excoriating America
for immorality, Mr. Brown was using facts from the two-day briefing to plan a
step-by-step attempt to enlist his 350-member church in a broader campaign to
make a difference in the fall elections, or what was portrayed as one last
crusade to save the nation from destruction.

The Art of Oratory Lives

The crowd, which ranged from 7,000 at day sessions to 15,000 for a speech by
Ronald Reagan at the closing program last night, heard an array of dazzling
preaching talents rouse their anger, stir their hopes and issue a call to
mobilize. Many of the biggest names in television evangelism took turns at the
podium, rarely using a note or script but showing that the art of oratory is
still alive.

''Either sound the charge or blow taps,'' thundered the Rev. James Robison, one
of the most influential of younger preachers.  ''Most Americans are egomaniacs
strutting their way to hell,'' asserted another leader, the Rev. Adrian Rogers.
''If America does not go to her knees, she'll go to her grave,'' declared the
Rev. Del Fehsenfeld, a Chicago youth evangelist.  Most preachers are accustomed
to having the platform to themselves, so the appearance of several pulpit
celebrities on the same bill was regarded as an achievement, and a cause for
some goodnatured ribbing.

''I don't know what I'm doing here,'' quipped the Rev. Paul Crouch, who
specializes in preaching the gospel to children on television. ''I feel like a
Volkswagen parade.''

Likewise, after Mr. Robison had made an impassioned half-hour plea for a
''return to God'' that brought the house to its feet, the Rev.  Jerry Falwell,
turning toward Mr. Robison, said wryly, ''Very nice sermonette; I appreciated
that little talk.''

Doom and Hopelessness

For all their enthusiasm and spirit, often depicted in military imagery, the
speakers and the participants sometimes seem more convinced by the forecasts of
doom and portrayals of hopeless political corruption than by the prescriptions
for spiritual and moral remedy.

And not everyone accepted the ''military superiority'' solutions offered by
many. ''Christ seems to be saying 'renounce the use of military weapons,' ''
said Dr. Ed Ward, a dentist who sat at the rear of the hall. ''They are
confusing being a Christian soldier with being a United States soldier.''

Evangelicalism bears the elements of Calvinism and Southern sectional defeatism,
and the resulting gloom and certainty about human depravity weigh heavily in
every declaration of eventual triumph. Such attitudes have helped instill
political passivity in the past.

The ambivalence was evident in attitudes toward the Federal Government. Many
preachers condemned the nation's leaders and warned the attentive crowds against
putting their faith in any politicians or human institutions. ''No politicians
or group of politicians have the ability to solve the problems of the world,''
asserted the Rev.  Pat Robertson, head of the Christian Broadcasting Network.

But others declared that righteousness could be restored by ''returning to God's
principles'' and sending to Washington people who are God-fearing and accept the
evangelicals' conservative moral standards.

'This Is Our Day'

''The future of the nation is in your hands and mine,'' Mr.  Falwell, leader of
Moral Majority, the largest evangelical political action group, exhorted them.
''This is our day. The liberals have blown it.''

The campaign to inspire political concern in evangelical churches represents a
striking turnabout. Only a decade ago, fundamentalists were denouncing liberal
Christians for applying their beliefs to such issues as racial justice and the
Vietnam war. Conservatives were saying that Christians should avoid politics.

Many evangelicals do regret their general lack of responsiveness to the fight
for racial justice. When Mr. Robison criticized the failure to join that
struggle, for example, he was roundly applauded.

At the end of the preaching, praying and singing, after the tumultuous welcome
for Mr. Reagan, the question of the extent and effect of the evangelical drive
remained to be answered.

Mr. Brown, equipped with materials and instructions, was heading home with
optimism. He would begin canvassing the church and would observe Sept. 28 as
''Christians Are Citizens Too Day'' in accord with the Roundtable plan.

''I'm sure to some people we look like fanatics,'' he said. ''But anyone
involved in it realizes it is a real commitment and a positive force. I used to
worry about what they think,'' he added with a smile, ''but I don't anymore.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TEXAS MONTHLY SHARPENING ITS SPURS FOR CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: By JOHN M. CREWDSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 40, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1247 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 23


Imagine a magazine devoted to reporting on local issues, politicians, scandals
and even restaurants that holds the same magnetic appeal in New York City,
Nashville and Norfolk. Not likely, you say, and yet each month residents of such
equally distant and disparate cities as El Paso, Beaumont, Amarillo and
Brownsville eagerly devour their copies of Texas Monthly, ''the magazine as big
as Texas.''

In contrast, residents of San Francisco and Los Angeles, cities that are even
further apart psychologically, if not geographically, than Dallas and Houston,
have not shown the same passion for the semiweekly New West magazine. In the
five troubled years that it has been in business, its regional editions have
left it lacking any clear editorial identity.

Now Mike Levy, who in seven years has built Texas Monthly into a success, will
try to do it again with New West, undeterred by those who say that California, a
state embracing many states of mind, will never give its allegiance to a single
publication.

They Said It Couldn't Be Done

''They told us the same thing when we started Texas Monthly,'' Mr.  Levy said
the other day. ''The state's too big, it's too diverse, people in Houston don't
care about people in Dallas, people in Dallas don't care about Houston. Well,
first of all, they do, and if they didn't, we sure made them care about it real
quick. It's all in how you do it.''

The 34-year-old Mr. Levy has done it here by blending irreverence, bold
graphics, gossip and essentially frivolous articles with solid reporting and
elegant writing on such vital regional topics as energy and immigration. But the
key to the magazine's success has been its ability to persuade its readers to
set aside their regional differences and to see themselves as Texans first and
Houstonians or Dallasites second.

While Mr. Levy refuses to say how much this approach is bringing in (''It's
nobody's business.''), the magazine is clearly rich. Its issues run to 250 pages
or more and are filled with full-page advertisements, many of them in color, for
such expensive doodads as jewelry and hot tubs. Its circulation has risen from
20,000 in February 1973 to 275,000 today.

New West, on the other hand, with 250,000 circulation, is losing heavily, by
some accounts as much as $2 million over the last year.  Ted Siff, the Monthly's
associate publisher, who handled the New West purchase, attributed its losses
mainly to the fact that while the magazine is based in Los Angeles, its
circulation and business offices were managed from New York by Clay Felker, its
founder, and later by Rupert Murdoch, to whom Mr. Felker sold it. Mr. Siff is
preparing to move to California to assume operating control over the magazine,
which will be made into a monthly.

'A Fabulous Market'

''The attitude we had in buying New West,'' Mr. Siff said, ''is that it's a good
editorial product, it's a fabulous market and we know how to run a regional
magazine. The concept of a regional magazine is as valid in California and the
West as it is in Texas.''

For a regional magazine, the Monthly enjoys disproportionate influence outside
its region. One of every 10 copies is sold elsewhere, principally on the East
and West Coasts, where it serves as a political, cultural and stylistic Baedeker
to a state that has emerged as one of the most important in the nation.

It also satisfies the current appetite for things Texan. One prominent Manhattan
writer sent the magazine a letter a while back, declaring that while it was
''one thing to enjoy reading about politicians in a state you don't live in, you
know you're really hooked when you wind up reading restaurant reviews for cities
you wouldn't enter on a bet.''

The Monthly's founding fathers were an improbable group, the most improbable
among them being Mr. Levy, a Dallas native and finance major at the University
of Pennsylvania who returned home ''with the idea of starting a magazine like
Philadelphia magazine,'' for which he briefly sold advertising.

In Search of Good Journalism

''The state was very sophisticated,'' he recalled the other day, ''both the
natives and the transplants, but there wasn't any good journalism down here.''
For an editor he acquired William Broyles Jr., a decorated Vietnam veteran who
had gone to Oxford and was working as an assistant superintendent of schools in
Houston. Mr.  Broyles's wife, Sybil, became the fledgling magazine's art
director.

They and most of the rest of the staff had no formal training in journalism and
approached it with a reformist bent.  ''I take great pride in the fact that
we've managed to make just about everybody in the state mad at one time or
another,'' Mr. Levy said. Asked whether there was anyone of importance in Texas
whom his magazine had not yet offended, he replied, ''Gosh, I hope not.''

Of former Gov. Dolph Briscoe, the Monthly wrote, ''No governor has been absent
more, no governor has shown less inclination to participate in government, no
governor has so mysified his colleagues and his citizens.'' A strong
condemnation of alleged civil rights abuses by the Houston police department was
characterized by Harry Caldwell, then the police chief, as ''the work of an
obvious cop-hater.''

Of 'Sexy' and 'Sexist'

Feminist groups have taken the magazine to task for what they see as an
inordinate number of covers featuring suggestively posed or scantily clad women,
but Mr. Levy is unrepentant. ''There's a difference between sexy and sexist,''
he said, noting that he just adds the complainers ''to the list of folks we've
upset.''

Among the magazine's critics these days are more than a few former fans who
accuse it of devoting too much space to articles about the best, worst, biggest,
smallest, most and least in Texas, and not enough to the kind of extensive
reporting that has won it four national magazine awards. But James Fallows, a
former staff member who is now the Washington editor of the comparatively solemn
Atlantic Monthly, defends the lighter features. ''One part of its personality
has always been the fashion features and the 10 best living rooms in Texas,'' he
said. ''I don't object to that.''

''The fluff stuff makes the magazine work,'' Mr. Levy said. ''It gets people
into the heavy stuff. Without it, we would not have a magazine.''

The current issue is a case in point. It contains a usual month's ration of
gossip and features on professional football and how to make ends meet on
$38,000 a year. But it also includes an account by John Bloom, an associate
editor, of his encounter with a gang of European art thieves, described in an
accompanying editorial as ''not only the longest article we've ever published
but also the most ambitious, costly and dangerous.''

Such reporting is made possible by an editorial budget of around $1.5 million a
year, a sum that Mr. Levy calls ''a lot of money for a little magazine.'' He
adds, ''We spend that money not because I'm a great guy or committed to great
journalistic precepts; we spend it because we got to. That's the difference
between us and all these other magazines: If we don't do it, nobody else will.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PETER TOWNSEND,AT 65,SETTLES IN AS A SUCCESSFUL AUTHOR

BYLINE: By SUSAN HELLER ANDERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 70, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words

DATELINE: SAINT


LEGER - EN - YVELINES, France - Crisp and dashing at age 65, Peter Townsend
seems to have made the thorny transition from war hero and sweetheart of
Princess Margaret to writer of serious books.

Since 1958, when he found himself stranded in Brussels with no money, no career
and much notoriety, Mr. Townsend has lived off the capital of his adventurous
life. He has zigzagged from the wine trade to movies to public relations to
being host of a radio talk show. He has written several books based on personal
experience - on his travels; on the Battle of Britain, in which he fought; on
the last of the old rulers of the countries of the British Empire, including
Burma, where he was born; on his life and, of course, on his romance with
Princess Margaret.

Now, in his latest book, ''The Smallest Pawns in the Game,'' to be published in
the United States by Little, Brown on Thursday, Mr.  Townsend has turned for the
first time to a subject outside his sphere of experience: children as the
innocent victims of war.

''One or two people have told me they couldn't read it,'' he told a visitor.
''In a way that's who the book is for.'' It is a documentation of the effects of
war on children, beginning in Bethlehem with Herod and his slaughter of Jewish
infants and ending in a hospital near Beirut, where the 13-year-old Arab victim
of an Israeli commando raid lay with a freshly amputated leg.

Mr. Townsend goes through 2,000 years of history in graphic detail, with
frequent eyewitness accounts of atrocities against children.  The book's
relentless horror is mitigated only by a quiet, almost dispassionate tone.

In the bright sunlit garden of his restored farmhouse 30 miles southwest of
Paris, Mr. Townsend is trim, tanned and handsome, looking 20 years younger than
his age. Ducks and geese waddle by on the way to the pond that gives the house
its name, La Mare aux Oiseaux (The Pond of the Birds). His subject seems distant
from his private world.

The idea for the book came to him, he said, from his French publisher, Robert
Laffont. ''I was fiddling around with other ideas,'' he said. ''My other books
had been historical, but I had had enough of sitting in an office surrounded by
documents. This got me going.''

Seven publishers in as many countries put up money for the project, which took
nearly two years. Typically, Mr. Townsend hopped immediately onto a plane and
traveled for three and a half months.  ''I'm not an intellectual - I'm a man of
action,'' he said. ''I thought this book was such a marvelous idea. After all, I
have children myself and I'd fought in a war.''

With the help of such agencies as the International Union for Child Welfare,
Unicef and the Red Cross, he sought out witnesses and survivors of the
Holocaust, Hiroshima and postwar horrors in China, Palestine, India, Korea,
Zaire, Rhodesia, Pakistan, Cyprus, Ethiopia, South America, Uganda, Vietnam,
Laos, Cambodia, Burma, Israel, Lebanon and Syria.

''It was a terribly tough assignment,'' he said. ''At times I was so moved I
couldn't continue. But then I got more professional, more blase.'' He marveled
at the optimism of even the most wretched children. ''Even the poorest ones who
had been through so much horror were still wonderfully alive and funny,'' he
said. ''You wanted to hug them.''

He took his youngest son, Pierre, 14, on the journey to Central Africa, where
they visited a boy who had lost his legs in a land-mine explosion. ''We learned
that a mine explodes when you get down off it,'' Mr. Townsend recalled. ''I
asked my son, who was the same age, what he would have done. He replied that he
would have stood there longer to contemplate his legs, which he knew he'd never
have again.''

The interviews in the book are filtered through Mr. Townsend's wartime
experiences. ''I survived one or two extremely horrible things and once the word
got round I felt rather guilty,'' he said.  ''When people talked about their
guilt of surviving, I know this exists in every group disaster.''

The young survivors he met had diverse reactions to their pasts.  ''The survivor
of an Israeli raid, a beautiful young girl, wanted to become a terrorist,'' he
said. ''Everywhere I was impressed by the children's dignity, their longing for
revenge, sometimes their forgiveness. There is no simple solution to wars, but
killing is not the answer.'' Mr. Townsend says he has no solution either. ''If
men can get to the moon they can solve their own problems,'' he said.

Throughout the book he harks back to his English upbringing - the simple virtues
of honor, patriotism, duty and kindness. They were learned in England during the
waning days of the British Empire, in Spartan private schools and, finally, in
the Royal Air Force, in which he attained the rank of group captain.

''I went into the air force in 1933 because I was crazy about flying,'' Mr.
Townsend said. ''The Germans of my age had the same feelings. As the war neared,
it was different. I was disgusted that my passion was leading me to kill.'' He
distinguished himself by shooting down 11 enemy aircraft. ''I became a
redoubtable killer,'' he acknowledged. ''But being a fighter pilot is not like
dropping bombs on innocent people. You're shooting a bomber that's over your
country. Self-defense, survival.''

After the war he became equerry to King George VI and a friend of members of the
royal family. A wartime marriage and two children did not prevent him from
cutting a dashing figure at court and, after he was divorced, when his romance
with Princess Margaret reached the headlines in 1953, he was brusquely
transferred to the Belgian Embassy as air attache.

Off Around the World

On his return two years later, in the intense glare of publicity, he and
Princess Margaret were compelled to drop their marriage plans because he was
divorced. He left the air force, going off on an 18-month round-the-world trip
in a Land-Rover, which became the subject of his first book, ''Earth My
Friend.'' In 1959 he married a Belgian, Marie Luce, and took on a series of
jobs.

''Writing and publicity were so tied,'' he said, ''and we had had enough of
publicity.'' He finally returned to writing in 1970, settled in France with his
wife and their three young children and has hardly looked back.

In July he went to London, a guest at the Queen's garden party at Buckingham
Palace. ''It was nice to see the old place again,'' he said.

Now he is holed up with his next book, on the so-called boat people, the
refugees from Indochina. ''I'd like to stay with this general subject,'' he
said. ''Both books aren't political analysis.  They are a record. Doing them has
been very moving and extremely humbling. It filled me with admiration for these
children. I am their witness.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Peter Townsend

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEHIND EVERY DEFENSE POLICY THERE LURKS A POLITICAL IDEA

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words


BOSTON NOT since the ''missile gap'' of 1960 has defense policy been as much of
a campaign issue in a peacetime election as it is this year.  And it's not just
because of what the Russians are doing and what the candidates think about that.

For both President Carter and his main challenger, Ronald Reagan, arms policy in
this campaign is a metaphor for leadership. Mr. Reagan wants to keep public
attention focused on the subject as a way to remind them that they should think
of Mr. Carter as weak and vacillating. Mr. Carter likes the subject just fine,
because he wants voters to keep thinking of Mr. Reagan's finger on the nuclear
button, and to recoil from that prospect.

All the while, Congress, which usually takes over on arms issues after the grand
speeches by Presidents and their rivals have died away, is busily adding money
to the budget estimates for defense.  The Senate Budget Committee voted last
week to add $5.6 billion, because of inflation, it said, to the $153.7 billion
it approved only two months ago.

Wherever the realities lay - and when Defense Secretary Harold Brown announced
the development of an invisible (to radar) warplane Friday it was even hader to
tell, especially in view of his insistence only last weekend that his speeches
weren't politically motivated - the campaign arguments were laid out there.

Defense Cuts Go Out of Style

All three leading candidates visited the American Legion convention, walking in
wearing their Legion caps, to make their pitches.

Mr. Reagan argued that the spending figures the Administration uses are
''phony,'' said Mr. Carter had passed up many fearsome weapons systems such as
the B-1 bomber, and contended the Soviet Union would only get serious about arms
control once it knew the United States would not let itself get behind. Mr.
Carter argued that major advances had been made in real strength while he was in
office, reversing the previous Republican trend, but that real security lies in
the twin approach of arming and negotiating.

And Representative John B. Anderson, the independent, attacked them both (though
the Legionnaires only liked it when he attacked Mr.  Carter), saying the nation
was stronger than Mr. Reagan thought, but that Mr. Carter, when he wasn't
''leading us in circles,'' was following the Californian's bad examples,
weakening on SALT and going for expensive systems like the MX missile.

This argument may come at a significant moment in political history, and Mr.
Carter himself is an example of change. The Pentagon (''the most wasteful
bureaucracy,'' he said) was one of the opponents he ran against in 1976, when he
began his campaign promising a 5 percent to 7 percent cut in military spending.
By the time he was nominated, he wasshifting to promising to cut only the rate
of growth in defense spending - at a time when Congress, after Vietnam, was just
beginning to appropriate more - and he indeed did do so. By now, however,
defense spending is increasing faster than under former President Ford's 1977
projections, and Mr. Carter's quarrels with the Hill are generally more focused
on where, rather than on how much.

Electioneering War Plans

His own shift, and his speech here bristled with advocacy of arms measures,
parallels growing public support for increased arms outlays. New York Times/CBS
Polls have reflected that concern throughout the year. In January, for the first
time in at least 11 years, a plurality of the public thought too little was
being spent on arms. This month 51 percent, in the first clear margin recorded
on that issue, said the United States' goal should be arms superiority over, not
equality with, the Soviet Union.

But with the campaign debate largely over exciting or menacing weapons systems -
such as the new invisible warplane, a nice counter to the cancelled B-1, or the
MX -or overall military military spending totals, public anxieties can be fanned
or soothed without getting at one of the difficulties that the Congress
constantly creates for the military.

Only Mr. Anderson - though he did not blame his fellow Congressmen - dealt with
it here, when he complained that basic maintenance was being shortchanged in the
Pentagon budget. Whoever is elected, it may not be easy for him to persuade a
Congressman with a tank factory or an aircraft plant in his district that $25
million more for engine grease is a more important way to hold off the Russians
than an equivalent expenditure on the local tank or fighter.

But for the moment, no matter how much the candidates believe their arguments,
those arguments are devices they are using to help get elected. One of the key
themes, for example, in Mr. Reagan's Boston speech dealt less with any specific
decision than with the image he wants the public to hold of the President, and
not just on defense matters. ''It is easy to become confused about the Carter
Administration's views,'' he said, ''since they change frequently, are so often
contradictory, and there is so much difference between what is said and what is
done.''

Mr. Carter was saying it softer than the week before, when he accepted his
nomination with the warning that Mr. Reagan's commitments would lead to the
''alarming and perilous destiny'' of nuclear war. Last week he did not even use
the word ''Republican'' to the Legion, though he was a bit more direct Friday
before the more friendly American Federation of Teachers in Detroit. To both
audiences, he presented himself as the sober, careful guardian of national
defense always ready for negotiation. In contrast, he suggested instead of
hammering as he did the week before, that his foe sought a ''dangerous and
costly arms race'' bringing nearer ''misunderstanding and miscalculation could
lead to a global catastrophe.''

Neither of these caricatures is being manufactured in the dark.  Each side seeks
to overcome the other's efforts. Richard Wirthlin, Mr. Reagan's polltaker, calls
the Carter approach ''the 'button' issue'' and to neutralize it his candidate
speaks, as he did Friday in Dallas to the evangelical Christian
nondenominational Roundtable, of the ''careful, measured renewal of our military
strength.'' Mr.  Carter, seeking to project an image of resolve, not
vacillation, peppered his speech here with such descriptions of his record as
''prudent. ..steady ...improved.''

Even this early in the campaign, neither side was taking a chance on
understatement, as each sought to use the arms issue as a frame for the
electorate's thinking on basic questions of character.  History demonstrates the
approach may work, regardless of the realities of the arms race. The Kennedy
Administration was in place, thanks in part to its campaign image of vigilance,
before it decided there had been no missile gap after all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of the three major candidates for President

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TAKING A HARD LOOK AT COMMON CAUSE

BYLINE: By Tom Bethell; Tom Bethell is a Washington editor of Harper's magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4746 words


John W. Gardner, the founding chairman of the Washington-based public - interest
lobby Common Cause, is intrigued by the metaphor of plumbing. Framed on the wall
of his office is the following quotation from one of his several books,
''Excellence'':

''The society which scorns excellence in plumbing because plumbing is a humble
activity and tolerates shoddiness in philosophy because it is an exalted
activity will have neither good plumbing nor good philosophy. Neither its pipes
nor its theories will hold water.''

In 1970, Gardner decided to bring new philosophical tools to bear on what he
regarded as leaking political pipes. Common Cause has been tapping and tinkering
away ever since. Some of the reforms it has lobbied for - such as
freedom-of-information and ethics-ingovernment laws -have been widely praised by
political analysts. But on the eve of the organization's 10th anniversary, which
will be celebrated Sept. 4-6, some important political pipes have sprung several
new leaks - as a direct result, say Common Cause's critics, of the attentions of
Gardner and his well-meaning handymen.

The latest dispute stems from Common Cause's lawsuit, filed July 1, to prevent
several independent political groups from spending an estimated $30 million to
$60 million to help elect Ronald Reagan President in November. Common Cause
believes that these groups, although nominally independent of Reagan and the
Republican Party - and thus permitted under a 1976 Supreme Court ruling to spend
as much as they please - are in fact linked to the candidate ''by many subtle
but substantial ties.'' Their expenditures, in Common Cause's view, would
therefore subvert the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1974, which aimed to
limit the influence of wealthy individuals and organizations by placing strict
limits on direct contributions to Presidential and Congressional candidates and
making the two major parties eligible for Federal funds to finance their
Presidential campaigns ($29.4 million each this fall).  The independent groups
whose spending Common Cause now wishes to curb have evolved in response to the
1974 Federal election law, which was enacted largely as a result of Common
Cause's lobbying. ''Common Cause has some nerve bringing this suit,'' says David
Landau, staff counsel to the American Civil Liberties Union, ''when it was their
1971 lawsuit that created this problem in the first place. Common Cause still
supports limits on expenditures by individuals.'' The A.C.L.U. regards these
spending limits as a cur-tailment of free political expression.

Thus, Common Cause is beginning to encounter serious resistance and criticism,
not just from political conservatives - who have never been among its greatest
admirers and are naturally angered by its recent lawsuit - but also from
impeccably liberal quarters. The concept of ''reform'' itself is beginning to be
viewed with skepticism. Writers are more and more inclined to put the word
inside quotation marks. In Washington these days, one often hears references to
''the unintended consequences of reform.'' For Common Cause, an organization
pre-eminently associated with reform for the past decade in American politics,
this growing skepticism poses a challenge to some of its most celebrated
successes.  Just over 200 years ago, Adam Smith wrote: ''By pursuing his own
interest (the individual) frequently promotes that of the society more
effectually than when he really intends to promote it. I have never known much
good done by those who affected to trade for the public good.''

Since its inception, Common Cause has operated on an entirely different premise
from Adam Smith's. Common Cause has claimed to lobby in the ''public interest,''
its assumption being that when lobbying cannot be impugned as selfish, the
legislation it produces must be better than that which results from the clash of
avowedly self-interested groups. If it has done nothing else in the past 10
years, Common Cause has succeeded in implanting this assumption in the national
consciousness.

John Gardner is familiar with the quotation from Adam Smith. ''I have said since
we began that the special interests are legitimate,'' he commented. ''Most
people belong to one. The right to influence Government is clear in the
right-to-petition clause of the First Amendment. Where we balk is that we don't
want them to use money in a way that corrupts the public process.''

In Common Cause's view, laws are frequently passed because the diligent efforts
of a small but highly active and vocal minority are not counteracted by the
vast, unconcerned majority. Most observers agree that much special-interest
legislation results from this inequality of pressure. What this observation does
not tell us, however, is whether the resulting law has any merit. One cannot
make a decision about legislative merit simply by inquiring on Capitol Hill
whether those who lobbied for a law will also benefit from it.  That judgment
follows from one's political beliefs and opinions.

Common Cause describes itself as ''neither left, nor right, nor center.'' But
the positions it advocates seem to make up an essentially liberal agenda. The
original raison d'etre of the organization was its opposition to the war in
Vietnam. One of the first Government ''process'' reforms sponsored by Common
Cause - the abolition of the seniority system for selecting Congressional
committee chairman, who were then blocking votes relevant to the war - made a
great deal of sense in terms of this effort to end United States involvement in
Vietnam.

Since 1970, Common Cause has also opposed the supersonic transport; supported
repeal of the oil-depletion allowance; backed stricter environmental laws,
tougher auto-emission standards and a new intelligence agency charter; opposed
the B-1 bomber; supported energy-conservation measures, solar-bank legislation,
limitations on strategic arms, voting representation for the District of
Columbia and ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment.

This does not mean that Common Cause never takes positions dear to conservative
hearts. Notable exceptions include support for a balanced budget, trucking and
airline deregulation, and a ''sunset'' law requiring Federal programs to be
terminated automatically after 10 years unless specifically reauthorized by
Congress.

In any event, Common Cause's decisions to oppose or support particular pieces of
legislation do not always depend on whether the proposed law serves some special
interest. For instance, it neither opposed nor supported the best-known piece of
special-interest legislation in the past year -the Federal Government's $1.5
billion loan guarantee to save the Chrysler Corporation from bankruptcy - which
both the United Auto Workers and Chrysler lobbied for and benefited from.
''There are literally thousands of pieces of specialinterest legislation in
Congress every year,'' said Fred Wertheimer, Common Cause's senior vice
president, ''and we can only focus on so many of them.''

Welfare legislation, supported by welfare-rights organizations but opposed by
many taxpayers, is also special interest-legislation as defined by Common Cause.
So is legislation to improve the economic well-being of Government workers that
is lobbied for by Governmentemployee unions. Yet neither group has been opposed
by Common Cause.  John Gardner, a former Secretary of Health, Education and
Welfare under President Johnson, retired from the Common Cause chairmanship
three years ago and started a new organization called Independent Sector. This
group devotes its efforts to studying the problems faced by private-sector
institutions, such as universities and religious organizations, and engages in
some lobbying. Gardner's new office is in the same downtown Washington building
that Common Cause occupies, but a couple of floors higher up.

Common Cause's new chairman is Archibald Cox, the first Watergate Special
Prosecutor and Harvard University law professor. Cox spends most of his time at
Harvard, where he remains teaching full time. His work for the organization
consists mostly of lecturing, fund-raising and advising.

Unlike some other citizens' lobbying groups, such as Ralph Nader's Public
Citizen, Common Cause operates democratically, polling its membership frequently
and adopting an agenda based on these polls.  The organization grew rapidly at
the outset, reaching nearly 200,000 members by the end of the first year.
Membership peaked at 325,000 in August 1974, the month that President Nixon
resigned. It now stands at 230,000 - up somewhat in recent months, according to
Common Cause's president David Cohen, who is a former lobbyist for the
A.F.L.-C.I.O. and Americans for Democratic Action. Initial dues remain at $15,
but renewers now pay $20. Total revenues are $5.3 million - down from $6.5
million in 1974.

Common Cause accepts no foundation or Government money and no corporate or union
contributions over $100. Seventy-five percent of its income is derived from
individual contributions of $25 or less.  It employs 125 people across the
nation, and last year it spent some $1.3 million in lobbying - mostly
solic-iting grass-roots support on issues.  Common Cause members are middle-to
upper-middle-class in income, and highly educated, as a 1979 poll disclosed.
Seventy-eight percent of the respondents had completed college, and fully 49
percent had completed graduate school. They are older than one might have
guessed: Two-thirds are over 50. And they are exceptionally ac-tive politically:
73 percent contribute to political campaigns either ''very frequently'' or
''occasionally''; 98 percent voted in the 1976 Presidential election.

A six-month Common Cause volunteer wrote in The Washington Star in 1978 that
Common Cause consists mostly of ''well-fed, well-scrubbed, upper-middle-class
liberals. You could peel the Carter-Mondale stickers off their car bumpers to
find Udall or Bayh stickers, and faded McGovern ones under those....''

The writer added, however, that ''in the cynical 1970's, Common Cause was a
flicker of light when people took a dim view of idealism. It had the
foolhardiness to be idealistic and the audacity to achieve a relative degree of
success....''

Reviewing these successes, David Cohen said at a recent governingboard meeting:
''Imagine a Common Cause board meeting taking place 10 years ago. At that time,
Congressional and Federal agency meetings were closed, ethical standards were
ignored, campaign finances were hidden, power and position in Congress were
based purely on seniority, and state-government accountability laws were the
exception rather than the rule.'' Common Cause has often claimed the Federal
Election Campaign Act as its greatest victory. Since no one at Common Cause
stood to gain from the measure, it qualifies as public-interest law. The
important question is: Does public-interest lobbying make good law?

In the aftermath of Watergate and the illegal corporate campaign contributions
of 1972, the regulation of campaign money seemed a triumph of good government.
But within the past year, there have been second thoughts about the already
much-amended Federal Election Campaign Act, which gave us the Federal Election
Commission, limited the amount of money an individual can give to a candidate
($1,000 per election) and limited the amount political-action committees
(P.A.C.'s) can give to candidates ($5,000). It also set up a system of public
financing for Presidential races.

One provision of the law, requiring disclosure of the source of campaign
contributions, is still widely praised. But the provisions limiting the role of
money, which once seemed like a good idea, are beginning to look like
incumbency-protection measures. To achieve a comparable name recognition,
critics of the law point out, newcomers need to spend more money than
incumbents, not the same amount.  Overall campaign spending limits, which are
eroding in value through inflation, thus favor incumbents, who can more easily
generate news and, therefore, free media time.

The House Administration Committee ordered a study of the new law by the Harvard
Institute of Politics, which found: ''If one of the original intentions of
campaign finance reforms was to limit the appearance of special interests in the
political process, the law has in practice had the opposite effect.'' A total of
1,360 P.A.C.'s, representing business, labor and political special interests,
contributed $32 million to Federal campaigns in 1978 - up from 600 P.A.C.'s
($12.5 million) in 1974. Business P.A.C.'s have grown most rapidly, and $3 out
of every $4 given by all P.A.C.'s go to incumbents.  Congressional candidates,
the Harvard study showed, have become increasingly dependent upon such
political-action committees, fundraising has been centralized in Washington and
local participation has diminished. Similarly, Herbert E. Alexander, the author
of ''Financing Politics,'' has found that in Presidential contests the new
spending limits have resulted in a ''cost-effective'' approach to campaigning,
concentrating on television appeals and reducing grassroots contacts.

Another problem is that the law, as amended in light of the 1976 Buckley v.
Valeo Supreme Court decision, allows wealthy candidates to spend as much of
their own money as they like, if they do not accept public funds. They are
therefore uniquely well positioned to take on incumbents. ''It's getting so you
have to be a brand name or a foundation to get elected,'' said former Minnesota
Democratic Senator Eugene McCarthy. He may have been thinking of Republican
Senator John H. Heinz 3d of Pennsylvania, who spent $1.5 million of his own
money getting elected in 1976. His Democratic opponent spent approximately
$760,000.

Common Cause has responded to this criticism by supporting the Campaign
Contribution Reform Act of 1979, introduced by Representatives David Obey,
Democrat of Wisconsin, and Tom Railsback, Republican of Illinois, and passed by
the House of Representatives last October. Its principal effect would be to
limit the total amount of money a House candidate could receive from all
P.A.C.'s to $70,000. But Senate Republicans, viewing it as an
incumbencyprotection measure, have promised a filibuster, and the bill is
unlikely to be brought to a vote this year.

Michael Malbin, a student of Congressional reform and a resident fellow at the
American Enterprise Institute, a conservative Washington think tank, believes
that all these attempts to limit campaign spending are misguided. ''The cost of
campaigns now comes to less than the nation's advertising budget for soap,'' Mr.
Malbin has written, ''while the cost of running the Federal Government exceeds
one-fifth of the G.N.P. In light of this, how can anyone seriously claim that
the cost of keeping incumbents on their toes is too high?'' In a recent
interview, Fred Wertheimer responded to some of these complaints by saying: ''I
think we will review the $1,000-limit after this election. But we will not have
reached a solution merely by balancing larger P.A.C. contributions with larger
individual contributions.''

Tom Mader, who worked with Common Cause for seven years before joining John
Anderson's campaign as finance director, still thinks that the campaign finance
law is satisfactory, although he adds: ''There's no doubt that any reform law
probably needs reforming itself.'' Precisely because no one has anything
materially at stake in ''public-interest'' legislation, it can often be adopted
without the more calculated assessments that ''special interests'' encourage.
Consider another Common Cause-sponsored reform, the sweeping away of the
Congressional seniority system. In 1971, a chorus of criticism arose against the
automatic appointment of committee chairmen on the basis of seniority, which
seemed like an arbitrary avenue to power.  Common Cause lobbied hard to change
this system. Today, the committee chairmanships no longer automatically go to
those who have been in office longest.

The result has been an increase in the ''fragmentation of authority in
Congress,'' James L. Sundquist notes in a Brookings Institution publication,
''Setting National Priorities: Agenda for the 1980's.'' Ever since 1910, he
writes, ''the trend in the House has been toward the dispersal of power, and the
trend gathered new force in the 1970's, when committee chairmen were stripped of
their power and the seniority system that protected them was abolished.'' Mr.
Sundquist suggests the following back-to-square one reform: ''the delegation of
considerable new power to the Congressional leadership, or to powerful
centralized committees of some kind....''

Republican Representative Bill Frenzel of Minnesota recently noted that the
House reforms have amounted to the replacement of tyranny by anarchy. ''Most
members of the House who have survived (the reforms) will readily admit that the
House functions more poorly today than in 1970,'' Congressman Frenzel wrote.

Fred Wertheimer replies that ''There are a variety of problems, one of which is
that some of the key reforms, such as the effort to create a more rational
committee jurisdiction system, were never implemented. It is the growth of the
P.A.C. movement that has weakened the parties and weakened the leadership.''

Another instance of a reform law that needs reforming is the ''sunshine'' rule
change that David Cohen cited as one of Common Cause's victories. Until 1973,
Congressional committee chairmen had the authority to conduct ''markup,'' or
bill-writing, sessions in private, behind closed doors. Today, a majority of the
committee must vote to allow this. As a result, most markup sessions are now
open to the public.

This reform was at first praised as a triumph for open government.  But it turns
out that most of the people who come and sit through the long and tedious hours
of Congressional wrangling are not publicspirited citizens but representatives
of the special interests. ''Openness attracts the lobbyists, who end up with
more, not less, influence,'' Michael Malbin said recently.

Fred Wertheimer responds that ''When you go into secret session everyone knows
what's going on except the public. The lobbyists certainly know what's going
on... Behind closed doors, the powerful lobbyists were the only ones who had a
piece of the action. They weren't physically in there, but they were spiritually
present, and they were represented.''

Critics of the law point out that legislators find it easier to vote their
consciences behind closed doors, when lobbyists from their home states are not
glaring at them from a distance of a few feet.  Common Cause imputes an
irresistible influence to such lobbyists because often they are also the source
of campaign contributions.  Common Cause assumes that only with recorded votes
and public sessions will legislators keep the public interest in mind. In
private, unrecorded votes, they will slip into the special-interest orbit.

Such an assumption implies a cynical view of politicians, one that regards them
as individuals who merely respond to the will of campaign contributors and
denies that they, too, can be idealistic in just the way that Common Cause is.
Common Cause has a tendency to deride politicians. The frequent use of the
special-interest rhetoric makes this almost unavoidable, of course, since it is
the politicians who grant the favors that the spe-cial interests seek.  But the
denigration of politicians may be a harmful exercise because it impugns politics
itself.

In practically all of his speeches, John Gardner makes an appeal on behalf of
the political process, urging that it be used, not scorned. In a recent
interview, he said: ''When equally worthy groups want mutually incompatible
things, unless you want to shoot it out or turn it over to a dictator, you've
got to turn to the arena of politics.'' He added: ''As you can imagine, that is
not the easiest idea to get across in good-government circles.'' He said that
his comments about the need for politics are ''never quoted'' in press reports
of his speeches.

Nevertheless, the literature that Common Cause sends out to its members
sometimes mocks politics and politicians. One cartoon, for example, depicts the
United States Capitol sliding backward into a stagnant pond. Another is
entitled, ''This is a member of Congress.  Color him purple - purple for
royalty.'' Although Mr. Gardner has praised politics, Common Cause may have
helped to undermine it.

Mr. Gardner responds that this ''is not an unfair question to raise,'' adding,
''I've never quite figured out how you attack something that you see as an evil
without having some spillover.'' Common Cause has continued to push for
Government ''process'' changes this year, having made a big effort on behalf of
a new lobbydisclosure law. If it passes - and the bill supported by Common Cause
has not emerged from the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee - organizations
that try to influence legislation will have to tell us more about themselves,
their spending and their specific areas of legislative interest. The old
lobby-disclosure law, written in 1946, is widely regarded as ineffective because
it only applies to organizations whose main purpose is lobbying. Thus, for
example, the Mobil Oil Corporation does not have to register as a lobbying group
because its main purpose is producing and selling oil, not trying to influence
laws. Nevertheless, Mobil does lobby.

This is clearly a sizable loophole, which Common Cause would like to close. The
proposed law would require any organization spending more than $5,000 per
quarter on lobbying to register and to disclose the actual amount of money it is
spending.

The American Civil Liberties Union has opposed this bill on the grounds that it
endangers the right ''to petition the Government for a redress of grievances,''
which is protected by the First Amendment. ''How does the Government find out
that the lobbying group is telling the truth in its reports?'' asks the
A.C.L.U.'s David Landau. ''The law has considerable enforcement implications.
The General Accounting Office will be able to launch an investigation into your
organization for engaging in First Amendment activities.  This is of enormous
concern to us.''

Common Cause, however, says that there ought to be lobbying disclosure ''to
serve the public's right to know,'' and ''to preserve the integrity of the
governmental process.''

Opponents claim that Common Cause itself has a ''special interest'' in the
lobby-disclosure bill. Common Cause is, after all, an organization that makes
available to its members information about the activities of lobbying groups in
Washington. What better way to accumulate such data than to push for a law that
mandates its accumulation?

''It's a Common Cause relief bill,'' said the A.C.L.U.'s Landau.  Barry Lynn, a
policy advocate on civil liberties with the Washington Office for Church and
Society of the United Church of Christ, has written: ''Because of the obvious
savings to Common Cause, which will now have the grist for its press releases
prepared at taxpayers' expense by the General Accounting Office, some cynics
have dubbed the bill the 'Common Cause subsidy bill.' ''

But, as Adam Smith would have pointed out, the fact that the bill serves the
special interest of Common Cause does not necessarily make it a bad idea. It
may, in fact, be a good one.  To some in Washington, Common Cause seems less
relevant today than it did six or seven years ago. For example, Stephen Miller
of the American Enterprise Institute, who set out a couple of years ago to write
a book about Common Cause, but then decided to turn it into a book on the
special interest-public interest debate in American history, has this to say:

''People realize that the agenda set by Common Cause for the 1970's - open
government, the elimination of cor-ruption - is no longer so important. These
issues have been replaced by far more important ones such as inflation and
defense.''

The organization has launched, in response to a poll of its members, a tentative
assault on inflation - which it links to Government subsidies to the special
interests. Many economists have argued that Government spending is the driving
force behind inflation. But Common Cause's 104-page report sails over great
mountain ranges of spending programs and comes down heavily on some odd,
scattered molehills - such as the Beekeepers Indemnity Fund ($3.2 million in
1979).

John Gardner himself has moved on to new zones of reflection. His current
organization, Independent Sector, is an umbrella group covering many voluntary
institutions, such as private universities, museums and the Red Cross as well as
religious groups. ''A huge sector,'' Mr. Gardner said, ''but worried about its
future.''

Years ago, Mr. Gardner noted that every man should have three careers. He sounds
today as though he has embarked on his third.  There is an unfamiliar tinge of
conservatism to his views.

''With Government money comes the Government rule book, and an erosion of
private giving,'' he said. ''I was at Cal Tech recently - a few days after an
Occupational Safety and Health Administration team had been in telling them how
to run their chemistry lab. You could have scraped them off the ceiling.''

He still worries about the dangers posed by an unalert citizenry, but with a new
twist: It is ''the smoothest path to centralization - a slide into the waiting
arms of Government.''

How did Mr. Gardner like being Secretary of H.E.W.?  ''Interesting,'' he said,
with little enthusiasm. ''My deep convictions that solutions are going to come
from outside Government come from that experience. Government is not a creative
element in our society.''

About his one-time partner-in-reform, Ralph Nader, Mr. Gardner said, ''I don't
think Ralph realizes that by attacking the private sector, it kind of backs you
into Government.''

He sounded as though he was beginning to enjoy his third vocation - the advocacy
of voluntarism.  Downstairs, in the Common Cause office, the staff was laboring
at the protracted business of sorting out the new problems of campaignfinance
reform, lobby-disclosure reform, Government in the ''sunshine'' ... a new bypass
here to replace that leaking valve there ... tap, tap, tap ... a never-ending
task.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Gardner and Archibald Cox

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE VOICE OF REASON

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. LASH; Joseph P. Lash is the author of ''Helen and
Teacher,'' ''Eleanor and Franklin'' and other biographies.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2174 words


WALTER LIPPMANN AND THE AMERICAN CENTURY By Ronald Steel.  Illustrated. 669 pp.
Boston: Atlantic-Little, Brown. $19.95.

A SUPERB reporter and political analyst, a founder of The New Republic, the
editor of The New York World's editorial page and the author of several
influential books, Walter Lippmann was, to James Reston, ''the greatest
journalist of our age.'' As Ronald Steel notes in this marvelously researched
and readable biography, Lippmann ''commanded no divisions, but he did have an
enormous power over public opinion. This in turn gave him a power over
Presidents, politicians and policy makers. They did not, by any means, always do
what Lippmann advised. But they listened to him and sought his support - and
learned not to take his opposition lightly. Lippmann commanded a loyal and
powerful constituency, some ten million of the most politically active and
articulate people in America. Many of these people literally did not know what
they ought to think about the issues of the day until they read what Walter
Lippmann had said about them. A politician could ignore that kind of power only
at his own risk.''

For 36 years, Lippmann wrote a syndicated column, ''Today and Tomorrow,'' which
at its peak appeared in over 200 daily newspapers.  Mr. Steel writes: ''Readers
turned to Lippmann, not for solutions, but for dispassionate analysis. He had a
marvelous ability for simplifying the complex. His extraordinary success was due
to two qualities: a mind that could plunge through the miasma of contention to
grasp the essence of a situation, and a superbly lucid literary style. He had an
intellect of a sort that is rarely attracted to journalism. He could have been a
philosopher, a professor of history or even, as he once wistfully reflected, a
mathematician.''

Born to a wealthy German Jewish family in New York City on Sept.  23, 1889,
Lippmann was an only child, ''brought up to be a gentleman,'' as Mr. Steel
notes. He had been Harvard's most brilliant undergraduate from the moment he
entered in 1906. William James, then in semiretirement, knocked on the
undergraduate's door and announced ''I'm William James.'' Lippmann became
Charles ''Copey'' Copeland's ''pet'' and George Santayana's assistant. But as a
student, he was an outsider. None of the elite social clubs invited him to join;
neither did The Crimson. He once wrote of Santayana that ''a man can't see the
play and be in it too,'' and the statement described well the alternatives he
saw before him even then. He might have become a socialist in any case, but the
snobbery of the clubmen added spice to his advocacy of the superiority of
socialism and his faith in Ibsen and in Shaw's scornful view that ''morality is
not respectability.'' Another member of the Class of 1910, John Reed, soon to be
known as a writer and revolutionary, hailed Lippmann as ''the future President
of the United States.'' He not only helped found the Harvard Socialist Club in
1908 but became a mainstay of the Intercollegiate Socialist Society.

His first book, ''A Preface to Politics,'' was in part a popularization of
Graham Wallas, the Fabian socialist whose views on human nature and politics
influenced him strongly, and in part an effort to use a new analytical tool,
Freudian psychology. ''Not bad,'' comments Mr. Steel, ''for a man just turned
twenty-five.'' Lippmann had written the book in seclusion in England. On his
return in 1913, Herbert Croly sought him out as an editor of a new magazine, The
New Republic, funded by Willard and Dorothy Straight - she the Whitney heiress
and he a Morgan banker and diplomat. Lippmann had found his life's vocation.

Harold Laski once told Lippmann, ''While you were on (The New Republic), it made
history week by week.'' It did so because even as a young journalist who had
moved from socialism to Bull Moose Progressivism, Lippmann was on the inside,
the friend of many of the Wilson Administration's top men, beginning with
Colonel House and Newton D. Baker. Among the many virtues of Mr. Steel's
biography is his presentation, in fascinating detail, of the many times that
Lippmann, one of the best observers in America, confronted the problem of
finding the proper distance from the seat of power. The concessions a journalist
has to make in order to be on the inside are constantly at war with truth and
realism. There is no simple formula that will save him from seduction and error.
Yet in the tension between the two, good journalism is forged. Sometimes, to be
sure, Lippmann's solutions to this problem were unsuccessful, as when he wrote
off F.D.R. as a ''Boy Scout'' -partly because of Lippmann's faith in Al Smith.
But on the whole he managed to keep his distance.

In his farewell speech to his colleagues in the press in 1967, when he gave up
his column ''Today and Tomorrow,'' Lippmann said: ''A long life in journalism
convinced me many Presidents ago that there should be a large air space between
a journalist and the head of a state. I would have carved on the portals of the
National Press Club, 'Put not your trust in princes.' Only the very rarest of
princes can endure even a little criticism, and few of them can put up with even
a pause in the adulation.''

This opinion was confirmed by Lippmann's experiences with Lyndon Johnson. The
two had started on the very best of terms. Lippmann had turned to Johnson almost
as a ''savior'' in 1964; he thought Johnson favored a negotiated settlement in
Vietnam. The President had even come to Lippmann's home to celebrate his 75th
birthday. But once Lippmann was persuaded that Johnson sought a military
showdown, he refused to set foot in the White House. The war obsessed him and he
came to think of Johnson as the ''most disagreeable individual ever to have
occupied the White House.'' Later, a resentful Johnson had his researchers
compile a series of ''bloopers'' in Lippmann's old columns, but when the
President used a White House dinner to air his grievances, the guests were
embarrassed by the gaucherie. For the problems on which Lippmann had sought to
shed the clear light of reason were among the central ones confronting America,
and what politician could say he has changed his mind less often than the
journalists covering him? Indeed, L.B.J.'s chief charge against Lippmann was his
courage to say of the President, in regard to Vietnam, ''He misled me.''

For years, people who were interested in Lippmann above and beyond his books and
columns sought out such informative essays as Gilbert Harrison's introduction to
''Public Persons.'' But there was always the knowledge that in the Lippmann
papers there were the materials for a major biography. The late Richard Rovere,
with Lippmann's blessing, undertook the job, but yielded to Ronald Steel when he
ran into difficulties imposed by Lippmann's wife Helen, who resisted Rovere's
treating Lippmann's Jewishness with the candor and prominence he felt the topic
deserved. It is to Mr. Steel's credit that he does cover the subject fully and
critically.

Lippmann always sought to minimize that he was a Jew. Mr. Steel writes that
Lippmann grew up ''in a gilded Jewish ghetto. Virtually everyone he knew was
wealthy, Jewish and of German background.'' To Lippmann, Judaism was ''an
infirmity,'' in Mr. Steel's words, and from his earliest intellectual awareness
he took the path of assimilation. This is not an unknown or dishonorable posture
in Western culture, but it has a price. In Lippmann's case, it caused him to
misread or be silent about one of the central issues of our times. He considered
''the bad economic habits of the Jews'' one of the causes of anti-Semitism. When
he described Hitler in 1933 as ''the authentic voice of a civilized people,''
his old friend Felix Frankfurter - a man of ''many passions,'' including
Zionism, which Lippmann rejected as a form of ''tribalism'' - broke relations
with him for more than three years. There have always been Jews who chose to
behave like Jules Moch of France, a descendant of a grenadier in Napoleon's
Grande Armee, who said he was only a Jew when Jews were under attack; but not
even that could be said about Lippmann. A brave and outspoken internationalist,
he was silent all through the war about the plight of the Jews.

Mr. Steel is unsparing, but he keeps Lippmann's assimilationism in perspective.
Yet as every Jew knows, the non-Jewish world rarely lets one forget one is a
Jew. Theodore Roosevelt -whom the columnist idolized and who had once called the
25-year-old Lippmann ''the most brilliant young man of his age in the United
States'' - dismissed the editors of The New Republic as ''three circumcised Jews
and three anemic Christians'' when the magazine, at Lippmann's urging, began to
criticize T.R.'s belligerency towards Mexico. Later when Lippmann shifted his
enthusiasm from T.R. to President Wilson and - through Colonel House, who
appreciated his intellect - helped draft the President's ''Fourteen Points,''
the foundation of the Administration's ''New Diplomacy'' and the basis of the
1918 Armistice, House had to assure Wilson that ''the objection to Lippmann is
that he is a Jew but unlike other Jews he is a silent one.''

''Essentially a man of reason, Lippmann was also buffeted by passions,'' Mr.
Steel writes, and he sensitively presents a love affair that provided some high
drama in Lippmann's life. In 1937, when Lippmann's first marriage, to Faye
Albertson, had long lost its glow, Hamilton Fish Armstrong, the editor of
Foreign Affairs and a good friend, asked him to take his wife Helen to dinner;
he had to go to a meeting. She had been born a Catholic in a well-to-do New York
family, had converted to Episcopalianism, had served as a nurse's aide in World
War I. Soon Lippmann was telling her of his loneliness, his doubts about the
column, his lack of satisfaction in his marriage. They danced. Shortly afterward
she rented an apartment for their trysts. He was 47, she 40. A year later she
left Armstrong and they were married. Armstrong never forgave Lippmann, and the
Lippmanns decided to move from New York to Washington.

Until its final years, it was a happy though childless marriage in which Helen
served as his assistant and managed his household. He loved being a public
figure, and she loved being married to one. In 1967, when he was 77, he gave up
his column and they returned to New York. Both lived another seven years.
Unable, she claimed, to cope with his senility, she had him placed in a nursing
home on Park Avenue. Although younger, she died first, of cardiac arrest, in
early 1974. He died several months later, also of cardiac arrest.

All his life, Lippmann distrusted the majority. At Harvard, Irving Babbitt's
attack on Rousseau's faith in the ''goodness'' of the people found in Lippmann a
sympathetic listener. He feared the ''herd instinct'' and sought ways to limit
the power of the majority. Reason alone seemed no proof against mass egotism and
vulgarity. Lippmann sought unsuccessfully to create a new, higher morality that
could replace the ancient habits and values that were dissolving. The Catholic
magazine Commonweal saw his ''A Preface to Morals'' as an expression of ''the
spiritual dissatisfaction of the modern Jew who has been severed from his
religious community.'' It was an acute perception. At the end of his life
Lippmann again sought to answer the problem in ''The Public Philosophy.'' It was
among the least successful of his books.

Perhaps no philosophy can suffice for the man who neither is religious nor
values the company of men and women of all kinds, not just the elite. Perhaps
his answer - his column and his love for Helen - was as good as any.

''You are drawing sketches in the sand which the sea will wash away,'' he wrote
of himself when he was 25, adding, ''The truth is you're afraid to be wrong.''
He did himself an injustice, and this splendidly written biography is here to
testify to that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Walter Lippman photo of Walter Lippman (page
22)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TRADITIONAL FRESHMAN HAZING ENDED AT THE CITADEL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 501 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, S.C., Aug. 24


Freshmen at South Carolina's tradition-steeped military college, The Citadel,
formerly faced 15 minutes of ''racking,'' strenuous exercise for breaking rules.

The ''knobs,'' so called because of their closely cropped haircuts, were at the
mercy of upperclassmen, who could order push-ups or running exercises almost on
a whim. Meals for plebes were regimented to the point where first-year students
had to sit at attention and ask upperclassmen for each serving of food.

The 690 plebes who enrolled last week in this year's freshmen class will not be
subject to such rigors. They are to be governed by a revised ''fourth class
system'' that stresses counseling, assignment of chores or grounding instead of
severe punishment.

The Citadel is one of the last all-male, state-supported military colleges in
the nation. At most similar schools, the plebe system has not been relaxed.

The Citadel's new system, adopted last year at the insistence of its former
president, Vice Adm. James B. Stockdale, abolishes ''racking'' - mental or
physical torment - and relaxes mealtime regimen.

Other Practices Continue

Admiral Stockdale, the Navy's most decorated officer and a former Vietnam
prisoner of war, had also pressed for an end to the freshmen haircuts and a
shortened plebe year, but the governing board of visitors refused to end those
traditions.

He resigned last week after a disagreement with the board over his
reorganization plan for the college's administration.  Lieut. Col. Dick Clarke,
a spokesman for The Citadel, said that Admiral Stockdale and other
administrators began questioning the plebe system after about 50 freshmen
dropped out in the first month of classes last fall. Usually 10 to 15 of them
quit in the first month, he said.

Under the new system, knobs are to be punished by pulling cleanup duty or by
being restricted to campus on weekends. In many cases, they will be counseled
instead of punished.

The reforms were welcomed by seniors, many of whom experienced hazing. None said
they were physically abused, but they failed to see much value in physical
workouts for misdeeds.

'More Professional Place'

Cadet Capt. David Summer, a senior and editor of the college newspaper, said he
originally opposed the changes.  ''I thought we were trying to entice
students,'' Captain Summer said. ''But actually we've just gotten rid of the
Mickey Mouse aspect of school. It is now a more professional place.''

He said the stress had changed from regimentation to academics.  An enrolling
freshman said he liked the college's tradition but at the same time welcomed the
changes. ''We deserve to be put through a lot,'' said Michael Lachnicht of
Cherry Hill, N.J. ''I'm glad they toned it down some but didn't totally get rid
of it.''

Alice Ranck of Richmond, whose son is a freshman, said she and her husband were
glad that the college administrators ''have the viewpoint that hazing is not
necessary - that they're individuals and can be recognized as individuals.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW ASIAN IMMIGRANTS SHAPE A LIFE IN NEW YORK

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1849 words


in Flushing

By ANNA QUINDLEN

On Main Street in Flushing, Queens, Korean vegetable stands and gift shops
flourish alongside the delicatessens and drugstores, and the teen-agers who walk
along the shopping thoroughfare punctuate their Chinese conversations with
American slang.

In apartment buildings in the Bronx, Indochinese refugees gather in the lobbies,
discussing the problems of making their way here and news of relatives from
home.

In Woodside, Queens, a girl in designer jeans and spike-heeled sandals, her
purple eye shadow striking as a neon light, escorts her elderly grandmother to
the supermarket, the older woman in the drab pajamas of her native China.

And on Church Avenue in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, the subway disgorges
hundreds of tired riders in the evening who were were once residents of Taiwan,
Hong Kong, Saigon or Bangkok.

Number Placed at 400,000

They are New York's new Asians, and they have changed the way parts of the city
look and feel. Two decades ago the majority of Asians here were Chinese, and
were to be found below Houston Street in Manhattan. But, in the intervening
years, their ranks have been augmented by Koreans, Vietnamese, Cambodians,
Laotians, Thais, Filipinos and some Japanese.

There are also ever-growing numbers of new arrivals from China and nearly all of
them, because of high rents in Manhattan and overcrowding in Chinatown, have
moved into the neighborhoods where their counterparts from Europe settled more
than a half century ago.

Many New Yorkers buy produce from the stands, flowers from the shops and food at
the restaurants of the new East Asian immigrants.  Also, the immigrants work in
light factories and shoe factories, as seamstresses in the garment center and as
accountants in midtown Manhattan. There are, by some estimates, more than
400,000 Asian Americans living in the city, many of them beset by problems of
language and loneliness. But they are, with few exceptions, determined to make
good here.

Most say they came to the United States for financial security and for the
education of and a better future for their children. They say that they left
home because of poverty or a repressive political regime. A revision of the
immigration laws in 1965 made it possible for more to come to America; for some,
the American withdrawal from Southeast Asia made the move imperative.

New York's East Asians have made parts of the city, some of them left vacant by
the receding of earlier waves of immigrants, their own.

Change Since '64 Noted

''In 1964 when I came here to school, it was so hard to find a Korean store in
New York,'' says Han Young Lee, who lives in Flushing with her husband, an
accountant, and their 9-year-old daughter.  ''And there were just a few students
here who all knew each other.  Now there are grocery stores, vegetable stores,
all the shops.

''Many old people move here because they can get whatever they want. And the new
immigrants come because there is someone they can speak with in their language.
And now people can find jobs in those places and that's another reason they
come.''

Flushing has indeed changed since Mrs. Lee came to America. Many of the shoppers
on Main Street are Asians, and the IRT train that runs through the Borough of
Queens carries many Chinese, Korean and Indochinese commuters. More than 20,000
of the city's 80,000 Koreans have settled in Flushing, most in the last decade.
An additional 9,000 Koreans are coming to the city each year. And there are
70,000 Chinese living in Woodside, Elmhurst, Jackson Heights and other parts of
Queens.

There are nearly 8,500 Asian students in the City University system; 1,000 of
them are enrolled at City College, twice the number that attended a decade ago.
In public schools in Queens alone, the number of Asian students attending has
nearly tripled in 10 years.

The More Things Change

The Bronx and Brooklyn, too, reflect these new waves of immigrants and refugees
for, since many of those coming from Indochina and from the rural areas of
mainland China arrive without any knowledge of English and must take factory and
restaurant jobs, they must be placed where rents are lowest.

On Church Avenue in Flatbush and on Davidson Avenue in the Bronx, there are some
buildings that went begging until family after family of Asians was placed there
by social welfare agencies or community groups.

''The idea that the Asians coming here are taking housing and jobs away from the
native-born is a myth,'' says Charles Wang, managing director of the Chinatown
Planning Council, which has opened offices in Flushing and Flatbush in the last
three years. ''Landlords and employers say these are places they would have a
hard time filling otherwise. Like lots of other people to come here from foreign
countries, the immigrants will take these so they can save and buy a business or
a house of their own.''

In fact the attitudes and aspirations of the Asian immigrants and refugees
mirror those of the immigrants who came before them. Land of opportunity, they
say of America, place of freedom and money. Many say that they came here to
reunite their families.

'If the Lamppole Had Feet. ...'

''My brother came here so it was right for us to follow,'' says 19-year-old
Ellis Yee, who has lived on Church Avenue for a year.

''Sometimes I can see that you do not know you are so lucky,'' says Cac Thanh
Le, a urologist who is on welfare while studying for his qualifying exams in
January. ''We have a four-room apartment here, much better than the studio in
Saigon. We are not free in Vietnam, in our action, in our thinking. We have a
saying, 'If the lamppole had feet, it would come here.' ''

Maureen Sui, who immigrated five years ago, adds that people who wonder how
immigrants and refugees tolerate tenement apartments and the overcrowding caused
by several families living together are not familiar with conditions in Hong
Kong. ''Some people must rent bed space on eight-hour shifts,'' she says. ''When
your time is up, they wake you so the next person can have the bed.''

Of course, the Asians who arrive here are faced with almost overwhelming
problems as well. The primary one, the one all mention and the one most must
fight to master, is the English language, which is so vastly different from
their own. A range of organizations as well as the Board of Education offer
English lessons for arriving immigrants and refugees, but until they have
mastered the consonants they find so tongue-twisting many must take jobs far
below their skills.

Engineer Swept Floors

Tang Kuei Te, an engineer for 13 years in Vietnam, recently got a job as a civil
engineer with a construction company here, but before that he had a job sweeping
in a supermarket in Brooklyn. He is working and saving for the eventual
immigration of his wife and two children, whom he left in Taiwan. ''I came here
first to get the new life,'' he says slowly, searching for the words. ''I don't
know the U.S. life, but I know it is what we want. But first I must work hard,
get money, get English.''

Some Asians, however, have found ways to circumvent the new language. In
Flushing, for example, there are now so many Koreans and Chinese and so many
businesses owned by them -as many as 60 in the Main Street area, an association
of Korean businessmen estimates - that their native tongue can be used both at
and after work.

Many Koreans say one reason they want to own their own business is that it will
lessen their problems with English. ''No English, no English,'' say the two men
running a small fruit stand near 41st Avenue on Main Street, their smiles wide.
Some like it that way; others think that they must embrace their new home.
Jungil Song, who opened a small variety shop off Main Street two years ago,
says, ''I am afraid of the future here.''

''That it will turn into Koreatown?'' asks Mrs. Lee.  ''No, there are some bad
people who are around here,'' he answers.  ''It would be better if there were
more Koreans.''

'Stabilizing Influence'

Some of their neighbors agreed. A Queens hairdresser whose window carries both
Chinese and English characters says, ''Some people are afraid this is going to
turn into another Chinatown, but the people take such good care of their houses
and their businesses that it is hard to argue with it.''

''The Asians are generally perceived by their neighbors as a stabilizing
influence,'' says Frank Vardi, a population analyst in the Department of City
Planning. ''And we will probably never see the kind of ethnic concentration that
we saw earlier in this century.  Chinese will live in Bay Ridge, but they will
have to compete with the Greeks for housing. You see Flushing very visibly
Asian, but there are many other ethnic groups as well. The days of the Chinatown
are gone.''

But the insecurities remain, many of them financial. Some of the Indochinese
refugees borrowed money to escape from Vietnam and they work long hours or hold
two jobs as they strugge to repay their debts.

Dr. Le was determined not to take the public assistance he and his family needed
during the time he was studying for his qualifying exams. ''Then I was told of
the income tax,'' he says. ''Now I know I will pay it back so I will take it.
But I prefer to use my own money.''

''Financial security is very important,'' says Mr. Song, ''and the future for
our children.'' The two are intertwined.  Many Asian parents say they have saved
to buy a home in Queens, where they feel that their family will be safer, have
more contact with other Asian children, and will be able to attend bilingual
classes in some of the schools. Some even pay for their houses in cash because,
as Mr. Wang says, ''they come in with their lifetime savings and do not want to
spend it on interest.'' They are concerned, they say, not that their children
will become Americanized, but that they will become simply bad people.

A Student's View

And their children sometimes think that their parents are oldfashioned.
''American parents, if their children want to do things, they won't stop them,''
maintains George Hua, a 16-year-old student at Bayside High School who has lived
in America for less than a year. ''But Chinese parents always want you to do the
right thing.''

Mrs. Lee adds: ''Here is freedom. Parents are worried about free dating and free
choice of partner. We are trying to educate the children, before any decision
they must consult their parents.''

But as George and his friends, all in the current uniform of Tshirt, jeans and
sneakers, make their way down Main Street they look like any other teen-agers,
and Mrs. Lee and others admit that Asian parents will have some of the same
problems that other immigrants had.

''All immigrants face the same experience, I suppose,'' says Chaiman Kim,
executive director of the Korean Community Services Center. ''The first
immigrants still observe the festivals, the costumes. The first generation will
change very little. And when the second generation begins to change they will be
unhappy. It happens everywhere.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of children at Asia Education Welfare Inc photo of
Oriental shops

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ENERGY ISSUE FUELS HOUSE RACE IN FAIRFIELD

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. MADDEN

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: STAMFORD, Conn., Aug. 24


Those who like to hear about the energy issue should love the Congressional
campaign in this Fairfield County area, where a combative gasoline station owner
is battling the designer of an atomic bomb to run against an entrenched
Representative who helped write recent Federal legislation to develop synthetic
fuels.

The two Democratic contenders in the Sept. 9 primary election for their party's
nomination in the Fourth Congressional District, which extends from Greenwich to
Bridgeport, are trying hard to avoid being regarded as single-issue candidates,
but it is difficult.

Wayne Konitshek, a 32-year-old Vietnam War veteran who won the endorsement of
the Democratic district nominating convention last month, owns an Exxon station
in Stamford and a Chrysler dealership and is president of the state Gasoline
Retailers Association. The association won enactment of a state law last year
barring the major oil companies from owning their own retail stations in
Connecticut.

His challenger is John Aristotle Phillips of Norwalk, who gained national
attention three years ago, when, as a Princeton University physics student, he
designed an atomic bomb to demonstrate the dangers of nuclear proliferation.

Uphill Against Incumbent

Mr. Phillips, who yesterday turned 25, the minimum age to be a Representative,
founded last year the Fund for Secure Energy, a nonprofit organization to
promote public support for alternative energy sources.

Despite a slight Democratic edge in registration in the district, one of the
wealthiest in the nation, the primary winner will face an uphill battle against
Representative Stewart B. McKinney of Fairfield, a 49-year-old Republican
running for a sixth term. Mr.  McKinney, the only Republican Representative from
Connecticut, is cochairman of the New England Congressional Caucus's energy task
force.

''These two guys are going around making themselves out to be more than
one-issue candidates, but they come back to energy,'' a McKinney aide said of
the Democratic contenders.

But while energy may be a focus for all three candidates, they go different
directions in advocating solutions to the problem.

Favors Gas Price Control

Mr. Konitshek assails the big oil companies and says Congress should reimpose
controls on fuel prices. He says he is the only one of the three who has opposed
decontrol of prices.

Mr. Phillips puts the emphasis on more efficient use of available energy sources
and seeks incentives for solar energy and other renewable energy resources. His
literature says the recently enacted synthetic fuels program is ''an unnecessary
corporate subsidy for an undersirable and economically risky technology.''

Mr. McKinney, in a newsletter being mailed to consituents this week, says the
$20 billion synthetic fuels program stemmed from a bill he introduced 16 months
earlier and says its 10-year goal is to produce synthetics equivalent to 2
million barrels of oil a day to help the nation achieve energy independence.

The problem for both Democrats is to get the message to the voters that there
will be a party primary election on Sept. 9. Mr. Phillips has sought to debate
Mr. Konitshek, but Mr. Konitshek says that since he is the party-endorsed
candidate he has to concentrate on running against Mr. McKinney.

'Enough Is Enough'

Mr. Konitshek, in turn, wants to debate Mr. McKinney, but the Republican
incumbent is studiously ignoring both Democrats until after the nomination is
decided.

Appearing before a state labor group in New Haven, Mr. Phillips said he had put
together ''the best organized campaign this district has seen in a decade.'' He
is said to have raised $61,000 so far, compared with about $40,000 by Mr.
Konitshek.

Mr. Phillips also has issued over the last few months a series of lengthy
position papers on such subjects as health care, problems of the elderly,
housing and foreign policy, in addition to a 31-page paper on New England's
energy future. ''New Energy for the Eighties'' is the inscription on his buttons
and posters.

Mr. Konitshek told the same labor group that his campaign was going well. ''I've
been working all my life and I see what's happening to the little people,'' he
said. ''This is the year Washington has got to learn that enough is enough.''

Mr. Phllips acknowledged at one point that one of his polls showed that district
voters had the following assessment of Mr. McKinney: ''The liberals think he's
liberal. The moderates think he is a moderate. The conservatives think he's very
conservative.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Wayne Konitshek photo of John A. Phillips map
of Connecticut

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Books

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


Civil War 'Apocalypse' By Herbert Mitgang
SHERMAN'S MARCH. By Burke Davis. Il- lustrated. 335 pages. Random House.
$12.95.

THERE is a scene in ''Apocalpyse Now'' in which the gung-ho colonel in the
cavalry trooper's hat (''I love the smell of napalm in the morning'') proudly
places calling cards from the First Air Cavalry Division on the bodies of
Vietnamese villagers killed by his helicopter outfit. The gesture seems
outrageous and theatrical, but a similar true-life incident occurred on American
soil during the Civil War.

In ''Sherman's March,'' a narrative of the campaign through Georgia and the
Carolinas, the Union cavalry commander, Gen. Hugh Kilpatrick, orders his
troopers to burn down everything in their way in South Carolina. If travelers in
the future ask who was responsible for the charred chimney stacks across the
Southern landscape, says the cavalryman proudly, he wants the answer to be
''Kilpatrick's cavalry.''

Popinjay Careerist

Burke Davis, author of solid biographies of Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson,
has created a true theatrical villain in General Kilpatrick, a cocky popinjay, a
hoopskirt chaser and a glory-seeking careerist. Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman
called his cavalry chief ''a hell of a damn fool.'' Yet he chose Kilpatrick to
be at the cutting edge of the terror campaign because he was just the sort of
ruthless commander needed to win the war and teach the South a lesson. The
author makes the point that such a ''lesson,'' vengeance for seceding from the
Union, was very much a part of the psychological warfare that Sherman conducted
from November 1864 to April 1865.

''Sherman's March'' is quite a story. How often it has been said in recent years
that Americans never could understand the horrors of war because they had never
been on the receiving end of warfare on their own grounds. We never had a Battle
of Britain or, for that matter, a napalm attack in the boondocks beyond Saigon.
But a book such as this one is a reminder that war once did rip across the
fields, factories and homes of hundreds of thousands of people, scarring their
land and psyches for generations.

Here was war, destruction and starvation without the romanticizing elements of
''Gone With the Wind.'' The military campaign through the South was no piece of
fiction or film art. What the book provides is a double view, North and South.
We see the hard brilliance of the Union commanders, led by Sherman himself in
the saddle, finally ending the notion that war was some sort of chivalric
adventure and that in the fury of combat fellow countrymen couldn't bayonet one
another. The other view is the effect of the killing and burning on civilians in
the Confederate States. These events serve to clarify attitudes about the
parochialism, even the distrust, that Northerners sense Georgians and other
Southerners sometimes still hold today.

At the center is General Sherman, mounted on his horse, puffing on a
half-lighted cigar, sloppily dressed, quite unlike the sterling figure in bronze
mounted on a pedestal between the Plaza Hotel and Central Park. He knows how to
feint his troops, to fight on the flanks and drive through the middle, to avoid
direct engagements wherever possible. The Confederates do not know where he will
turn up next; they dig into the cities while Sherman cuts through the
countryside of roads and swamps, carrying his own pontoon bridges.

Even Gen. Ulysses S. Grant and President Abraham Lincoln do not know the details
of Sherman's campaign except for his wild dream of going all the way from
Atlanta to Charleston on the coast and up through the Carolinas. It is
blitzkrieg toward his armed enemies and terror toward the unarmed Southerners.
His tactics have been studied ever since, for what Sherman did was bite the
bullet and engage in total warfare.

While the Army of the Potomac was cautious in battle under the likes of such
commanders as George McClellan, the Middle Westerners (218 regiments) plus
Easterners (33 regiments) first under Grant and then under Sherman were
hard-eyed veterans capable of delivering the killing blows without compunctions
through the heart of Dixie.

Peace Was Not His Profession

The rich details in Mr. Davis's book are bound to startle and inform even
students of Civil War literature. One regiment of white Alabama Unionists rode
with Sherman's cavalry, hill countrymen who owned no slaves and refused to side
with the plantation owners.  Another telling fact: Sherman studied the census
reports of farm production county by county so that he could lead his troops
through the regions richest in provisions to feed his forces. There was pillage
and looting on both sides. The author notes, ''The universality of the impulse
to vandalism was to become familiar to Americans in generations to come.''

''Sherman's March'' ends with an irony. Although he knew how to win the war, he
was outgeneraled in writing the terms of the truce. In the view of his superiors
in Washington, he had conceded too much and was too generous, more so than Grant
with Lee at Appomattox. He had not sufficiently taken into account the abolition
of slavery and the aspirations of the Negroes. Like many another warrior, peace
was not his profession.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Gen. William T. Sherman

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 26, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JURY SELECTION BEGINS IN THE CASE OF MARINE ACCUSED OF DERSETION, N.C.,

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 310 words


Aug. 25 (AP) - Jury selection began today in the court-martial of Pfc. Robert R.
Garwood of the Marines after he entered a formal plea of not guilty to charges
that he deserted and collaborated with the enemy in nearly 14 years in Vietnam.

''Your honor, I plead not guilty to all charges and specifications,'' the
34-year-old Private Garwood, standing straightbacked, told Col. R.E. Switzer,
the military judge.

If found guilty, the first Vietnam-era soldier to be tried on such charges could
be sentenced to life imprisonment.  The case has stretched over more than a
year, with military investigations beginning when the marine returned to the
United States in March 1979 and court proceedings beginning last December.
Defense attorneys have said they may call as many as 130 witnesses, and the case
is expected to last for at least two months.

As the panel selection got under way, the first group of prospective jurors came
into the courtroom to be questioned by the judge and lawyers from both sides.

In the first round of questions, potential jurors were asked if they recognized
any names on the defense witness list. The list contained the name of Richard I.
Queen, apparently the American recently released after being held hostage at the
United States Embassy in Teheran, Iran.

There were no clues as to what role he might play, but Private Garwood's lawyers
have indicated they will base part of the defense on the reactions of prisoners
under duress and coercion.

The jury will consist of at least five officers. The first pool of prospective
jurors consisted of 10 officers.  None of the 10 prospective jurors is now in a
combat-oriented job, but several have combat experience. Their ranks ranged from
first lieutenant to colonel, and lawyers began the selection process by asking
them about their backgrounds and knowledge of the case.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 26, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FORCES IN CONFLICT AT THE DEMOCRATIC CONVENTION

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 656 words


To the Editor:

A conflict between two powerful American establishments was once again acted out
at the national Democratic Party convention. We may call one of these
establishments Government I, which is the very prominent government of elected
officials that we all see. The other establishment, Government II, is the
defense/foreign policy bureaucracy in Washington which remains in power while
Republicans and Democrats come and go. Its leaders are a group of safe-seat
senators and representatives, foreign policy experts of the balance-ofpower
persuasion, military officers, plus businessmen and labor leaders whose jobs are
dependent on the Pentagon.

Government I has to win elections, and therefore makes promises about solving
domestic social and economic problems. Senator Kennedy was its main
representative at the Democratic convention and the delegates -only faintly
aware of the demands of Government II - cheered him lustily.

Government II, by contrast, inhabits a world of machtpolitik which, its leaders
fervently believe, deals with subjects too important to be entrusted to the
vagaries of elections and party politics.  Government II leaders, in fact, have
succeeded over the past generation in getting almost all U.S. foreign policy
issues stated in terms of military calculations based on a deep and permanent
anti-Communist philosophy. The arms race, which has become Government II's
all-consuming passion, is based on the frequently-stated fear that ''they'' will
''get us'' - a fear that has by now become almost a characteristic of the
American psyche.

Governments I and II are both nominally responsible to the President, and
Presidents must sometimes make hard choices between them, as when President
Carter sided with Zbigniew Brzezinski (who tells the President every morning at
about 7 A.M. how the world looks to him) against Secretary of State Cyrus Vance.
Earlier, the Vietnam War was a Government II project which the true believers in
Government II became convinced had to be fought whether the American people
liked it or not. In the 1950's and 1960's the political careers of Harry Truman,
Lyndon Johnson - and perhaps Hubert Humphrey - were terminated because they
could not adequately explain the policies of Government II to the voters of
Government I.

At the Democratic convention, President Carter had to broker the claims of
Governments I and II, and he was at a clear disadvantage compared to Senator
Kennedy. The President had already acceded to Government II's demand that he
help it soften up American opinion for fighting a nuclear war by endorsing
Government II's counterforce strategy for nuclear weapons. He must also have
been painfully aware - at least in general terms - that 60 percent of the funds
available to Congress this year for relatively controllable expenditures are
already earmarked for military purposes, as reported in the January budget
supplement of The New York Times.

Having failed during his first term to establish the priorities for which he
campaigned in 1976, this time Jimmy Carter rejected in advance the priorities
contained in his party's platform and sought to comfort the delegates by
reminding them that Ronald Reagan would give even higher priority to the arms
race.

The 1980 Democratic convention made it clearer than ever before that until we
get a President who is willing and able to (1) challenge Government II on its
own turf, (2) re-assert civilian priorities over the demands for nuclear war
that emanate from Government II, (3) reach out to the Soviet leaders as
Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy both started to do and (4) talk about world
order, the need to strengthen the United Nations and de-commission nuclear
weapons, the American ''malaise'' that Jimmy Carter once complained about will
continue to sap our nation's self-confidence.
ROBERT W. STEVENS, Professor of Economics, Roosevelt University, Chicago, Aug.
15, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 26, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

STILL MAN OF THE 60'S

BYLINE: By David Marc Kleinman

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 774 words


It is taken as a sign of maturity these days when the children of the 60's
denounce their past. In the process, they have become the good bureaucrats,
account executives, salesmen, entrepreneurs, middle managers, lawyers and
financiers who now see in that earlier period unqualified confusion even though
they may have found meaning in their beatific visions then.

They talk about their buckskin jackets, tie-dyed shirts and old recordings as
relics of the bygone age, surrendered finally with little remorse; about the
prayer shawls and beads now outdated; about the infantilism of radical politics;
about the mirage, sexual or otherwise, that they once took to be the proof of
the pudding of alternative styles of life. All this, they now say, is no more
than the mindless residue of what was in fact a manic, collectively extended
adolescence, a mass delusion that they blush to remember as having been real.

Well, for them perhaps it wasn't. But that doesn't mean it was a pose for
everyone. Some of the more embattled dreamers cracked up along the way and were
never heard from again. Some still belong to communes in Tennessee. Some live on
ashrams and in the backwoods of Vermont or Maine. Some are mountain hermits in
the Colorado Rockies.  Not all of the bearded wonders shaved and went into their
daddies' businesses. Not all of them went back to law school or got their
M.B.A's. Not all of them carry briefcases. Not everything is strictly status
quo.

These new nullifiers of the 60's are virtually assured of a wide audience.
Almost everyone is flattered when the part of the past they did not understand
or failed to live up to is dismissed as pretension.

For many, however, the 60's is neither a longed-for part of the past nor a
period they want recreated in the future, but simply a time genuinely
characterized by a frenetic idealistic drive, however callow, to see the social
and political worlds changed.

For some, this zeal hardened into narcissism, the crass egotism of the ''me
decade.'' It has run the gamut from California hot tubs and EST to defenses of
capitalism and free enterprise that are vehement enough to credit current
conceits that the 60's did not in fact even exist.

But for others the moral passion that marched on Washington and later helped end
the Vietnam War is no casual distinction. It is part of a wider, still-present
appetite for individual integrity and change. The 60's produced its share of
anomalies and effigies but it should not be so blandly homogenized now. Not all
of its manifestations were healthy, but neither were they all fads.

There are contradictions beneath the facade of any age. Much of the
countercultural combustion of the 1960's was only steam. Some who began by doing
their own thing concluded with nothing to do. Drugs that supposedly produced
euphoria or revelation did not foster insight so much as make it unnecessary.
The apparent insouciance of free love and sex was often studied, so neither
carefree nor uplifting. And radical politicking was not infrequently
self-serving and inane.

But for me the 60's did happen. I played music then. I was 17 in 1968. I dropped
out of school. I lived in the country. I went back to college, but didn't
graduate until 1976. I am almost 30. I got a haircut. But although I have tried
to adjust to the unavoidable verities, I am the same Don Quixote now that I was
then. More organized, no doubt, surer of myself and my place in the world. But
at bottom there is the same drive, the same questioning spirit, the same passion
for authentic life that is impossible to overlook when considering the 60's.

I assume it is this way for many, even though the circumstances have changed.
The 1980's do not belong entirely to the discos and the joggers; to the Milton
Friedmans and the Bunker Hunts; to the socalled realists; nor to those whose
idealism is relegated thoroughly to the exercise obtainable on custom roller
skates.

Not everything about those earlier days will be so easily dismissed. Somehow it
seems mean-spirited to discount the 60's in one lump sum. It is a distortion to
be so glib. The repertoire has been altered, but the best of the old songs,
along with the buckskin jackets, will keep.
David Marc Kleinman, former editor of The Empire State Investigator, a
police-union magazine, now writes primarily about the criminaljustice system.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 26, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

5 YEARS AFTER THE NOBEL: PORTRAIT OF A MAN OBSESSED WITH SCIENCE

BYLINE: By HAROLD M. SCHMECK Jr.

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1802 words


CAMBRIDGE, Mass.  THE picture on the screen, meaningless to a layman, looked
like a row of vertical ink blotches on a dirty gray sheet. To the dozen or so
young men and women clustered in the room, the blots were an unfinished mystery
story.

The patterns showed cloned mouse cells that should have been identical. In fact
they had grown into two genetically different populations. How? Why?

Orchestrating the discussion was a bearded man in his early 40's, smoking a
pipe, wearing metal-rimmed glasses, a dark red sport shirt and suntan pants. His
young colleagues addressed him as ''David.'' He is known to the world at large
as Dr. David Baltimore, American Cancer Society Professor of Microbiology at
M.I.T., co-winner of a Nobel Prize and one of the most brilliant and inventive
minds in modern American science.

As he and the young scientists tried to make sense of those mouse cells, Dr.
Baltimore's comments were sparse but telling, terminating one line of
investigation, encouraging another.

''I don't think it's going to be worthwhile to drive that into the ground,'' he
said at one point.  ''Good, very good,'' he said almost inaudibly at another.
One research worker said two specimens seemed to be identical.  ''No,'' Dr.
Baltimore said quickly, ''they are reversed.'' The meeting was informal,
conducted at lunchtime with sandwiches from paper bags. Excitement and
concentration seemed to wax and wane with the discussion.

Dr. Baltimore sat at the side, only occasionally asking a question or rising to
go to the chalkboard. But the speakers seemed to be directing their words as
much to him as to the rest of the group.

The young M.I.T. scientists were seeking ways to harness this particular paradox
- to make it reveal an underlying truth about the immune defense system of
humans and animals.

The cells were precursors of those that produce the diseasefighting substances
called antibodies. The experiments, still in progress, might explain something
important about the development of these indispensable cells.

Dr. Baltimore's research style and the way he imparts it to a new generation
reveal something of the creative genius of modern biology, something of the fire
that has kindled a revolution in human understanding of the chemistry of life on
earth.

''I think it's partly a habit of mind,'' he told a visitor. ''It involves a kind
of obsessiveness. Unless you are obsessed with scientific questions you are not
going to get anywhere with them.''

Also needed, he says, is a talent for thinking a logical train of experiments
through to its long-term consequences. The layman's perception is often that of
a scientist working doggedly, in lonely dedication, toward some distant goal.
The reality, Dr. Baltimore says, is that a scientist must learn to find the path
of least resistance through a maze of scientific unknowns, choosing the
experiments that are ripe to be done, even backing off from a tough problem
until some new insight or new technique softens it up.

He once backed off from an impasse in virus research for 17 years and then
picked it up again when a new development made the question ripe for solving.
The lapse had continued to bother him over the years until he ended it.

Brilliance in scientific research is not a simple talent, nor is it simply
explained. The obsessive urge to find answers is clearly a part of it, as is the
talent for choosing the right questions. Dr.  Baltimore says he wakes up in the
morning thinking - and assumes everyone else does, too. There were times in his
early career, notably at Rockefeller University, when his waking hours were
science and nothing but science; meals were the only breaks in the work, and
even these functioned as opportunities to discuss science with colleagues.

A Compulsion to Protest

Once in the Vietnam War years he halted important research for a week in protest
against the invasion of Cambodia, all the while feeling the compulsion to make
the protest but also the agony over the delay in his experiments.

The ability to devise fruitful experiments is largely a learned talent, he says,
that can be passed on to students. The meeting of his laboratory group showed
that process at work.

Today Dr. Baltimore's creative role is mainly that of a catalyst, directing
research rather than doing it himself. But his talents and style put an imprint
on the work. He is a man of great energy and, some of his students say, a
library of valuable information on many aspects of molecular biology.

His current obsessions embrace some of the key fields in molecular biology:
study of how viruses reproduce and how some of them transform normal cells to a
state like cancer; study of immunology, the internal defense system that tells
friend from foe and fights back against invasion by germs and other intruders in
the living body.

Central to much of the work is the sometimes controversial recombinant DNA
technology. With it, scientists can make limitless copies of the pieces of
deoxyribonucleic acid that serve as the genes of all forms of life; can snip and
splice and rearrange genes from any species; can combine genetic material from
man and mouse, and can grow human genes in bacteria.

Mathematics Came Easy

Dr. Baltimore was introduced to the real obsessions of science as a high school
student in the middle 1950's. Mathematics and related fields came easy to him,
he recalls, but fascination began to germinate at a summer session for high
school students at the Jackson Laboratory in Bar Harbor, Me. The young visitors
to the famous laboratory listened to lectures, did some research projects and
discussed biology with experts.

Although Dr. Baltimore did not decide on a career in science until he was about
halfway through his undergraduate studies at Swarthmore College, he now
recognizes the Jackson laboratory experience as a key determinant.

The person he remembers as the ''guru'' of his group was Howard M.  Temin, now
of the McArdle Laboratory at the University of Wisconsin.  The two never worked
together after that summer. Neither had more than a passing knowledge of what
the other was up to as their careers evolved in the next decade and a half.
Their habits of mind, or at least their scientific styles, grew to be far
different.

Yet, in one of the ironies of modern science, their research paths converged
until, in 1970, they each, independently and unknown to the other, did almost
the same experiments with viruses and thereby demolished what many considered a
central dogma of modern molecular biology. Five years later they and Dr. Renato
Dulbecco, one of the towering figures of modern biology, were awarded the Nobel
Prize.

Looking Like Dr. Ehrlich

A photograph of Dr. Baltimore shaking hands with the King of Sweden at the Nobel
Prize ceremonies that fall shows the young American scientist dressed in formal
costume and looking a little like Paul Muni playing Dr. Paul Ehrlich in the
1930's movie ''Dr. Ehrlich's Magic Bullet.'' The film was made approximately the
year Dr.  Baltimore was born.

In the research cited by the Nobel committee, Drs. Temin and Baltimore had
identified a special class of enzymes through which certain viruses could
subvert the genetic machinery of the cells they infected.

The two closely related master chemicals of heredity are DNA and ribonucleic
acid (RNA). The arrangement of chemical subunits in the DNA serves as the
genetic code spelling out each message of heredity. One of the key functions of
RNA is to form a copy of the DNA and use this as the blueprint for the
production of the specific protein coded for by the gene.

It had been almost universally assumed that the flow of information was always
from a nucleic acid to protein. Some thought it always from DNA to RNA to
protein. That concept left scientists puzzled over the ability of some of the
viruses that contained RNA instead of DNA to transform the very nature of the
cells they infected - to make them cancerous. Somehow, they reasoned, the virus
RNA must be leaving its message permanently in the DNA of the infected cell.

The discovery of the enzymes now known as reverse transcriptases solved that
puzzle.  Such an enzyme was found by Dr. Tamin in a virus that causes cancer in
chickens. Dr. Baltimore found his in a virus that causes leukemia in mice. It
soon became clear that RNA-containing viruses known to cause cancer in animals
had these subversive enzymes while other viruses did not. Their existence,
denied on theoretical grounds for years, proved to be a general phenomenon.
Students since then have confirmed its profound importance.

On Predicting Creativity

Working closely with about 20 younger scientists today, Dr.  Baltimore says he
can see in some of them the possibility of creative greatness, although he adds
quickly that creativity really defies prediction. Some scientists plug along for
decades, then abruptly blossom into brilliant productivity. Others, seemingly
racing ahead in the throes of genius, suddenly fade and lose the fire. Some
concentrate narrowly. Others leap at creative opportunity where they perceive
it.

Dr. Baltimore likes to be in the competitive forefront of a field and does not
leave when the field becomes crowded with research workers following the current
fashion. He has sometimes been criticized for his zeal in leaping into highly
active fields.

The scientist credits association with many brilliant workers for helping shape
his talents. Notable among these has been Dr. Alice Huang, a microbiolgist at
Harvard Medical School, an early collaborator on virus research and now his
wife.

About six months after he had joined the laboratory of Richard Franklin at
Rockefeller Institute (now University) in the early 1960's, he was doing
significant work at the forefront of the science of that day. He says he does
not know just how this happened, except that he was always allowed to follow his
own creative path.

But there were older scientists at that time too who could see talent for
creativity taking shape.  ''There are times in the development of a field of
knowledge when the ground for the next major development is laid,'' said Dr.
Igor Tamm of Rockefeller on an important occasion in 1964.

''David's teachers and associates have all been impressed with his broad grasp
of concepts and the integrative quality of his mind,'' he continued. ''I
therefore think that David has ample qualifications not only for a productive
life in research, but also for a rewarding life in teaching. I expect that his
lively interests in science will fire enthusiam in others; that his insights
will illuminate many.''

The occasion was the presentation of David Baltimore for the Ph.D.  degree, at
the beginning of a creative career whose dimensions are still unfolding.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo (page C2) Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 27, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN CAMPAIGN PROBLEMS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Aug. 26


Perhaps the turn in Ronald Reagan's luck and in the momentum of his campaign was
his speech before the Veterans of Foreign Wars in which he declared the Vietnam
war ''a noble cause.''

As with other issues in the bumpy week since the Republican Presidential nominee
gave that speech in Chicago, staff members were at odds over how to handle the
speech.

''There were some differences,'' recalled a Reagan political adviser. ''I would
like to have seen a softer speech. Others wanted a harder speech.'' In the end,
the candidate himself called the shot - a hard-line call that led to
controversy. ''It was his speech all the way,'' the adviser concluded.

That set a pattern that has prevailed until now: apparently shaky staff work,
Mr. Reagan plunging ahead on instinct and making strong statements that provided
ammunition for his critics.

Tough Military Views

The ''noble cause'' speech was followed by an address to another veterans group
that focused further attention on Mr. Reagan's tough military views.

Then there were his remarks to evangelical Christians in Dallas that left him
open to charges of indifference to the constitutional principle of separation of
church and state. That coincided with the protracted dispute over his China
policy. It culminated yesterday with Mr. Reagan's backing down on his early
remarks supporting ''official relations'' with Taiwan, all the while insisting
that his position had not changed.

It would be an overstatement to say that this is a campaign in disarray. But it
is a campaign that has been jolted by events and that seems to have some basic
organizational defects, with the election slightly more than two months away.

Some Work Slipshod

Senior aides acknowledge that the advance work on major campaign events has been
slipshod. Also, the speech-writing operation, based in Washington, has not shown
itself up to the task assigned it: producing up to three major new issue
speeches a week. One of the reasons that Mr. Reagan's ''peace through strength''
speeches to two veterans groups made him look more bellicose than he probably
is, according to a close adviser, is that the speeches came out in such a way
that they were ''heavily canted to the strength side.''

But there is some question as to how much direction or help Mr.  Reagan wants
from speech writers. The candidate personally inserted the ''noble cause'' line
that diverted attention from the more thoughtful portions of his speech to the
Veterans of Foreign Wars.

Such problems are small, however, compared with that posed by Mr.  Reagan's
statement on Taiwan and the trip that his running mate, George Bush, made to
China last week. After Mr. Reagan's recent slip in the Gallup Poll to a virtual
dead heat with President Carter, his tacticians wanted to use the China trip, as
one put it, to focus ''attention back on what we think is the major issue, which
is Carter and his competence.''

Candidate on the Defensive

Instead, critics were able to question Mr. Reagan's competence to deal with the
Chinese or, for that matter, to control his own running mate. The fact that Mr.
Bush in China and Mr. Reagan in the United States were saying contrasting things
about the ticket's policy on Taiwan suddenly put Mr. Reagan on the defensive.
And that is a serious matter, considering the Reagan campaign's dictum that the
key to victory is to stay off the defensive and prevent Mr. Reagan's personality
and statements from becoming an issue.

At his news conference yesterday, Mr. Reagan labored to get back on the
offensive. ''I think the issue is not how I feel about Taiwan,'' he said. ''The
issue today is the Carter foreign policy and what it is doing to our allies and
to the United States' position in the world.''

One senior campaign official said today that Mr. Reagan's insistence on
restating his views on what he considers matters of principle, such as the
treatment of Taiwan or the Vietnam War, might be personally admirable but was
politically unwise and distracting.  But he said that there was one minor
consolation: Mr. Reagan's statements on those issues appeared to have pleased
and reassured his most conservative supporters for whom the choice of Mr. Bush
had been a disappointment.

News Conferences Limited

Mr. Reagan's tendency to make strong statements about sensitive subjects has got
him into political trouble before. Lyn Nofziger, the press secretary, has tried
to curb this tendency by instituting a policy of only one or two news
conferences a week. But apparently no one is trying to tone down Mr. Reagan's
rhetoric and probably for good reason. ''Nobody can reshape Ronald Reagan;
that's what happened to John Sears,'' said a key adviser, referring to the
campaign director who was dismissed by Mr. Reagan months ago.

So the cadre of loyal Californians who increasingly control the campaign have
let Mr. Reagan have his say in speeches and press conferences.

''He does have a difficulty in being disciplined in what he says,'' Mr. Sears
said in an interview before the controversy over Taiwan.This takes the form, he
said, of ''opining in public, throwing things out and drawing them back,'' as
Mr. Reagan did on his proposal for ''official relations'' with Taiwan. ''But if
you do that often enough,'' Mr. Sears said, ''it does give you the reputation of
not knowing what you're talking about.''

As Mr. Carter moves to the attack, Mr. Sears went on, it becomes more important
for Mr. Reagan to put forth a reasoned picture of how he would govern. ''If you
don't do that, you can find yourself explaining every day why you're not an
idiot,'' Mr. Sears said.  ''He's got some work left to do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 27, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S NOBLE CAUSE'

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 101 words


To the Editor:

If Ronald Reagan believes our Vietnam intervention was ''a noble cause,'' he can
have no logical objection to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

In both cases, a puppet dictator, placed in office by the superpower, officially
requested military help from the superpower to subdue subversive elements. Like
Mr. Reagan, the average Russian superpatriot must regard his country's
intervention as ''a noble cause,'' and since Afghanistan, unlike Vietnam,
borders the interventionist power, the Russian may have a shade more logic on
his side.
I.N. WOLFSON, Worcester, Mass., Aug. 18, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
Prosecutor Requests Data on Mrs. Harris

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 619 words


WHITE PLAINS (AP) - The Westchester County District Attorney has asked for
psychiatric reports on Jean S. Harris, the woman accused of murdering Dr. Herman
Tarnower last March 10. In motions filed in State Supreme Court, he also asked
for blood samples, to compare them with those found at the murder scene.

The prosecution is still seeking a letter the 58-year-old woman wrote to Dr.
Tarnower the day before she drove to his home in Purchase and allegedly shot and
killed him.

Both sides believe that the letter may shed some light on Mrs.  Harris's state
of mind on the day the 69-year-old doctor, a longtime companion of hers, was
killed. But the defense contends the letter is a privileged communication
between attorney and client.

Five Vietnamese Deported to Canada

BUFFALO (AP) - Five members of a Vietnamese family who illegally entered the
United States have been deported to Canada.  Chihue Truong, 18 years old, and
his sisters Tuyen, 20; Binh, 27; Nu, 24; and My, 19, were arrested last Thursday
after slipping across the border at Chateaugay, N.Y. The five had been living in
Montreal as landed immigrants since they left Can Tho, Vietnam, over a year ago.

They were driven to the border at the Peace Bridge on Tuesday and turned over to
Canada.

Jail Escapee Found

DENVILLE, N.J., (AP) - One of four inmates who escaped from the Bergen County
Jail in Hackensack was found Tuesday night at St.  Clare's Hospital. Two others
who escaped Sunday night were still being sought, the fourth man had already
been captured.

Dennis Priester, 29 years old, of Ridgewood, checked into the hospital Monday
under another name, according to Larry Stern, a hospital spokesman. Mr. Priester
underwent surgery for a ruptured spleen and was listed in critical condition
yesterday, Mr. Stern said. The inmate was apparently injured during the escape.

Jersey Imposes Rules On Boarding Homes

TRENTON - Regulations designed to improve living conditions in more than 2,000
boarding homes, many of which house mental patients released from state
hospitals, went into effect yesterday.

The rules were drawn up under a law signed by Governor Byrne in February. The
Commissioner of Community Affairs, Joseph A. Le Fante, said the law, which
requires the homes to be licensed for the first time and to submit to annual
inspections, ''will preserve the residents' civil rights, protect them from
physical and mental abuse and require the operators to provide personal and
financial services and adequate nutrition.''

There have been several fatal fires in these homes in recent years. The most
recent occurred this summer at the Brinley Inn in Bradley Beach, where 24 people
died.

Under the rules, places such as the Brinley will have to install sprinklers and
fire-retardant doors. Homes with fewer guests will be required to have at least
smoke detectors, and in homes where the guests live on the second floor or
higher the stairway will have to be enclosed and have a fire partition.

WOR-TV Transfer To Jersey Proposed

WASHINGTON - Representative Andrew Maguire, a New Jersey Democrat, attached to a
House Commerce Committee bill a rider to transfer WOR-TV to New Jersey.

The provision, which was passed by a vote of 25 to 17, was added to a bill
concerning media cross-ownership and specifies that the next available VHF
station be assigned to New Jersey.

WOR, which is owned by R.K.O., is having its ownership challenged by the Federal
Communications Commission and could have its license revoked, thus becoming
eligible for transfer to New Jersey.

No bill on New Jersey television is pending in the Senate, and the outcome of
the House bill is uncertain, but a vote is expected today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GOAL OF WORKERS WORLD CANDIDATE IS TO SPREAD THE SOCIALIST MESSAGE

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


While the major party candidates for President argue about foreign policy and
which of them takes the sternest stance against Soviet aggression, a radically
different view is being espoused by another Presidential candidate.

Worldwide revolution is the answer to everyone's problems, according to Deirdre
Griswold, the candidate of the Workers World Party, and the Soviet Union
provides an invaluable, if imperfect, model. In the meantime, she says, she will
settle for a people's takeover of the oil companies in this country.

Miss Griswold, a 44-year-old Communist (''Communist, Socialist, Marxist-Leninist
- we consider them to be the same,'' she says), is sharing the Workers World
ticket with her Vice-Presidential running mate, Larry Holmes, a black activist.
Party spokesmen report that their ticket is on the ballot in a dozen states and
that they are petitioning for access in a few others.

Miss Griswold concedes that she is spectacularly unlikely to be elected
President of the United States, and that the Workers World Party comprises only
a few thousand followers nationwide, at most.  Her goal is to get their message
across to outsiders, she says.

Opposes Pentagon Policy

Miss Griswold offers opposition to what her party calls ''the Pentagon's war
drive'' (''The United States military-industrial complex is the greatest danger
to our security,'' asserts a party flyer); a call for people to fight back
against what the party sees as an economic crisis generated by the capitalist
profit system, and a demand for an end to various kinds of social oppression,
including racism, sexism and discrimination against homosexuals.

According to the party, people should take over the oil companies ''and run them
for human need and not for profit;'' take over nuclear plants and shut them
down, and take over plants closed by such corporations as Chrysler and reopen
them under the direction of workers' committees, aided by Federal financing.

Miss Griswold suggests that the American people vote in a public referendum on
''whether the oil companies should be owned by a handful of billionaires.'' She
also says there should be a ''moratorium on all evictions, foreclosures and
repossessions as long as people are unemployed.''

First Year in Race

This year is the first time the Workers World Party has mounted candidates for
public office. Besides Miss Griswold and Mr. Holmes, it is supporting Tom Soto,
a Puerto Rican activist, for the Senate from New York State; Lydia Bayoneta, a
Philippines-born activist, for the House in the 35th District in upstate New
York, and Preston Wood, an activist for homosexual rights, for the State
Assembly in the 64th District in Lower Manhattan.

A lifelong Socialist, Miss Griswold was one of the founders of the Workers World
Party in 1959, and has edited its weekly newspaper since 1971. Born in Buffalo,
she was the daughter of a steelworker whom she describes as a Socialist and a
militant trade unionist.

She dropped out of the University of Buffalo, where she was a philosophy major,
and has worked as a laboratory technician, a typesetter, a meatpacker, a
warehouse worker and in a variety of other jobs. Separated from her husband, she
lives with her 11-yearold daughter in Hoboken, N.J.

Miss Griswold has a long history of activism as a union member, as an opponent
of the Vietnam War and as a civil rights advocate. ''I've been arrested at least
eight times at demonstrations and sit-ins, including twice at House Un-American
Activities Committee hearings investigating the antiwar movement,'' she said.

She acknowledges that the United States, which has a relatively high standard of
living for a relatively large proportion of the population, might seem infertile
ground for Socialist ideology.

''But we don't see people's opinions as static and unchanging,'' she says. ''I
think poverty is much more widespread here than is generally admitted. We feel
that a consciousness among working people of their class interests is emerging
from this recession. In the oppressed communities - black, Hispanic, Asian,
Latin - there is not the kind of hysterical anti-Communism that is promulgated
as the official line of this country. Those communities are receptive to the
content of what we stand for.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Deirdre Griswold

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 28, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN, IN UNION TALK, SAYS CARTER 'HAS CREATED A SEVERE DEPRESSION'

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: COLUMBUS, Ohio, Aug. 27


In a hastily revised speech intended to shift the focus of his campaign from
foreign policy controversies to domestic issues, Ronald Reagan today declared
that President Carter ''has created a severe depression in our nation.''

But almost immediately after the address to the Ohio Teamsters Conference
meeting here, he and his aides began issuing clarifying statements insisting
that the Republican Presidential nominee was not using the word ''depression''
in the way that economists do. Mr.  Reagan's chief economic adviser, Martin
Anderson, acknowledged that most economists believe the nation is in ''a very
severe recession'' rather than a depression.

''I wouldn't have used that term,'' said Alan Greenspan, another Reagan economic
adviser.  Today's events continued the series of clarifications that the Reagan
campaign hoped to end with yesterday's news conference at which Mr. Reagan
conceded that he had made ''misstatements'' in proposing ''official relations''
between the United States and Taiwan.

Human Terms Stressed

Indications of poor planning that have also troubled the campaign were
heightened by two other events today. First, in his speech Mr.  Reagan
contradicted his host, Gov. James A. Rhodes of Ohio, on the cause of the
nation's economic problems. Then, the candidate met in a closed session with a
group that included some teamster officials who had been investigated for
alleged corruption.

''As far as I am concerned,'' Mr. Reagan said in a statement released after the
speech, ''the line between recession and depression cannot be measured in strict
economists' terms but must be measured in human terms.''

He said that to anyone out of work the nation was in a depression, and top aides
added that any confusion over his meaning was a problem of ''semantics.''

Roots of the Problem

The semantic problem had its roots in a meeting last night between Mr. Reagan
and Mr. Rhodes. The Ohio Governor is among a group of Middle-Western Republican
Governors who, after a private meeting tonight, said they strongly urged Mr.
Reagan to campaign on domestic economic issues. An Ohio official of the Reagan
campaign said that it was widely believed that Mr. Reagan had hurt his campaign
by ignoring bread-and-butter issues to focus on controversial statements about
Taiwan, the Vietnam War and evolution - issues that they say voters do not care
about unless they are pressed by politicians.

After the meeting with Mr. Rhodes, Reagan aides revised the teamsters speech,
which had already been released to reporters, to include a strong passage on
''the Carter depression.''

In his speech to 300 members of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters at
the Imperial Hotel, Mr. Reagan said that ''workers and their families today are
suffering more than at any time since the Great Depression of the 1930's. Their
lives have been shattered by a new depression - the Carter depression.'' Citing
unemployment figures, he added, ''The Carter depression was created and molded
by Carter himself.''

No Single Definition

Later, Mr. Anderson said that Mr. Reagan was not trying ''to lay down a
technical definition'' of a depression. And Lyn Nofziger, the press secretary,
said, ''I don't think anybody else can give you indicators that will show when
you have left a recession and are in a depression.''

There is no single, formally accepted definition of recession or depression, but
most economists designate as a recession a broad downturn in economic activity
that persists for six months or more.  Most of them define a depression as a
downturn that lasts longer - more than a year, most authorities would say - and
that is marked by an even sharper decline than in a recession.

In introducing Mr. Reagan to the teamsters, Governor Rhodes called oil imports
from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ''the cause of all the
troubles that we have in America today.'' But Mr. Reagan, in his remarks,
ridiculed the Carter Administration for attributing inflation to OPEC.

Friction in Organization

Apparently trying to catch himself, Mr. Reagan ad-libbed a line saying that Mr.
Rhodes was right in part, but then he added: ''OPEC didn't delay the Alaska
pipeline for years. OPEC hasn't delayed for years the completion of the nuclear
power plant in Seabrook, N.H.''

Afterward, Mr. Rhodes refused any credit for helping to shape Mr.  Reagan's
speech. ''No, no, no,'' he said brusquely. ''He has great speech writers.''

While there has been tension between Mr. Reagan and Mr. Rhodes, it has been
nothing compared with the friction within the Reagan organization in Ohio. It is
torn by factionalism, and much of the anger is aimed at the Reagan high command,
whose idea it was to label today's event, where Mr. Reagan received no
endorsement, the official kick-off of the fall campaign.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ronald Reagan

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TO UGANDANS, THE UNEXPECTED HAS BECOME ROUTINE;
The Talk of Kampala

BYLINE: By GREGORY JAYNES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 813 words

DATELINE: KAMPALA, Uganda


Even with the departure of Idi Amin this place remains bizarre. Some reasons
why: The Government, such as it is, gave the director of national broadcasting
24 television sets to distribute to key personnel, the theory being that
executives and technicians deserved to see the product. The sets never made it
into the right hands. The word is that they were sold instead.

The empty-handed technicians promptly retaliated against the country's single
network. The other evening, as a broadcaster tried to read the day's news, a
cleaning crew suddenly appeared on the screen, tidying up the news reader's desk
and taking down the map behind him. Small incidents of sabotage like this can be
seen any night.

There is a famine going on in the northeast, in the Karamoja district. The Save
the Children Fund, a British-run relief agency, hired an American helicopter
pilot, Van Smith, and his Bell 206 to ferry food and medicine to the area. Mr.
Smith, who served in the Marine Corps in Vietnam in 1968 and 1969, flew from
Kenya to the Ugandan town of Soroti not long ago.

His employers had obtained clearance for Mr. Smith to land from the director of
the Soroti Flying School, Capt. Don Lauzier. Captain Lauzier simply made a note
to himself, left it on his desk and went home. He did not tell the control tower
Mr. Smith would be landing and he did not tell the three batteries of soldiers
manning antiaircraft guns in the elephant grass by the landing strip.

As he approached the pilot heard the characteristic sound of weapons being
fired, something he had not heard since 1969, and managed to wrench his
helicopter out of harm's way. The maneuver damaged the helicopter, which is back
in Kenya for repairs. The pilot hasn't made up his mind about returning to
Uganda.

At times it seems like everyone has a gun and no one cares for human life. A
British aid worker, Kevin O'Dockerty, finds the attitude of the people more
astonishing than the heavy display of armament. ''You see a body and you say,
'How did this happen?' The attitude seems to be, 'Who cares, it's not my tribe,'
or 'Who cares, it's not my family,' or, 'Yes it is a member of my family and
that is regrettable,' '' says Mr. O'Dockerty.

The country's most ubiquitous sight is armed checkpoints. They make travel in
Uganda a terrifying experience. After driving across the border from Kenya the
Kenyans search the car, then the Ugandans search the car, then less than 200
yards into the country Tanzanian soldiers, who helped Ugandan exiles overthrow
the Amin dictatorship, search the car and demand cigarettes. Another 10 miles
and there is another roadblock, this time controlled by local militiamen.
Sometimes there is a piece of brush thrown into the road or a Coca-Cola bottle,
as a sign to the driver that a roadblock is up ahead. Failure to comprehend the
sign and slow down can result in death.

Approaching Karamoja one day last week Mr. O'Dockerty was stopped at a Ugandan
Army roadblock. ''I want food,'' the soldier said, sticking the barrel of his
automatic rifle into the window of the Land-Rover. ''I want your name,'' Mr.
O'Dockerty said. The two men repeated the same sentences, neither giving way,
until at last the soldier stepped back and allowed the relief worker to pass.

''That was stupid of me,'' Mr. O'Dockerty said later. ''It's just that I get so
bloody tired of the harassment. I've become an antagonist. Sometimes I start
wishing some mad colonel, 'Apocalypse Now' fashion, would come in here and clean
this country up.''

Some Ugandan voices: Omar Shariff is a Moslem who owns a building in Kampala
that contains 12 apartments. ''We will never get my country back the way it
was,'' he said. ''Corruption has gotten into the blood. You can't even get a
10-year-old boy to work or to study. He would rather steal cars.''

Ismail Ally is an air traffic controller. ''The country is explosive,'' he said.
''I keep thinking we are all going to blow up any minute.''

Luke Ruttagah is a jack-of-all-trades who grew up in a Seventh-day Adventist
mission and went on to study aeronautical engineering in Peking. He said: ''It
is my faith that keeps me going. No man can stand in the way of God's plan for
me. That is what I tell myself each time I come to a roadblock.''

Stephen Peter Nsubuga attends a technical school, where he is learning to be a
printer. ''My country makes me want to cry,'' he said.

The absurdities continue. A representative of a French oil company got a new
Peugeot 505 and beat it with a claw hammer to make it look less attractive to
thieves.

An American journalist walking in a Kampala street near dusk the other day saw a
teen-age boy trying to steal a car. A Ugandan policeman saw it, too. The
policeman shot and killed the boy.

''Why did you do that?'' the American asked.  The policeman said: ''We can't
have people ignoring law and order.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Tanzanian soldier

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WHO IS CAMBODIA?;
Who Is Cambodia?

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 421 words


An awkward question will arise again next month in the United Nations: Who gets
the chair labeled Cambodia? To Americans, both contestants are objectionable.
The representative of Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge retained the seat last September
even though Pol Pot had been deposed and his government had been revealed as
monstrous. Yet most nations refused to seat his successors, the Cambodians
installed in Phnom Penh by Vietnam. Although it never directly recognized Pol
Pot's regime, the United States voted with the majority so as not to sanction
the invasion of 1978-79.

Nothing has changed, but it is time for at least a slight change in the American
posture. To keep championing Pol Pot's murderous gangs, who control only a few
outposts in western Cambodia, would be a cynical betrayal of a ravaged people.
It may please China, Thailand and other enemies of Vietnam, who support this
desperate rear-guard faction with no concern for the welfare of Cambodians. But
that is not a proper standard for membership in the United Nations.

To shift sides altogether would be equally wrong. The present regime in Phnom
Penh, led by Heng Samrin, has done little to establish its independence of the
Vietnamese or to build a government of genuine reconciliation. It has hampered
the worldwide effort to relieve Cambodia's hunger, admitting food only when it
could be used also to enhance its own power.

The right answer at the United Nations, therefore, is abstention, to leave
Cambodia's seat conspicuously empty until a new regime can demonstrate a desire
and capacity to govern without foreign troops.

The majority of the governments at the United Nations are hardly fit to pass on
the humaneness or democratic legitimacy of another member. An institution that
counts the Ukraine as an independent state and

South Africa and Vietnam as representative of their inhabitants is reduced to
some pretty shaky definitions.  It can ask only that a regime be in effective
command of a designated country.  Even the puppet rulers installed by Vietnam
could rightly claim Cambodia's chair if they could manage to rule without an
alien army of occupation. That is the deal that should be offered them, and it
might, at least incidentally, evoke from them a greater concern for the plight
of their people.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS NATIONS AREN'T FRIENDS

BYLINE: Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: PARIS


One of Ronald Reagan's campaign pledges is to make sure the United States
remains the ''friend of our friends.'' A reader who is particularly angry with
France has written to ask what friendship between nations is really about. It is
a good question because the issue is one many people assume to be obvious, and
proceed to muddle hopelessly, even dangerously.

But it isn't at all obvious that governments, much less the societies for which
they speak, are - or even should be - capable of the kind of ties that bind
individuals. As Rolf Hochhuth put it, succinctly, in ''The Soldiers'': ''Men may
be linked in friendship.  Nations are linked only by interests.''

There is nothing cynical about this, providing ''interests'' are well understood
as far more than short-term convenience. They necessarily include universal
needs of environment, resources, health, security and basic national principles,
and even sentimental affinities bred by history, culture and ethnic kinships.

Sloppy confusion of this sort of warmth toward long-time allies with personal
loyalties isn't just bad judgment and bad policy, it is a cheat, inviting
disillusion and reckless reaction. In effect, it is a demagogic way of trying to
mobilize support for politics of power that is otherwise hard to justify.

What is to be the test of national ''friendship''? Is it blind endorsement of
all acts, undiscerning support for every policy however misguided or outrageous,
so long as it is mutual? The United States doesn't need that from others, only
hurts itself by asking for it, and shouldn't give it. Actually, friendship thus
defined amounts to no more than alliance with an ''enemy of our enemies'' and
anyone with a memory span of more than a few years must be aware of how
unreliable, shifting and deceptive that standard can be.

A little book by a man named Bernard Wagner came to my attention recently.
Entitled ''You See, My Dear,'' it dealt with the war in Vietnam, offering
fatherly advice to the angry, bewildered teen-agers of the late 1960's. It
explained painstakingly that while China was indeed a menace to Asia, the U.S.
could end the war safely by handing South Vietnam to Hanoi and getting Russia to
guarantee the unified country against the Chinese. Remember who was supposed to
be pushing the first domino?

Wagner's scenario turned out to be what actually happened, though not by
American design.In the process a lot of Southeast Asians as well as Americans
changed their ideas about who was the greater menace. Even the bloody Pol Pot -
who won power in Cambodia with Hanoi's help after the United States had brought
an unwinnable war into his country in a mad attempt to save friends in Saigon -
is now the beneficiary of U.S. support at the United Nations, and reasonably if
disagreeably so. The alternative would be to endorse Vietnam's conquest of
Cambodia and undermine the new relations with Peking.

Among individuals, friends are people you like and admire. Was that really what
linked the United States to the Shah of Iran? Will it link us to the Brazilian
Government, which is now enthusiastic about Ronald Reagan because it has taken
his pledge to mean that a Reagan White House would indulgently overlook any nice
little bombs produced under Brazil's nuclear program?

U.S. policy on China is a crucial factor in deteriorating relations with the
Soviet Union, and needs more sensitive handling if greater future damage to
American interests is to be avoided. But sound decisions can't be made on the
basis of reasserting ''friendship for Taiwan,'' itself the result of U.S.
opposition to the Chinese revolution.

The idea that the people of one country can like or dislike the whole people of
another is a romantic fallacy. You can appreciate its food, enjoy its scenery,
deplore its climate, resent its manners, admire its music and literature,
condemn its government and policies of the moment - or the opposite, as taste
may move you. But any traveller without paralyzing preconceptions finds friendly
people and unpleasant people in every society.

The demonology of international relations, with greater and lesser Satans, is
for ayatollahs, not statesmen, and the notion of enduring, abstract
international friendships is simply the reverse of this dark concept.

A pretense of being ''a friend to friends'' is just another form of sheer
national egotism, no better morally and no more effective diplomatically than
its supposed opposite, a narrowly calculated search for quick advantage. Values
and enlightened self-interest aren't so contradictory in foreign policy.
Accepting their guidance, however, requires a lucid view of interests, including
cherished principles, a long-term understanding of the forces that move nations,
and a rejection of righteousness. The last may be the one thing personal
friendship and international relations need in common.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PORTIONS OF DEBATE ON SENATE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 4053 words


Following are excerpts from the transcript of a debate at The New York Times
yesterday among the four candidates for the Democratic nomination for United
States Senator from New York - Elizabeth Holtzman, John V. Lindsay, Bess Myerson
and John J. Santucci. The debate was moderated by William E. Farrell, The
Times's deputy metropolitan editor.

Q: We're going to ask you first to tell us what you think qualifies you to serve
in the United States Senate.  MISS HOLTZMAN: I've been in the House of
Representatives for seven and a half years. I know how the legislative system in
Congress and in the Senate works. I have myself gotten through tough
legislation.  I have a record of performance. I don't offer rhetoric, I offer a
record of performance. I don't offer promises, I offer action.

The Equal Rights Amendment, for example, would be - which is a major issue
between the two political parties - would not even be an issue today. E.R.A.
would be dead if it hadn't been for the legislation that I wrote, introduced,
shepherded through the House and the Senate, extending the ratification deadline
for the Equal Rights Amendment.

MR. LINDSAY: Well, I think experience counts. And I don't think that any
candidate for the Senate in any party can match the collection and variety of
experiences that I have had. Some of it's been very tough indeed.

If I'd gone straight from the House of Representatives, where I had a record of
production and achievement and getting results in the fields of housing, civil
rights, foreign policy, a number of other subjects, immigration law, Lindsay
legislation that was passed - if I'd gone straight to the House of
Representatives to the Senate I would have been a neophyte indeed. And I think
the 1980's are going to be tough and so dangerous that there's no time for
neophytes down in Washington. Four terms in the Congress, two years as executive
assistant to the Attorney General in law enforcement. Two terms as Mayor of New
York.

MISS MYERSON: I'd like to pick up in terms of my own career the time when I
entered government. And when I agreed to serve as Commissioner of Consumer
Affairs, I realized that I was taking on a department that had no strength, no
mandate, no real power to do anything to relieve the frustration of the people,
really to protect the consumer.

I took on that task and I decided what the department needed was a tough
legislation. And I wrote and got passed through a City Council unanimously the
toughest piece of consumer protection legislation that existed in the country.
Having a unanimous vote in that City Council on that legislation was a great
compliment. And as a result of that legislation I was able to write the kind of
laws, seven laws and regulations, that would protect the consumer and that would
not threaten business.

MR. SANTUCCI: I seek the office based on qualifications that I have that I think
are unique among the four of us. No. 1, I've had 23 years of public service.
I've been a success at those jobs that I've had. I've worked well as an
administrator of a major district attorney's office.

But more importantly, I think I can represent a nonexistent lobby in Washington.
And that's the lobby of the people, particularly the middle class and poor
people in this country who are getting short shrift. You can walk through
Bed-Stuy, you can walk through Williamsburg and you can feel sympathy and
compassion, but when you live with it and you see the deterioration and it's
there every single day, and you know you're being taxed to death as a member of
middleclass America and your money is not going where it's supposed to go, it
hurts twice.

Q: Mr. Lindsay, could you take your opponents one by one and assess their
qualifications - their weaknesses, if you will - as a candidate, as a possible
Senator. And I wonder if you'd go so far as to say that any of them are
unqualified?

MR. LINDSAY: Oh, I don't think so.  MISS MYERSON: We're all qualified.  Miss
Holtzman has been a good Congresswoman. And there of course, I only think of one
thing. I think the putting together of coalitions and making friends is going to
be essential for this Senate and for the representatives from New York State.

On one issue where, for example, the issue of voting against waste rather than
against, for example, the defense budget, is something, of course, not only
where I disagree in methods but I wonder there whether or not Miss Holtzman can
be effective. You are one of a very small minority all the time.

MR. SANTUCCI: Miss Holtzman will go about the state saying that she believes in
jobs and jobs are the thing we need the most, and I agree with that. But then I
see that she votes against military spending, she votes against appropriations.
And I ask you, as a very practical matter, how do you get jobs when you vote
against the very things that pay the bills for the jobs? It's a matter of
practical politics that if you vote for an appropriation your state may get some
of the defense contracts.

She talks about waste, and the only waste she opposes is waste in military
spending and waste in those programs that help industry thrive and move ahead
and create opportunities. On the other hand, she votes for every wasteful
program possible in the social area.

John Lindsay, who I think took a lot of unfair raps as Mayor - and that's
unfortunate, when you're in public office you do take some unfair raps - but I
do think by and large his administration is something he has to answer for.

My problem with Bess Myerson is this, that she has never held elective office.
Now I say that I am opposed to waste in government in any fashion, whether it be
a social program or it be a program aimed or geared to its industry. But at the
same time, I realize that you've got to trade off to get the things your state
needs and I'm willing to do that.

MISS HOLTZMAN: I must be doing really well to be attacked by everybody here! And
I think the polls show that. Let's go to the issue raised about qualifications,
and let's understand what the job of a U.S. Senator is. Part of that job tegrity
of our court system and, through that, preserving our constitutional liberties
and the constitutional rights that really have preserved this country's
democracy over close to 200 years.

I think that that requires independence of mind and also ability to understand
what qualities are needed to sit on the Supreme Court of the United States. I
think I could do that job.

Q: The other three are qualified, in your view?  MISS HOLTZMAN: I think they
have to be judged against this standard, and the people will make the decision
as to qualification.  I've also gotten legislation, I mean every bill that has
my name that's been enacted, had to be enacted by the Senate of the United
States as well as the House. I have worked with the Senate, I have gotten them
to go along with legislation.

MR. LINDSAY: One Senator pointed out to me not long ago that the quality of life
in New York City when I retired was better than it is now, there was less crime
then, the city was not as polarized.  They're scared to come to New York City
now because of that.

Every Mayor thinks that he's inherited a disaster. God knows I did, with the
subway strike and a budget crisis that was unbelievable.  Mr. Santucci, crime in
this city is at an all-time high. They are snatching necklaces, grabbing
pocketbooks, you cannot ride the subways in Queens without fear. You're talking
about your record as a law enforcement person and yet crime is rampant in this
town. Where have you been?

MR. SANTUCCI: Just quickly, with John Lindsay on prosecution, I don't think
there's any D.A. in the city of New York, or anywhere, who prosecutes harder
than we do. We've virtually eliminated plea bargaining in Queens County and
we've got more convictions of murder in the second degree, top counts of
indictments than any prior D.A.  has. And I'm sure he knows that D.A.s don't
commit the crimes nor are they on the front line with regard to the
apprehension. In prosecution, our record is second to none.

But what concerns me about what Liz Holtzman had said. In the very beginning she
made a great statement about constitutional rights and civil rights which she is
so active in protecting. Yesterday, we talked in a debate about the Equal Rights
Amendment and the plank in the National Democratic platform. And one of those
aspects of that platform is, or that plank is, that if a candidate of the
Democratic Party does not support the Equal Rights Amendment, he shall not be
entitled to assistance in his campaign from the National Democratic Committee.

If that is civil rights, I must have been living in another world.  It's my
impression of free speech and civil rights that there is room for dissent, in
and out of the Democratic Party. And when someone says to me if I don't agree
with them, then I can't get help from the masses of the people in this state, or
from the party of which I am a member and a participant and a supporter, that
person doesn't believe in civil rights. That's not the kind of civil rights we
stand for in this country. I resent her attitude on that subject and I think
it's fascist, it's not civil rights.

MISS HOLTZMAN: First, I think, Mr. Santucci, you must realize of course that the
constitutional rights have to do with the individual versus the government. And
the Constitution prohibits the Government from restraining free speech. It
doesn't prohibit political parties from making a decision about where they're to
spend their money and how. I'm sure you understand that difference.

MR. SANTUCCI: I must tell you, I do not understand the difference.
Issue of Robert E. Lee

MISS MYERSON: I endorse what Mr. Santucci has said. I believe that E.R.A.
statements in the Democratic platform is similar to what the Republican platform
has said about disqualifying judges on the basis of their stand on abortion.

No. 2, let me talk about effectiveness - and going along. Going along, somehow,
has been made to sound a pejorative here. We're talking about putting together
allies, making friends, and not making enemies. You talk about going along when
it doesn't hurt us and when we as a state are not giving anything up.

Now the other day in The Daily News, Ken Auletta wrote about a specific vote and
it had to do with reinstating Robert E. Lee's citizenship. The Southerners felt
very emotional about that. They probably had to finish the carving on some
statue and they wanted to say that Robert E. Lee's citizenship had been
reinstated. The vote was 400 and many to 10. And Liz, when you are part of that
small minority, let me tell you that if you reach out to support from the
Southern Congresspeople, they may not be able to name everyone of the over 400
who voted for it, but they do remember those who voted against it. Because 10
names are not difficult to remember. And so when you have to go to them, they're
going to be less likely to move with you because they're angry about those who
voted against it, even though it passed.

MISS HOLTZMAN: Do you understand why I voted against that? Do you know why?
MISS MYERSON: You know, I do know how you voted in numerous different instances.
MISS HOLTZMAN: No but, do you know why?  MISS MYERSON: But I do not know why?
MISS HOLTZMAN: Well, isn't it interesting that you cite that, and attack me for
it. Did you ever read my statement in the Congressional Record on that?

MISS MYERSON: I didn't attack you for it. I only say on principle that is an
inappropriate way.  MISS HOLTZMAN: On principle.  MISS MYERSON: Yeah.  MISS
HOLTZMAN: But did you ever read why I voted for it? Did you ever read my
Congressional Record statement about it?  MISS MYERSON: No.  MISS HOLTZMAN:
Would you like -I think that would be really important for you to understand why
I voted against it.  MISS MYERSON: Well, why?  MISS HOLTZMAN: I think that's
important. At the time that Robert E. Lee was restored to citizenship - and I
carry no animus toward Robert E. Lee; both of my parents are immigrants. But at
the time that Robert E. Lee bore arms against this country, over 100 years ago -
and it took 100 years to reconcile to his service to the United States, even
though he was opposed to us - at the very time that Robert E. Lee was being
granted citizenship there were thousands of Americans stranded in other
countries who in conscience dissented from our position in the war against
Vietnam. And my vote - and I've said it on the House floor, Miss Myerson, and it
would have been wise for you to have read it before you attacked me - was that
it should not take us 100 years to reconcile ourselves to those who are living
and in conscience differed from the policies of this country.

MISS MYERSON: I didn't mean it as an attack, Liz. I just meant it as an approach
to being effective.  Q: John, could you tell us what you think about that E.R.A.
plank in the platform?  MR. LINDSAY: I'm for E.R.A. And I'm for women's private
personal choice on abortion. And I think that the plank in the Democratic Party
platform is bad. To me it violates the basic notions of free speech, and I think
it tends to push the thing towards single-issue stuff.
Carey Endorsement

MISS MYERSON: I've also read the responses and the writings of other reporters
and so on who say I have a good chance. I also heard Governor Carey say that I
would be the candidate who could beat Senator Javits.

Q: But you disavowed his support?  MISS MYERSON: I haven't disavowed his
support. I said I thought what he said was inappropriate.  Q: You won't run his
commercial?  MISS MYERSON: You don't know that I won't run his commercial, okay?
That decision is going to be made by my campaign office. I have a commercial of
Governor Carey alone, I have a commercial of Governor Carey with others, and I'm
sure that that commercial will run. As a matter of fact, I have his support, he
made it quite clear. I disavowed the endorsement the way it was interpreted,
which was I don't want to be endorsed because I'm Jewish, I want to be endorsed
because I'm going to be effective and because I can deliver and I can work well
in the Senate.

MR. LINDSAY: I like endorsements. I try to get them. I don't know how much
transfer there is. I doubt if there's much. I think it's one vote. But it does
get you media attention and all the rest of it. I think we would have liked to
have had the Governor's endorsement. I think he made a dreadful mistake, a real
boo boo, on that comment he made about why he was endorsing Miss Myerson. And I
don't know why Miss Myerson chose immediately to walk away from him. I think she
has a habit of cutting people who've helped her the most. And they'd better
learn that down in Washington.

Q: You know that whole brouhaha over the Governor's statement started when you
said on a television show in Buffalo and then elaborated with me, that the
Governor had told you that he made a mistake, he thinks he made a mistake in
endorsing Miss Myerson.

MR. LINDSAY: Not quite, not quite.  Q. It's on the tape of the television show.
He has denied that he ever said that. Could you clarify for us what happened?
MR. LINDSAY: I'll tell you exactly what the Governor said. He was trying to be
light about it and he said, ''Well, I may have made a mistake.'' He said, ''I
may have made or might have made a mistake, but I promised Dave Garth a long
time ago I'd go with Myerson.'' And he said, ''I wouldn't worry about it, I cut
a commercial for her but it's not a very good commercial.''

MISS MYERSON: He's wrong, it's a good commercial.  Q. You'll stand by your
statement that he did say that. You know, he flatly denies he said it.  MR.
LINDSAY: Absolutely. Absolutely, sure.  MISS MYERSON: I'm also criticized for
the amount of money that I've earned and I'm very proud of that. I've worked
hard.  But I'm talking about personal attacks. Now as far as my moving into the
business sector, I did it deliberately. I changed titles but I wore exactly the
same hat. I represented consumers. I've got the bank - the Citibank -to do
things I could not get them to do when I was commissioner.

MR. SANTUCCI: What I don't like about election campaigns is this, and I resent
it here - I'm not for Myerson or Lindsay, Holtzman. But the thing that's
bothered me the most in elections - and I've run for office more than anybody in
this room and I've held office longer then anybody in this room - is I don't
think we ought to go about these campaigns by bringing up innuendoes.

If Miss Myerson has a conflict, or if there's something provable against her,
dammit it ought to be laid out on the table and she ought to be lambasted for
it. But just by bringing up this constant thing that we're hearing every day:
She represented certain companies. Just representing people does not make it
conflict.
Handgun Legislation

Q: I'd like to hear from each of the candidates on the Saturday night specials,
what you would do as a Federal official about crime in the city and these
handguns?

MR. SANTUCCI: On the subject of handguns, it's in interstate transportation
where the Federal jurisdiction lies, and that is requiring a full accounting by
gun manufacturers as to where those guns go and strict controls of the
inventories so that we don't find those guns here within the state. The actual
enforcement of the law as to possession of the illegal handgun is a local
problem and you're not going to deal with that through Federal legislation.

Q: Miss Holtzman?  MISS HOLTZMAN: Handguns, a serious problem. The reason that
there is no enforcement against Saturday night specials is that it's not against
the Federal law. I think we need to have handgun control; I've sponsored and
fought for all legislation to control the interstate traffic in handguns.

MR. LINDSAY: There's got to be a national law against handguns by way of
licensing handguns. License and register handguns so we know who the applicants
are, whether they've been jailed people, whether they are insane, whether
they've had records, etc. The time is passed. This town is awash in blood
because of handguns at this moment.

MISS MYERSON: We have to have strong gun control legislation and you have to
fight for that in the Senate and you have to fight for it on a local level and
you have to make sure that there are strict standards set about who shall be
able to hold a gun in their hand.

Q: National standards you're talking about?  MISS MYERSON: Yes, of course,
national standards.
Westway and Health Law

Q: No. 1, do you favor Westway as it is currently proposed? No. 2, national
health insurance. Do you favor national health insurance or something other than
national health insurance?

MISS HOLTZMAN: I think we have a serious problem with mass transit, our mass
transit system is a shambles, our commuter railroads system is a shambles, our
bus system is a shambles. I favor a trade-in of Westway funds to be used for
mass transit.

I favor national health insurance. I have supported the equivalent of the
Kennedy - the present Kennedy-Waxman Bill. The present Medicare system is
inadequate and we have a patchwork system with respect to health care.

MR. LINDSAY: We've got to do something rather than nothing. My own guess is that
the present Westway, which on the whole I favor, will have to be modified in
Washington and will be modified because of the escalating high costs.

I think we have to make clear that the notion that you can simply trade in the
cost of Westway and receive back mass transit funds has to be hit on the head.
It simply doesn't work that way. You'd have to start all over again for the mass
transit money and push it through the whole system.

On national health, I'm for a catastrophic program, a catastrophic illness. I
recognize that that is a part-way measure in respect of reaching out to
preventive medicine, which is what the Kennedy approach is. The reason that I
prefer a step-by-step approach, which is starting with the catastrophic problem
is that I don't think the Kennedy bill is administrable right now. I don't think
the system will swallow it or digest it.

MISS MYERSON: I favor Westway; it's going to create jobs, it is going to solve
that problem of what's been a problem for too long a period of time. It is only
going to increase traffic by something like 1 percent. The jobs it will create,
the fact that it will facilitate movement of trucks and cars and everything else
- and we need that in New York.

I'm for the Kennedy-Waxman bill of national health insurance. It is very
expensive, as John has said, something like $28 billion. And we have to phase it
in. But for the catastrophic aspect of it, we must implement that immediately.

MR. SANTUCCI: I absolutely favor the construction of Westway. I think we ought
to stop all the talk and all the nonsense, it's been buried long enough. We have
to go with the job as soon as we possibly can.

On the national health program, I do not believe in the socialization of any
profession or any industry in this country. I don't think national health, as it
relates to the socialization of medicine, ought to be permitted.
Welfare Trade-Offs

Q: You always have to take trade-offs, would you take a limitation, a Federal
limitation on welfare payments if the Federal Government took over 100 percent,
or would you continue to insist that New York set the level and the Government,
the Federal Government pay the bill?

MISS HOLTZMAN: Well, I would hope that wouldn't be the choice, because I
remember what happened when SSI went into effect, which is in essence an 100
percent federalization for senior citizens. And the first couple of - well, the
first months and perhaps years of that program people were really in very
desperate shape, because they had had their payments cut back and there was not
any leeway. I would hope that there would be federalization, that there would be
some room.

MR. LINDSAY: The direct answer to your question of would I take a trade-off. The
answer is yes, I would. I feel so strongly about the subject that I think the
national Government ought to set a uniform standard on the whole thing.

MISS MYERSON: Well, I do believe that a standard has to be set, a minimum
standard of payments to welfare clients. I don't know what will happen if that
standard is less than what this state and city pays.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 29, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOUR NEW YORK DEMOCRATS ARGUE MERITS FOR SENATE JOB Holtzman

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 789 words


With the campaign in its final two weeks, four Democratic candidates for the
United States Senate nomination in New York questioned each other's
effectiveness and qualifications in a twohour discussion yesterday at The New
York Times.

The sharpest exchanges involved Bess Myerson and Representative Elizabeth
Holtzman, who are generally considered the front-runners in the Democratic
primary race. But, John V. Lindsay and District Attorney John J. Santucci of
Queens gave as well as got their share of barbed references in regard to their
qualifications for the Senate.

The exchanges pointed up what are generally agreed to be the major flaws of each
candidate.  Representative Holtzman leveled the most serious charge when she
said that Miss Myerson was involved in a ''serious conflict of interest'' when
she was a consultant for CitiBank at the same time she was heading an
organization that counseled debtors, including the bank's debtors.

'Can't Serve Two Clients'

''You can't serve two clients at once. ... if you were a lawyer doing that, you
would be in trouble with the bar association,'' Miss Holtzman said. Miss Myerson
said that as a business consultant she had been able to change bank and business
policies toward consumers.

Miss Myerson, who is often the principal target in the candidate encounters,
questioned Miss Holtzman's effectiveness because, she declared, ''You are one of
a very small minority all the time -say one of 10 in terms of defense
appropriations.''

She cited as an example Miss Holtzman's opposition - only one of 10 House
members - to an obscure House resolution restoring General Robert E. Lee's
citizenship. She said that Miss Holtzman had alienated members of the House from
Southern states who might help with New York interest bills. Miss Holtzman said
that her vote was ''a matter of principle'' because Vietnam War draft evaders
were still exiled in other countries. Both Mr. Lindsay and Miss Myerson also
cited Miss Holtzman's lack of support among fellow House members as evidence of
her isolation.

Miss Myerson and Mr. Santucci questioned how effective Mr. Lindsay would be in
winning aid for New York City.''I'm afraid that many might see John as having
been part of the problem,'' Miss Myerson said, adding that other senators ''may
perceive that he was indeed responsible for the mismanagement or problems of the
city.''

Mr. Lindsay said that if he had run and been re-elected to a third term,''we
would not have gone to the brink - it would have been handled quite differently
and you would not have had this problem as severe as it is now.'' He added that
Miss Myerson was his consumer affairs commissioner and ''if there's any onus
here, she shares it.''

Mr. Santucci, who may be running last in the race, was generally spared strong
criticism but at one point, Mr. Lindsay, noting that ''the town is awash in
blood,'' hung at least part of the responsibility for the city's crime on
prosecutors such as Mr.  Santucci.

The four candidates sat side by side at a conference table with Times reporters
and editors across the table questioning them. They greeted each other cordially
at the start of the session but there was distinct coolness toward Miss Myerson
by Miss Holtzman at the end.

Little Disagreement on Issues

While they often clashed on qualifications, there were only a few disagreements
on issues.  They reflected the split in the national Democratic Party over
national health insurance when both women candidates favored a full national
health insurance program on the scale of that proposed by Senator Edward M.
Kennedy while the two men leaned to President Carter's version, which would
provide such insurance at the beginning for cases involving only
''catastrophic'' illnesses.

Miss Holtzman was a minority of one in opposing the Westway road project in
Manhattan and supporting the Democratic platform plank on the equal rights
amendment that would bar party campaign contributions to any Democratic
candidate opposing it.

That touched off one of the sharpest exchanges when Mr. Santucci charged that
the proposal stifled dissent, violated civil rights and was ''fascist.'' Miss
Myerson compared the proposal to the Republican platform plank demanding the
appointment only of Federal judges who oppose abortion.

Miss Holtzman replied, ''It's very important for the Democratic Party to put its
money where its mouth is.'' The candidates sidestepped strong criticism of the
Republican incumbent, Senator Jacob K. Javits but Miss Myerson said that on the
basis of polls she was the only one of the Democrats who would defeat the
Senator. Asked to specify the polls, she paused and cited ''a poll in the
northern part of Onondaga County.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John J. Santucci, Bess Myerson, John V.Lindsay,
and Elizabeth

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 30, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPAIGN REPORT;
Reagan Meets With Staff To Plan Campaign Strategy

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 622 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va., Aug. 29


Ronald Reagan spent the afternoon today in meetings with his top campaign staff,
planning a strategy to make President Carter's economic record, rather than Mr.
Reagan's contoversial statements, the focus of press and public attention.

The meetings at Wexford, the residence that Mr. Reagan rented in the Virginia
countryside near here, followed what Reagan aides concede was a disappointing
two weeks for the Republican nominee, whose statements on the Vietnam War and on
relations with Taiwan and China dominated campaign debate.

But, according to one of the participants in today's meeting, the Reagan
advisers believe they did an adequate job in the last two days in getting Mr.
Reagan to stick to economic issues.

The strategy meetings are expected to continue tomorrow. Mr. Reagan has no
activities scheduled for Sunday, allowing him a day's rest before Labor Day
appearances in Jersey City and Detroit.

Anderson Gains Access To Ballot in Missouri

JEFFERSON CITY, Mo., Aug. 29 (AP) - Representative John B.  Anderson's
independent Presidential campaign achieved ballot access in Missouri today.

Secretary of State James Kirkpatrick said the Illinois Congressman's supporters
submitted 62,453 signatures from all of the state's 10 Congressional districts
to his office on Aug. 4. But a review of signatures from only five districts
proved enough to get the independent candidate on the Nov. 4 ballot, Mr.
Kirpatrick said.

Meanwhile, in Washington, Mitchell Rogovin, the Anderson campaign attorney, said
Mr. Anderson would accept an invitation to debate by the National Press Club
provided that the order in which the candidates debated in round-robin fashion
was determined by chance.

----

INDIANAPOLIS, Aug. 29 (AP) - The Socialist Workers Party, the Communist Party
U.S.A. and supporters of Mr. Anderson's independent candidacy filed nominating
petitions today to get their candidates on Indiana's ballot.

Mondale Is Resting After Minnesota Politicking

DULUTH, Minn., Aug. 29 (AP) - Vice President Mondale is spending the weekend
fishing after two days of politicking in his home state of Minnesota. He is
scheduled to resume campaigning Monday in Cleveland and Pittsburgh.

The Vice President used the stark symbolism of a vacant steel plant yesterday to
promote a new tax cut and jobs program announced by President Carter.

Although he had nothing specific to offer northeastern Minnesota, where
unemployment is running at 11 percent, Mr. Mondale said the long-range effect of
the Carter program would be beneficial.

Koch Says Carter Must Ease Burdens for Big Cities

By The Associated Press
Mayor Koch said yesterday that President Carter could not rely on Ronald
Reagan's ''keeping his foot in his mouth,'' and must do something for big cities
between now and November.

The Mayor, at an impromptu news conference in his City Hall office, said Mr.
Carter should do something about easing the welfare and Medicaid burdens for
cities before Election Day.

''As of this moment, the President is still behind,'' Mr. Koch said. But he
added that ''Reagan has hoof-and-mouth disease and will go down to defeat as a
result of the things he will be saying between now and November.''

Bergland Calls For Debates With Reagan Farm Adviser

WASHINGTON, Aug. 29 (AP) - Bob Bergland, the Secretary of Agriculture, called
today for ''a series of head-to-head debates'' on farm issues with Ronald
Reagan's chief agricultural adviser, Senator Roger E. Jepsen.

Mr. Bergland, in a letter to the Iowa Republican, proposed a series of three to
six debates ''in significant farm states over the next two months.'' There was
no immediate response from Senator Jepsen, a spokesman for the Secretary said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING CONGRESS MEETS TO ADOPT ECONOMIC CHANGE, NEW LEADERS Yun, Ye Jianying,
Song Qingling

BYLINE: By JAMES P. STERBA, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Aug. 30


With words and phrases such as ''profit,'' ''increased competition'' and
''market forces'' echoing through the Great Hall of the People, Chinese leaders
met today in what they said would be a historic session of the National People's
Congress to transfer governmental power to a new generation of leaders and
further loosen central control of the economy.

The Congress, which is expected to accept the resignations of Prime Minister Hua
Guofeng, Deputy Prime Minister Deng Xiaoping and other deputy prime ministers
during its 10-day meeting, was opened by Deputy Prime Minister Ye Jianying, who
said:

''We must take effective measures to change the state of affairs in which
leading personnel hold too many posts, with the consequence that power becomes
too concentrated, and we must select and appoint to leading posts those cadres
who have distinguished themselves in practical work, who enjoy popular support
and who are in the prime of life.''

It was the third annual session of the Fifth Congress - each congress lasts five
years - and the first to which both foreign journalists and diplomats have been
invited in 20 years. The Congress, the Government's highest legislative body,
convenes yearly to endorse decisions made by the Communist Party leadership.

Outlawing of Poster Criticism

Besides the leadership changes, the Congress's agenda includes an ''important''
speech by Chairman Hua, a constitutional revision outlawing poster criticisms
such as those on the old Democracy Wall and the adoption of unspecified laws on
Chinese citizenship, marriage and income taxes for individuals and joint
ventures.

The day's speeches dealt with the economy. Many of them, for the second year,
contained a withering compilation of statistics that had previously been
considered state secrets. Others dealt with economic plans and the results of
previous Government initiatives.

As Chairman Hua sipped tea, Deputy Prime Minister Deng, next to him, puffed
cigarettes, and 3,478 other deputies shuffled papers on the podium and in the
10,000-seat auditorium, Deputy Prime Minister Yao Yilin, who is in charge of the
State Planning Ministry, said the economy ''as a whole is becoming livelier''
after decades of stagnation. He said sluggish growth in agricultural production
and light industry was finally being overcome, adding that the experiments of
free enterprise, factory autonomy, local decisionmaking and competition would be
greatly expanded in the next two years.

In a speech that often sounded like one made in Japan or other government-guided
free-enterprise economies, Mr. Yao said, ''Regulation of the economy through the
market will be carried out under the guidance of the state plan.'' He added that
expanding experiments in competition ''give expression to the principle of
regulation through planning combined with the regulation of the market.''

By the end of June, he said, 6,600 industrial enterprises that had been allowed
to make local and market decisions had produced in value 45 percent of the
output of all state-run industries, surpassing in profits and income those
factories run under the old system of state quotas.

By following the new edict of ''to each according to his work'' and by placing
decision-making in local hands, Mr. Yao said, ''the irrational agriculture
structure and pattern that existed for a long time have begun to change
somewhat.''

Peasants received $7.2 billion through increased output last year, he said, and
that, when combined with a $1.3 billion tax cut, raised average income
significantly.

Mr. Yao said that retail sales in 1979 were up 14.7 percent over the previous
year and that ''1979 witnessed the largest increase in retail sales in many
years.'' In the first half of 1980 they were even higher, up 18.5 percent, he
said.

The new Minister of Finance, Wang Bingqian, gave a speech so full of numbers
that it might have been delivered in an American corporate board room. The 1980
budget, he said, will have a $5.3 billion deficit even though there were budget
cuts in a majority of departments, including the military. The military cut
appears to result from an increase last year because of the limited war with
Vietnam.

He also said the Government had spent nearly $670 million in rehabilitating and
restoring the salaries of people purged in the decade-long Cultural Revolution
conducted by ultraleftists during the late l960's and early 1970's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Chinese leaders: Hua Guofeng, Deng Xiaoping, Li
Xiannian, Chen

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLLSTERS BET ON 3 LETTERS IN NEXT PRESIDENT'S NAME

BYLINE: By E.J. DIONNE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 629 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 30


A panel of polling experts who often battle one another in the campaign wars
came together last night to exchange views, jokes, jabs and predictions. But
like most experts who know that being wrong hurts business, they were less than
forthcoming in their prophesies.

Peter Hart, who conducted polls for Senator Edward M. Kennedy's Presidential
campaign, expressed the consensus of the group when he predicted that the name
of the next President would include the letters ''a,'' ''e'' and ''r.''

They did agree that the contest between President Carter and Ronald Reagan was
likely to be very close all the way. But they were generally mystified by John
B. Anderson's independent candidacy, warning that his presence in the race
clouded even the most exquisite of crystal balls.

The poll-takers spoke at the convention here of the American Political Science
Association, a group of academics who often regard the pronouncements of
nonacademic political experts with utmost skepticism.

Real Interest in Real Politics

The turnout for the pollsters, however, was one of the largest at any of the
convention's activities, a fact that Dr. Warren Miller of the University of
Michigan characterized as ''a real testimony to the interest of the discipline
in real politics.''

Lance Tarrance, a pollster whose experience in real politics included work this
year for John B. Connally, argued that the conventional ways of gauging
Presidential popularity tend to underestimate the regard for Mr. Carter.

While the President's approval ratings are low, Mr. Tarrance said, a majority of
Americans gave Mr. Carter moderately high grades when asked how they thought his
Presidential performance would look a few years from now.

Moreover, Americans may be unhappy with the way things are going, he said, but
they are split as to whether the problems can be solved in the next Presidential
term. Thus many might be sympathetic to Mr.  Carter's contention that he is
doing the best that he can.

Finally, in regard to personal characteristics in a President, Mr.  Tarrance
found that about half are looking for qualities that Mr.  Carter's supporters
associate with him - trust, honesty and the like - and half are seeking virtues
attributed to Mr. Reagan, generally those of a strong leader who will change
things.

Mr. Hart agreed that the vote will be close, but he said he considered the two
major-party contenders to be largely disliked by the electorate. And he accused
all three main contenders of ''running the wrong campaigns.''

Mr. Reagan, he said, has ''chosen issues that were decided in the past,'' like
the Vietnam War and America's China policy, and is diverting attention away from
present difficulties associated with the Carter Administration. Mr. Carter, he
said, ''needs to get off the present'' and focus on his plans for the next four
years. And Mr. Anderson is running as ''a conventional politician'' instead of
portraying himself as an outsider who could offer a sharp contrast to the
major-party nominees.

Mark J. Penn, whose company, Penn and Schoen, conducts polls for Mr. Anderson's
top strategist, eschewed discussing the campaign, but attacked this year's
political shibboleth, ''volatility.'' He argued that voters have always changed
their minds in the course of a campaign, and usually for substantive, not
fanciful, reasons.

Vincent J. Breglio, executive vice president at DMI, Mr. Reagan's pollsters,
argued that Americans are in a mood to ''seek and follow a strong authority
figure'' who would offer ''a sense of discipline'' by way of solving problems.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EX-PILOT IN DRUG SMUGGLING TRIAL CITES STRESS OF VIETNAM FIGHTING

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 40, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 496 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Aug. 30


A decorated Vietnam War combat pilot says a need to continue to take risks led
him into a life of drug smuggling.  Peter L. Krutschewski is asking a court to
find that he was temporarily insane when he was smuggling drugs from 1973 to
1975, and that it resulted from the stress suffered during his 1,000 hours of
combat as a helicopter pilot.

''Here we have one of the most decorated Army pilots who made it out of Vietnam
- 55 medals, two Bronze Stars, two Distinguished Flying Crosses - and we have to
try to get this jury to understand what it's like to come back here after all
that,'' Mr.  Krutschewski's attorney, Robert Craig, said in an interview
Tuesday.

Mr. Krutschewski left Vietnam in August 1970. For the next 18 months, he said,
he worked to earn an undergraduate degree in business administration at Michigan
State University. But after awhile, he said, he missed the risks he experienced
in Vietnam.

''You need risk venture. You need to have risks,'' he said in an interview with
The Boston Globe.  He said that smuggling was similar to Vietnam because it was
a ''life or death risk; it was survival.'' But, he said, he is not the kingpin
of the drug-smuggling operation that the Federal Government makes him out to be.


Basis of Defense Prepared

Mr. Craig did not give details of the stress argument in his opening statement
to the Federal Court jury Tuesday. He said it was being prepared as the basis of
an insanity defense to be used in a second phase of the trial that will be held
if Mr. Krutschewski is found guilty.

The American Psychiatric Association and the Veterans Administration both
recognize a temporary ailment known as posttraumatic stress disorder or ''
Vietnam syndrome.'' A defense based on the disorder has been used to win
acquittals for veterans in California and Pennsylvania.

Mr. Craig said the case here would be the first time the ''syndrome'' argument
had been used as a defense for a nonviolent premeditated crime.

Mr. Krutschewski, 35 years old, of Lansing, Mich., was charged in a five-count
indictment in April with being the ''organizer, supervisor and manager'' of a
drug-smuggling ring that the authorities said brought marijuana and hashish from
Colombia and Mexico to Gloucester, Mass., and other points.

The first witness, Robert Rankin, said Mr. Krutschewski paid him $3,000 to
transport $40,000 in small bills from Massachusetts to Texas in August 1973.

Mr. Rankin said that several months later, he borrowed $10,000 from his mother
to invest in a smuggling venture that would bring marijuana and hashish from
Europe to the United States. Mr.  Krutschewski was the person ''organizing it
and giving instructions,'' he testified.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BRITISH COLONIZATION OF THE HOLLYWOOD FILM INDUSTRY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3037 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
David Lewin is a London based writer who frequently reports on cultural events.

By DAVID LEWIN

When he was a young man and making his first trip to Hollywood in the late
1930's, Laurence Olivier found a note waiting for him at the Chateau Marmont on
Sunset Boulevard where he was staying.

It was from Sir C. Aubrey Smith, then the ranking British actor on the scene. It
read: ''There will be net practice tomorrow at 4 P.M. I trust I shall see you
there.''

Net practice, the young Olivier did not need to be told, was for the Hollywood
cricket eleven which Aubrey Smith had founded and of which he was the benevolent
if somewhat dictatorial captain.

That was more than 40 years ago. Today there are sufficient English around (or
''Brits,'' as they are now called to meet the nationalistic feelings of the
Welsh, the Scots and the Northern Irish) to form 100 cricket teams. And they
make a difference.

Although the British no longer dress, behave or stick together as they did in C.
Aubrey Smith's day, their influence in Hollywood has never been greater or felt
more widely in every form of entertainment from movies to television to pop
music to records. And, while Americans continue to dominate Hollywood's arts and
entertainment industries, some 22,000 Britons have settled in southern
California -70,000 of them in Los Angeles; and 1,500 of them are employed in the
arts. Roddy McDowell is now the elder statesman of the British colony, but he is
the first to admit that much has changed since he first came to the film capital
as a child. While the Brits may still have their favorite bars and their
favorite restaurants, cricket and the old school tie are out and tennis and a
new breed of Briton are in.

About half are in music. The rest are actors (the largest number), writers, film
editors, art directors, the occasional producer, agents, even a publicist.

The degree of influence of the Brits (there is even a weekly newspaper for them
in Los Angeles called ''True Brit'') is perhaps best judged by American producer
Sandy Lieberson, who worked in England for Twentieth Century-Fox, was briefly
that company's president in charge of all movie making in Hollywood, and is now
back in London looking after production there for The Ladd Company.

From his trans-Atlantic experience, Mr. Lieberson said: ''The British have
influence, real influence in every field in Hollywood.  If a British director
like Alan Parker, Ridley Scott, Michael Apted, John Schlesinger or Peter Yates
wants to make a film deal, the deal will go through and the film will be made.

''As soon as the BBC showed John Le Carre's ''Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy'' on
television, an American producer invited its young director, John Irvin, to make
a major film, 'The Dogs Of War.'

''As John Schlesinger showed with 'Midnight Cowboy,'' an English director can
bring a deeper significance and a greater awareness even to an American subject.
That is because of the training, the background and the style with which English
films are made where great attention is paid to every detail.

''The same is true of actors. Look at Peter Sellers and 'Being There.' The
subject had been hanging around for something like 10 years and couldn't get off
the ground. As soon as Sellers said he wanted to do it, it was a viable
proposition.''

The reasons for the importance of the British in Hollywood today are three-fold.
One is historic. The second, geographic. The third, attitude or approach.

Two men basically shaped the British film industry - Sir Alexander Korda before
the war and J. Arthur Rank after the war. Korda brought Britain into the
international league of film makers in 1933 with ''The Private Life of Henry
VIII.'' He realized, perhaps because he was Hungarian, that a historical story
about the British royal family could have a universal appeal. It was an early
case of the outsider seeing how the game should be played and now, nearly half a
century later, it is British directors who come to America and bring a detached
observer's eye to such American subjects as ''Midnight Cowboy'' (John
Schlesinger) or ''Coal Miner's Daughter'' (Michael Apted).

But Korda also saw something else back in 1933. He realized that if he took an
English character actor like Charles Laughton and the part was rich enough, he
could make him into a star.

After the war in England, both Korda and Rank, who saw films as a way of
enlightening people as well as entertaining them, employed and gave total
artistic freedom to directors like Laurence Olivier, Carol Reed and David Lean.
But the budgets were never huge and there was no specific studio tradition to be
preserved and guarded. They were encouraged to go out and experiment. The
results were films like ''Henry V'' and ''The Third Man.'' And the tradition has
been handed down to British filmmakers today.

The second reason for British influence is simply that of geography. England is
a small island and its main artistic center is London. London is the base of all
British films, most of British television and the heart of the British theater.
Actors have therefore always been accustomed to switching around from one medium
to another with equal facility and a minimum of travel problems.

''In England you are not a film actor, or a stage actor or a television star,''
said Alan Bates. ''You are an actor and you are trained from the beginning that
you can be playing the lead in Shakespeare one week and carrying a spear the
next.

''You are not worried about loss of face if you go from a star part in a film or
on TV into a small character study. In America - certainly in Hollywood -I think
it is difficult for an actor to do so without feeling that he is losing ground,
even if his agent would let him.''

Most British actors started in films while still playing in the theater at
night. It is no more than a short drive from even the furthest film studio to
any West End theater. The very geography makes that kind of swap between
Broadway and Los Angeles impossible, however desirable a few weeks in a film
would be for an actor. The result has meant more training and experience - and
certainly more variety - for British actors and directors, and that, quite
simply, has given them more professional skill and power.

The third reason for British influence in Hollywood today is attitude or
approach. Sir John Gielgud summed it up when he said: ''Basically we were all
character actors in England. That is why when Alfred Hitchcock first went to
Hollywood in 1940, he immediately cast unknown British actors like Ronald Squire
or A. E. Matthews in the small character parts. They may have been unknown to
American audiences at the time, but Hitchcock knew them as stars in the British
theater and he also knew they would accept supporting parts, and bring great
quality to them.

British directors come to Hollywood from a background where they are the key to
making a film - and producers a diminishing species.  The British director is
often a diplomat, quietly observing, encouraging and gently demonstrating. David
Lean never shouts - even, or especially, at extras. What they bring to American
films is the keen eye for detail (the way people stand at the bar in a pub for
instance) or the importance, as Hitchcock realized early on, that the bit part
played by a master could be just as effective as the star peformance.

Also, as Korda found when he first came to Britain, the outsider really did see
more. John Schlesinger's first Hollywood film was ''Midnight Cowboy,'' and he
brought to that bus ride down South all the fascination of an Englishman for
American bus travel that a Hollywood director might have overlooked. Mr.
Schlesinger's latest American film, ''Honky Tonk Freeway'' (for a British
company, EMI, this time, however) is also about people on the move - on a
freeway in Florida. ''The great thing about America is just how much of the
population is always moving somewhere,'' said Mr. Schlesinger. ''All my films
are about voyaging in one form or another, and although there are highways in
every country in the world, the best place to focus on people and why they have
to travel is America.''

John Schlesinger, however, does not subscribe to the theory that a British
director can tackle any American subject. He turned down both ''All the
President's Men'' and ''Coming Home'' ''because they weren't really within my
grasp.''

Michael Apted, the young British director who made the successful ''Coal Miner's
Daughter,'' about the country and western singer Loretta Lynn, spent six months
researching the subject in Virginia.  He soon realized that there was little
difference between coal mining and miners there and in South Wales in Britain.
''It wasn't therefore quite so much of a gamble in picking someone like me to do
it,'' he said.

Other English directors in Hollywood like Franc Roddham betray their background
and their training as soon as a major studio invites them inside.

Mr. Roddham made ''Quadrophenia,'' a story of the battle between rival gangs of
English youths in a resort town. Twentieth Century-Fox offered him a
three-picture deal almost a year ago and gave him 120 scripts to choose from. He
turned down the lot -and he had never made a Hollywood film before.

''Ten of them could have gone into production right away,'' he said, ''but I
wanted to make a film on my terms, which means working with a writer from
scratch and not picking up someone else's work.

''I didn't come here to make money. I came to Hollywood to make films.''

The trouble is, as any Hollywood director could have told them, the British may
have influence and are sought after, but until recently no Brit had power to
make decisions and get things done. Mr. Apted, for example, despite the success
of ''Coal Miner's Daughter,'' found he didn't have the clout to persuade
Universal to back his next subject.

One Briton now has power as well as influence in Hollywood - and he is the only
one.  His name is Barry Spikings and he has $75 million of British money a year
to spend on making movies in Hollywood. Mr. Spikings, a 40-year-old farmer's
son, is chairman of EMI Films of London and in charge of their worldwide film
production.

When EMI first came to Hollywood five years ago, Mr. Spikings said, it was
something like 25th in line to ask if a producer or director had a project they
wanted backed. ''I wouldn't say we were the party of the last resort, but it was
pretty close to that,'' said Mr.  Spikings. ''The jury was out waiting to see if
we could keep our promise and deliver the goods.''

What changed things was ''The Deerhunter,'' which Mr. Spikings backed when no
one else wanted to know about a Vietnam war story. It went on to win five
Oscars.

What gives Barry Spikings power is that he can operate quickly in a town where
most decisions are made by committee. ''One phone call and the money for a film
is there,'' he said. At the moment he has three in America: ''Can't Stop the
Music,'' in release; ''Honky Tonk Freeway,'' in production, and ''The Jazz
Singer,'' near release.

The change in life style between London and California is not, however, to
everyone's taste. An English agent, Tim Stone, put the problem of adjustment
like this: ''At first, when one comes here, there is a very definite culture
shock and often an ego shock as well. If you don't get over that, you become
pretty depressed however well things go.''

Dick Clement, a British TV writer recently established in Hollywood with his
partner Ian Le Frenais, saw it differently.  ''Actually it is the New Yorkers
who settle less well in Hollywood than do the Brits. The New Yorker expects it
will somehow be what he was used to back East because, after all, it is one
country. The English expect it will be different -and it is.''

The British actor who has lived the longest in Hollywood is Roddy McDowell, who
came in 1940 when he was 12 to make ''How Green Was My Valley.''

''British stars and actors were isolated from the rest of the community then,''
he said. ''They were firmly set in their own social group with Sir C. Aubrey
Smith as king.

''The rules of the society were unwritten but very formal and the English didn't
mix well with outsiders. Now they do - but by interest not nationality. The
English used to keep their Englishness by the way they dressed, the game they
played (cricket), the pubs like the Cock 'n Bull, where they drank, and the
Chateau Marmont, where they used to stay before buying a home because it was
discreet, casual and accommodating to the original or the eccentric. Like Bea
Lillie, who upon arrival used to go around talking to the furniture: 'Hello
chair ... nice to see you mantel piece ... how are you sofa?'

''But that is all over now. I can't see the point of an English pub here. You
can't chase either the past or another environment. It is fruitless and
self-defeating.''

The British aren't cliquey anymore, and no one wears an old school tie. They
have all succumbed to California-casual.  The social scene flourishes. The
resident English party givers, like Michael York, the actor, and his wife, Pat,
and Leslie Bricusse, the composer, prefer sit-down dinners to huge affairs with
everyone milling around. The closest thing to the old-fashioned ''salon'' is run
by Michael York, with an open invitation to anyone in town from England to drop
in. The catch at any party is a visiting knight - Olivier, Guinness, Gielgud.

The resident Brits in Hollywood play tennis and soccer rather than cricket; one
or two even jog, although the majority think it is a highly undesirable form of
exercise. Each group within the British community has its own special place
where they like to meet. On Sunday at lunchtime, though, they'll stay at home
and stick to the traditional English roast beef and two veg rather than the
popular American brunch. Director Ronald Neame and actor Michael Caine are among
the better cooks on the English circuit: the visitor heads straight up the hills
for a touch of home on Sunday.

The Cock 'n Bull pub on Sunset - used particularly by English actors after
playing soccer on Saturday afternoons - may do a Sunday brunch of English
specialties like bacon and eggs and kippers, ''but that is for the tourists,''
said Michael Caine; ''we cook at home for our mates on Sundays.''

Caine is typical of the new breed of British actor: the cockney who made it. He
lives high in Beverly Hills, only a copy of Country Life to remind him of home.

''What has really changed here is that the working class actor like myself has
arrived,'' he said. ''The charming light brigade - typified by C. Aubrey Smith,
Ronald Colman and, later, David Niven, all upper class to a man - has gone.

''The divisions among the Brits here are like society in general: by money
rather than class. This is a bread and butter company town where the business is
taken seriously and there are fewer laughs and no giggles on a set like back
home''.

The Brits at the top end of the money market eat at Ma Maison for lunch and
Morton's for dinner. ''On Friday at lunch at Ma Maison, it is exactly like being
back at the Old Tratt in Soho,'' said Mr. Caine (The Trattoria restaurant in
Soho, in the center of London, was the luncheon place for film people in the
60's).

The phone number at Ma Maison is unlisted - or ex-directory as the English say.
Morton's, just opened by Peter Morton, who runs a successful club in Berkeley
Square in Mayfair, has not one unlisted phone number - but two, the second being
even more secret and so guaranteed to get those who know it a better table than
the first.  Mr. Morton explained the reasoning: ''The more difficult you make it
to get into a place, the better it is.''

The younger British actors and writers favor Oscars, which specializes in
traditional English roasts and pies - including steak and kidney, seldom seen on
any American menu.

The English do not, apart from certain parties or restaurants, tend to stick too
closely together. Ken Annakin, the director, said: ''If we did, we might as well
be back home. It is better to absorb yourself in a community than remain
exclusive.''

Robert Littman, the agent, believes, in fact, that to be terribly British is to
risk being a terrible failure in Hollywood. ''I behave like an American,'' he
said, ''and talk like an Englishman. This is a money culture and you have to
understand it and not sneer at it or try to be superior about it. What counts is
the American hard sell - not the English understatement.''

The reason why the British come to Hollywood is, in the words of Barry Spikings,
''because there is more creative input here at the moment than anywhere else.''
He added: ''When film people can meet somewhere, have a focal point to discuss
what they want to do and what they are doing, ideas flow more easily. That focal
point is Hollywood at the moment: it doesn't exist in London.''

Sandy Lieberson, who has had the opportunity of studying the British at home and
in Hollywood, put it: ''Quite simply, Hollywood makes films that go around the
world - and every British actor, director, technician or musician wants to be
involved in that.''

Or, as John Schlesinger said: ''We come here because Hollywood offers
opportunity.'' makes films that go around the world - and every British actor,

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

By ANN CRITTENDEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words


Arecurring nightmare for Israel and the United States in the oil cartel era has
been that the Arabs would use their riches and growing influence over the
international monetary system to force a Middle East solution on their terms.
That fear is heightening, as threats of economic warfare rumble out of the
Persian Gulf.

The most direct attack so far has been launched on the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, the two multinational lenders which have been
criticized in the past for being, if anything, too subject to American political
and economic pressure. It began late last month, when the executive boards of
both institutions voted, in effect, to bar observers of the Palestine Liberation
Organization from their annual meeting in Washington in September.

Shortly afterward, Kuwait refused to allow a Kuwaiti investment company to help
underwrite an $86 million bond issue for the World Bank. The Saudis indicated
they might withdraw an earlier offer to lend the bank $420 million. A
semiofficial newspaper in Abu Dhabi said the other Persian Gulf states would
also withhold loans from the bank.

The decision to bar the P.L.O. was made under intense American pressure,
specifically Treasury Department warnings that letting the Palestinians in would
jeopardize Congressional funding for the World Bank and the I.M.F. Now, top
officials at the two institutions are said to fear losing support from both the
Arabs and the United States.

The United States remains by far the largest contributor to the World Bank, but
Congress seems determined to reduce that support. A bill authorizing a
three-year, $3.4 billion contribution to the bank's International Development
Association is stalled in the House of Representatives. Until it passes, the
association, which makes low-interest loans to the poorest countries, is out of
the lending business.

The Arab states are less important to the bank, although members of the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries as a group have lent $4.2 billion
of the bank's total outstanding borrowings of $27 billion. The bank borrows
primarily in private capital markets but of the $1.6 billion raised directly
from governments last year, $1.07 billion came from Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries.

The International Monetary Fund relies entirely on direct contributions from
member governments and so is even more vulnerable to the Arab economic threat.
The fund is attempting to expand its role in recycling the oil producers'
balance-of-payments surpluses to the deficit countries. As one high State
Department official put it, ''Their whole strategy is going hat-in-hand to the
Arabs.''

The non-oil producers among the developing countries are expected to run a
combined balance-of-payments deficit of $68 billion this year. To help cover
that, the fund will have only about $33 billion in lendable currencies,
including a $10 billion Supplementary Financing Facility set up last year
explicitly to deal with balanceof-payments deficits.

The fund's managing director, Jacques de Larosiere, hopes Arab countries can be
persuaded to lend generously to a new lending facility. Last week, he went to
the Middle East to solicit billions of dollars from Arab states.

If he comes back empty-handed, as many observers now fear, the future role of
the International Monetary Fund itself could be thrown into question. ''We'll
know how serious this P.L.O. issue is by Labor Day, when de Larosiere gets
back,'' commented a knowledgeable New York banker.

Arab representatives have never before put political pressure on the bank and
the fund, even when credits were voted for Israel. By contrast, the United
States has on occasion tried to press its political preferences. American
representatives at all the multinational banks check borrowing countries' human
rights policies before approving loans and are required by law to oppose credits
that might finance certain exports competing with American exports.

On one of the very rare occasions in which a director of the fund has formally
opposed a loan, the United States representative voted against a credit of about
$36 million to the newly reunified Vietnam. He cited technical reasons, but his
action was viewed by the fund staff as politically motivated. The loan went
through over the American dissent.

In 1978, vigorous United States opposition kept the I.M.F. board from acting on
a request for a $20 million credit by the Somoza regime then ruling Nicaragua.
More recently, when the I.M.F. was holding out for tough concessions from
Jamaica before approving a credit for the troubled Caribbean country, the United
States executive director made it clear to the fund staff that he was anxious to
see the loan go through quickly.

Other nations play the same game when they can. Argentina once vetoed a
pessimistic staff assessment of its economy and asked that it be rewritten.

Still, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are generally
perceived, even in cynical Washington, as fairly purist, professional
institutions, particularly when compared with such a highly politicized
organization as the United Nations. An I.M.F.  spokesman pointed out that even
black African directors supported the fund's loans to South Africa in 1976,
because they qualified on the standard technical grounds. ''This is not the
United Nations,'' he said, ''It's a very business-like organization.''

To preserve that independence from political or economic pressures, some experts
are calling for a revision of the fund's 35-year-old charter to make it easier
to borrow funds in the private capital markets. This would reduce its dependence
upon a few wealthy countries, and the temptation to trade in politics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Chart of OPEC

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANDERSON'S CANDIDACY IS A CHOICE, NOT A DILEMMA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 626 words


To the Editor:

In an Aug. 25 column, Anthony Lewis described John Anderson's campaign as an
effort which ''can only help elect Ronald Reagan.'' To substantiate this
analysis, he cited a Gallup Poll taken immediately after Mr. Carter's
renomination, indicating that Carter would be the second choice of a majority of
Anderson voters.

Aside from the distortion inherent in any poll taken immediately after a party
convention (when the nominee normally finds his poll standing temporarily
inflated by as much as 10 points), the Gallup national findings seem sharply at
variance from surveys in certain key states. In Illinois, for example,
Republican Governor James Thompson has expressed concern that Anderson would
draw far more heavily from Reagan than Carter. In Texas, a recent poll indicated
the same phenomenon.

The volatility of these figures is due, one suspects, to the deep disaffection
of many voters with the major party nominees. Carter may bear the brunt of
disillusionment during a week in which his State and Defense Departments
squabble over nuclear strategy and wholesale prices explode once again. It may
next be Reagan's turn to slide during a week in which he glorifies the Vietnam
War, denounces the theory of evolution and engages in an intercontinental debate
on China policy with his Vice Presidential running mate.

Perhaps the most relevant poll is that conducted by Louis Harris shortly after
the Democratic convention. When respondents were asked to assume that Anderson
had a real chance of winning, he received 31 percent nationally, compared to 29
percent for Carter and 37 percent for Reagan. Moreover, in the eight largest
states of the North with a total of 216 electoral votes, the poll indicated that
Anderson would win 39 percent compared to Reagan's 31 percent and Carter's 29
percent. If columns like that of Mr. Lewis convince voters that Anderson in fact
does not have a chance, it will simply turn out to be a self-fulfilling
prophecy.

Without the $30-million Federal handouts available to the major party nominees,
obviously the Anderson campaign faces an uphill fight. And yet the successes of
such recent candidates as Maine's independent Governor James Longley, and
Maryland's Democratic Governor, Harry Hughes, demonstrate that relatively
unknown contenders can defy conventional wisdom and eventually surge to victory
on the strength of the character and content of their campaigns. The two major
party nominees have had their day in the sun during the recent conventions, but
once the Anderson campaign releases its platform and the campaign gets into full
swing after Labor Day, I believe you will see the polls begin to change in John
Anderson's favor.

An important factor here is public awareness of trends in opinion polls. If
Representative Anderson pulls even with President Carter, as many of us believe
possible, it is quite likely that Mr. Carter's support will collapse
dramatically as voters realize that he has no chance to defeat Governor Reagan
and that John Anderson is both a preferable and potentially more viable
alternative. Similarly, voters who have fled reluctantly from Jimmy Carter to
Governor Reagan may well move to Anderson, once he establishes that he is in
striking distance of election.

Mr. Anderson's success in gaining access to state ballots moves him toward that
goal. His selection of Democratic Governor Patrick Lucey as his running mate
invites broad support from Democrats, just as his appointment of former
Republican Party co-chairman Mary Crisp to chair his campaign will attract many
Republicans. These developments establish the seriousness of Mr. Anderson's
candidacy.  His own qualities establish its merit.  MILTON EISENHOWER Baltimore,
Aug. 27, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION A PREDICTABLE START;
by Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 886 words


Both major party Presidential candidates and their independent challenger are
off to predictable starts at Labor Day - President Carter using his office more
adeptly for campaigning than for governing, Ronald Reagan floundering in a mire
of depthless oratory, John Anderson struggling to get into the race.

Mr. Carter's economic ''revitalization'' proposals, for example, are precisely
what was to be expected of his trudging administration - unexciting,
unimaginative, limited in scope and expectation, with a few worthwhile points
buried in the ruck, all gathered into a shrewdly calculated political package.

In fact, its major importance may have been in yet another demonstration of the
enormous advantage of an incumbent President over his challengers. The new
Carter economic puffery dominated the news, printed and broadcast, as it had
dominated the ''speculation'' in recent days. It was generally presented as
red-hot action, not as something that might or might not happen next year,
depending on Congress, the voters, and fate.

Even Presidents as widely doubted as Mr. Carter get coverage like that all but
automatically; and in this case, the detailing of the promises obscured such
pertinent questions as these:

* Considering the economic problems it has faced from its first day in office,
why did it take the Administration three and a half years, until the start of
Mr. Carter's re-election campaign, to get around to a ''revitalization'' program
that is still little more than a promise of action in a second term - action so
limited that it would attack inflation only minimally and leave unemployment at
8.1 percent by the end of 1981?

* If Mr. Carter is re-elected, how can the voters count on even this
hobble-skirted program, since it constitutes his third switch in economic
direction this year and his seventh attempt to find a workable economic policy
since he took office? If the economic outlook changes by Inauguration Day, will
''revitalization'' disappear like 1979's ''malaise'' and last January's budget?

Moving toward general revenue financing of Social Security is long overdue; and
that's what Mr. Carter's proposal for income tax credits against payroll tax
payments amounts to. Holding down employers' payroll taxes also helps hold down
their costs, hence their prices.  That, and ''refundable'' investment tax
credits - a form of cash subsidy -for money-losing businesses are the only
traces of innovation in the Carter promises.

Most economists also seem to agree that allowing business increased tax credits
for investments in plant and equipment is a good thing; as to whether it will
stimulate productivity as promised, we shall see what we shall see. The rest of
the Carter promises are about as exciting as Amy's homework, and not much more
relevant to ''revitalization.''

Nevertheless, Mr. Carter may have seized the tax-cut issue from Mr. Reagan, or
at least neutralized it, and he may also have bamboozled the voters into
listening to his promises for the future rather than brooding on his failures of
the past. If so, Mr. Reagan is in double jeopardy, since he has got his own
campaign off to the worst start since George McGovern stumbled into the Eagleton
affair.

The Republican candidate needed to resurrect the Vietnam war as a ''noble
cause'' as much as he needs falling arches. Suggesting that Creationism, as well
as Darwinism, be taught in the public schools no doubt won cheers from voters
whose hearts he already has, but not from those he badly needs in states like
New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania. And Mr. Reagan's apparently incurable
two-China syndrome infuriated the main China without helping the other, publicly
embarassed his running mate, and underlined Democratic charges that in foreign
affairs he is a know-nothing.

This opening failure is considerably greater than the sum of its parts. After
the Democrats' assault on Mr. Reagan at their convention, when they obviously
sought to make him the issue rather than Mr. Carter, Mr. Reagan needed to show
himself calm, reasonable, intelligent, knowledgeable -above all, to stay off the
defensive so that he could focus public attention on the Administration's
failures. Instead, his excesses may have helped the Democrats to get the
campaign centered irredeemably on his fitness, rather than on Mr. Carter's
demonstrated unfitness.

As for Mr. Anderson, a summer of obscurity while the major parties dominated
television has resulted in sagging polls and a thin wallet - neither of which
augurs well for the independent candidate's staying power. His slippage has been
only partially offset by his acceptable but unexciting choice of Patrick Lucey
as his running mate, and by the President's petty and petulant efforts to keep
him out of the campaign debates.

Mr. Anderson's prime problem, however, is that while struggling to be heard, he
no longer seems to have much to say. The Doonesbury candidate of last winter, if
only he were still in the race, would be running well ahead of today's John
Anderson.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT IS A CONSERVATIVE?

BYLINE: By Steven R. Weisman; Steven R. Weisman covers the White House for The
New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5391 words


Now that the last echo of the last cheer has died out from the Republican and
Democratic conventions, the extraordinary fact remains: Both parties have
nominated conservative candidates, men who tomorrow enter the fall campaign for
the Presidency under the traditionally conservative banner of fiscal restraint
and military muscle, ready to fight against the intrusive spread of government
at home and Soviet influence abroad.

And who is presented at the same time to the voters as the ''liberal''
alternative to Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter? A certain Representative John B.
Anderson, a lifelong Republican who frankly embraces balanced budgets, higher
energy prices, and tax breaks for businesses to encourage investment. In spite
of these positions, maybe even because of them, Mr. Anderson commands the
support of the same types of activists who once rang doorbells for Eugene
McCarthy and George McGovern - middle-class students, for example, who confess
they've become weary of liberal prescriptions for ''Big Government,'' even as
they are enticed by Mr. Anderson's liberal views on abortion, the equal rights
amendment and the rattling of this year's strategic sabers.

For perhaps a decade, the United States has been in a conservative drift, but
1980 has become the year in which that trend dominates the electoral process.
The differences among Ronald Reagan, Jimmy Carter and John An-derson are real
enough, but it is hard to think of a modern precedent in which no Presidential
candidate, not even a third-party one, is offering a traditionally liberal
approach to the nation's foreign and domestic problems. The campaign managers of
all three men seem to have discerned what Americans are finding out for
themselves: There is widespread disenchantment with ''liberal solutions'' to
inflation and foreign-policy problems. Academics, middle-class suburbanites and
working-class city dwellers all seem to be affected by the conservative drift.

Many formerly die-hard liberals among them are discovering, sometimes to their
surprise, that although they continue to em-brace the ideal of social justice,
they no longer are as willing as before to make the practical sacrifices to
achieve that goal. Even more startling to some is the realization that they are
feeling less and less guilty about their flagging interest in some of the causes
they have supported much of their lives.  It is, of course, an
oversimplification to say that most Americans are born-again conservatives this
year, for there are conservatives and there are conservatives. Indeed, it is
difficult to fix a definition to the label itself, and almost impossible to
define the unifying philosophical stream of thought, or guiding set of
principles, giving life and strength to the conservative tide. Even William F.
Buckley Jr., perhaps the most prominent conservative writer in America,
acknowledges the difficulty in summing up the creed he has expounded all his
life. ''I confess I know who is a conservative less surely than I know who is a
liberal,'' he wrote, in a blush of modesty. The problem derives at least in part
from the multitude of different factors at work in the conservative trend: a
crippled economy, the rise of the use of quotas to alleviate racial imbalance, a
new disenchantment with Government solutions, the decline of moral stand-ards
and such institutions as families and neighborhoods, and renewed fears about
American military preparedness.

Americans who feel they have drifted to the right on one set of these issues may
remain where they were in their approach to another set. Lane Kirkland,
president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and a devout anti-Communist, has been especially
vigorous in renewing the American union movement's appeals to Congress to help
the United States rearm to meet a strategic Soviet threat. Yet he also pushes
for multibillion dollar jobs programs that other conservatives deplore.

Senator Gary Hart, the Colorado Democrat, came into office in 1974 with a
reputation as a fiery politician on the left. But in the last six years, he has
moved, along with a group of liberals in Congress, to call for some increases in
weapons procurement, for limitations on environmental laws and for fiscal
restraint. Gov. Edmund G.  (Jerry) Brown Jr. of California has earned some
conservative credentials by calling for balanced Federal budgets and for a new
era of limits to what government can do.

For Theodore H. White, chronicler of Presidential campaigns, conservatism has
always been unattractive. But recently, he has seen the Democratic Party fall
into the thrall of an orthodoxy, especially governing the use of quotas, which
he asserts is an ''absolute disaster'' for the party. ''I don't think of myself
as a conservative,'' he says. ''But I believe that dogma - and that includes
liberal and conservative dogma - must not take precedence over reality. A
liberal is a person who believes that water can be made to run uphill. A
conservative is someone who believes everybody should pay for his water. I'm
somewhere in between: I believe water should be free, but that water flows
downhill.''

The evidence is there that many Americans, despite their long distrust of
labels, and of ideologies, are even sheepishly donning the term
''conservative.'' The Gallup Organization, for example, found that while
throughout the mid-1960's Americans were almost equally divided about how to
describe themselves, in the most recent polls, 60 percent of them chose the
label of ''conservative'' and 40 percent chose 'liberal'' - roughly the division
prevailing more than 20 years ago, and, indeed, all the way back to 1936.

And something new in American political sentiment was ignited after the seizure
of hostages at the United States Embassy in Iran last November and the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan the following month.  In the course of the preceding
decade, a steady increase in popular support had welled up in favor of American
defense spending, following a low point associated with the failure in Vietnam.
But the more recent explosion of sentiment in that direction is almost
unprecedented. A 1972 Newsweek/Gallup poll found that 49 percent of Americans
surveyed were concerned about keeping our military defenses strong; in February
1980, it was a staggering 78 percent. In 1974, a Newsweek/Gallup poll found that
only 33 percent wanted the United States to play a more important role as a
world leader; in February 1980, the figure had jumped to 57 percent.

Conservatism, in other words, may well be a label whose time has come, but it is
a product of an erratic history of change and fierce disagreement over its
meaning. The distinctions have been blurred by events, just as have those
between ''Republican'' and ''Democrat,'' to name two other labels whose meaning
is as elusive to those who accept them as it is to those who cannot.  Perhaps
because it carries a residue of arch reaction and Victorian fuddy-duddyism, many
American ''conservatives'' don't like the term themselves. By some accounts,
Ronald Reagan would today just as soon tuck the label away between the covers of
a volume of the speeches of Franklin D. Roosevelt.

The difficulty that many politicians and writers experience with the
conservative label is perhaps best understood in the context of the changes of
meaning the term has undergone over the years.  Consider the following:

A few decades ago, a liberal was someone who opposed the use of racial,
religious or ethnic quotas in jobs and education. Today, someone who opposes
quotas or affirmative action for blacks or Hispanics or other minorities in
college, medical school or the work force is considered by many to be a
conservative. Still, the opponents of quotas are fighting to retain their
liberal escutcheons on the ground that quotas were what confined Jews and other
ethnic groups to ''their station at birth,'' as Midge Decter, the social critic,
once put it. ''True,'' she wrote, ''these days there are many more things I wish
to conserve than to improve upon, and my skepticism about the possibility of
doing the latter has been well fed of late. But all of that pales in the light
of my recognition that had conservatism been dominant among my precursors, they
would have ruled me out. In other words, I have no choice but to be a liberal.''

More than a hundred years ago, it was considered ''liberal'' to oppose the
intervention of government in the private ''freeenterprise'' economic system,
because among the freedoms and liberties prized by Thomas Jefferson and other
liberals was the right to private property. But today the laissez-faire
philosophy of that great liberal 18th-century economist Adam Smith is considered
by Americans to be conservative. And since the New Deal, at least, it has been
considered liberal to intervene in the marketplace with labor laws and consumer,
environmental and safety protections, and conservative to get government out of
the way and let American business do the job of achieving growth and finding new
energy sources, as Mr. Reagan puts it, again and again. Here, too, labels remain
deceiving, since Milton Friedman, one of the world's leading laissez-faire
economists, prefers to think of himself as a freemarket liberal, not a
conservative.

In the 1930's and 40's, it was liberals who urged the United States to intervene
in the fight against Fascism. After World War II, and well into the 60's, it was
still considered by many to be liberal to fight against isolationism and move
aggressively against Communist influence abroad. For much of the 70's, most
liberals severely criticized the principle behind such global intervention and
demanded that the line be held on defense spending.

Finally, only a few years ago, liberals were among the most ardent supporters of
the First Amendment's protection of freedom of expression, and they still are.
But today, Aryeh Neier, former executive director of the American Civil
Liberties Union, complains about the increasing frequency with which some
longtime friends of civil liberties, now acting on behalf of the ''oppressed,''
are taking up the cause for censorship.  In a recent issue of The Nation
magazine, Mr. Neier wrote: ''We see Jews trying to censor the casting of Vanessa
Redgrave as a concentration-camp inmate in a television film, gay activists
trying to censor the filming of 'Cruising,' Chinatown residents in San Francisco
trying to censor the filming of new Charlie Chan movies, feminists trying to
censor pornography, black and Hispanic residents of the South Bronx trying to
censor the filming of 'Fort Apache,' and so on.''

These ''new censors,'' he says, are trying to portray the First Amendment as ''a
shield for privilege and power'' in order to justify their approach as
enlightened liberals. His criticism is disputed by the feminist Susan
Brownmiller, whose liberal credentials include years of work in the peace and
civil-rights movements.  Rejecting the label ''conservative'' for herself, Miss
Brownmiller says today: ''A woman's right not to be degraded or humiliated is
more important than someone's right to distribute and display pornography at a
newsstand.'' Once again, the argument arises: Which side is the liberal, which
the conservative?

Thus, no single ideological trend explains why Theodore White or New York's
Mayor Edward Koch are considered to be conservative because they oppose quotas,
or why Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan has been described as conservative,
because he now says that the Johnson Administration's Great Society, of which he
was a part, tried to accomplish too much - or why Mr. Kirkland, the nation's
most powerful labor leader, is called conservative because he believes in a
strong defense. One might say, equally, that the Rev. Jesse Jackson, the fiery
black preacher, is also conservative, because he tells black teen-agers to study
hard, exercise self-discipline, and stay away from sex, pornography and drugs.
But, somehow, one can't imagine Mr. Jackson proclaiming the title for himself.
The axioms of conservatism have come to include: the protection of private
property, private enterprise and private institutions from Government
intervention and regulation; the preservation of traditional values associated
with families, the work ethic, tightly knit communities and rugged
individualism; and full-scale military preparedness, combined with the will -
which conservatives feel has failed of late - to protect American interests
overseas from Communist, or Communist-fed, encroachment.

Americans subscribe to many of these views - in the abstract, at least.  This is
part of the problem with making generalizations about the conservative drift in
the United States. The first thing to remember is that many Americans are, in
fact, ambivalent, perhaps even schizophrenic, about specifics; and that, in many
ways, they have become more liberal, as well as more conservative.

Recent opinion polls show that, in their attitudes toward divorce, interfaith
marriage, abortion and sexual behavior, and in their acceptance of the rights of
minorities, Americans are more liberal than they have ever been. One measure of
that cultural shift is that the first divorced man to become President of the
United States may well turn out to be Ronald Reagan. And, it doesn't seem to
bother Mr. Reagan's conservative supporters, either, that his unmarried daughter
once lived with a rock musician.

As for Americans' mixed and conflicting political feelings, early this year, two
social scientists - Everett Carll Ladd Jr. of the University of Connecticut and
Seymour Martin Lipset of Stanford University - showed how deep these were.
Writing in Public Opinion magazine, the authors concluded that Americans remain
''strongly committed to a large, ever-growing role of government,'' but that
they also believe government has become ''too intrusive, too profligate, too
inefficient'' and ''the major contributor'' to inflation.

While a 1978 survey by the Center for Political Studies of the Institute for
Social Research at the University of Michigan found 76 percent of Americans felt
government was too powerful, this year, both the Gallup and New York Times/CBS
polls found most Americans favoring wage and price controls. Indeed, a
Newsweek/Gallup poll last February found that of those voters who considered
themselves the ''most conservative,'' about half said they would be ''more
likely'' to vote for a candidate because he favored controls. The chief reason
why no uniform, fixed ideas have consistently carried the conservative label is
that conservatism - uniquely among ideologies -has historically responded less
to the pure musical strains of its theoreticians than to the percussive sounds
of actual events, and change, wrought by others.

Edmund Burke, the great 18th-century British statesman, established himself as
the father of conservatism when he rose to defend privilege against the liberal
philosophy of political change as epitomized by the revolutionary winds in
France. At the same time, the liberal economics of Adam Smith, the Scotsman who
saw free-market capitalism as an agent for progress and economic growth, were
challenging the European system of mercantilism. The Industrial Revolution of
the 19th century transformed Adam Smith's laissez-faire liberalism into
modern-day American conservatism, which, though it professes to believe in
change and growth, continues to defend preserving existing status and privilege
as a product of free enterprise, merit and equal opportunity.

Virtually alone among modern industrial democracies, the United States today
seems free of such radical ideologies as Marxism and Fascism. Instead, Americans
accept an amalgam of philosophies. There are echoes of Thomas Jefferson's
denunciation of ''the dead hand of the past,'' but there are also echoes of
Burke's appeal for prudence and tradition.

The flowering of conservatism in recent years comes from contemporary events,
just as surely as it did in the age of Burke.  Five different strains of
rightward drift can be discerned in America, each reflecting deeper historical
changes contributing to the conservative tide today.

First and foremost is the squeeze of low economic growth, high energy prices,
high consumer prices and unemployment -painful characteristics of the current
period of intractable economic decline in the United States. After decades of
spreading government, even many liberals find themselves turning today to the
conservative solutions of easing regulation and reducing the burden of taxes on
business to spur productivity, investment and economic expansion. In the l960's,
when the nation's economy exploded with growth, it was politically easier than
it is today to provide income and relief to those at the lower end of the scale.
Today the tide no longer rises to lift the boats of the poor and the middle
class alike, and Congress finds it harder to answer the old question, ''Who gets
what?'' as resources seem to diminish. This is the age of what Lester Thurow,
the economist, has called the ''zero-sum society,'' where scarcity makes it
increasingly hard for Americans to respond to the appeal for the redistribution
of resources implicit in Senator Edward M. Kennedy's call for ''economic
justice.''

Second has been the evolution of liberal attitudes toward social justice in the
last 20 years. Once, it was assumed by liberals, perhaps naively, that the civil
rights revolution would open the floodgates for economic abundance to wipe out
class conflict and achieve social harmony. It didn't happen quite as they
envisoned. But even before that became clear, President Lyndon B. Johnson
declared in a historic speech at Howard University in 1965 that the goal of the
Great Society was equality, not simply as ''a right and a theory'' but ''as a
fact and a result.'' Some liberals, accordingly, moved beyond legislating equal
opportunity to such steps as busing, affirmative action and racial quotas for
minorities. Typical of the liberals who turned against these steps was Nathan
Glazer, an intellectual who had once even thought of himself as a social
''radical,'' but who now says he feels ''closer to those who now call themselves
conservative than to those who call themselves liberal.''

Third has been a more practical disenchantment, even among liberals, with the
capacity of government to solve problems.  Conservatives who traditionally
opposed government programs on ideological grounds are today joined by
neo-conservatives who oppose at least some of the plans on grounds of
inefficiency. This trend has been fed by various academic studies in the last 10
years suggesting that more money spent on education does not necessarily improve
the performance of pupils. Today, national health insurance, the last big item
on the liberal agenda, worries many traditional liberals because of its
potential for increasing hospital costs. Of the socalled new era of lowered
expectations, Senator Moynihan says: ''This is not being conservative. You are
not conservative if you say there are only two pints of milk in a quart, even if
it is the liberal who says there are three. What some of us in the mid-1960's
did was let the promises get very fast and easy. I did not think the Great
Society was going to succeed at half the things it attempted.  Fifteen years
later, I do not think it useless to try anything. But we should never promise
anything we can't deliver.''

Fourth has been the response by increasing numbers of Americans to new concerns
about families, neighborhoods and institutions.  Demographic changes 15 years
ago led to turmoil in the ghettos and on campuses, and a ''blacklash'' resulted.
One-time liberals like Daniel Bell, the Harvard sociologist, now mourn the
decline of religious beliefs; others find it respectable to believe that street
crime ought not to go unpunished. But the reason this form of cultural
conservatism deserves its own category is that it often doesn't fit neatly into
the traditional conservative abhorrence of the state. The antiabortion movement,
for instance, favors government restrictions on abortion; others are for
government-sponsored prayer in schools. ''Somewhere you've got to put the flag
down and draw the line and say, 'Enough is enough,' '' declares Senator Jesse
Helms, the North Carolina Republican who led the successful fight for a series
of ''profamily'' planks in the Republican platform. As noted earlier, however,
opinion surveys suggest that most Americans do not share Mr. Helms's
self-described ''revulsion at the trends in this country -the permisiveness, the
pornography, the drugs, the abortion, living together, divorce.'' But those who
do are gaining increased political power through the existence of lobbying
groups in virtualy every state of the union.  Phyllis Schlafly, the Illinois
housewife now leading the fight against the Equal rights amendment, has
succeeded, so far, in blocking ratification, despite heavy public sentiment in
favor of it. Another strong, well-organized political force in this area has
been mounted by the newly powerful evangelical Christian groups, whose views
found their way into much of the Republican platform this year.

Fifth, and perhaps the most surprising, is the dramatic return by Americans to a
concern about military might not seen since the 1950's. Under renewed fears
driven by the crises in Afghanistan and Iran, President Carter has been forced
to shelve the nuclear arms treaty with the Soviet Union, proceed with draft
registration, pledge to seek an annual 4.5 percent increase in military spending
and embark on a range of new missile and weapons programs. Yet Mr. Carter finds
himself proclaimed by Republicans, and many Democrats, as soft on defense. Four
years ago, the Democrats pledged to cut the military budget; this year, they
assail the Republicans for not having increased it more when they were in
office. Foreign-policy experts say that America may have emerged from its post-
Vietnam era, a time of uncertainty about the use of power overseas. But
in-creasing numbers of Democrats echo the view of Norman Podhoretz in his new
book, ''The Present Danger,'' that a ''culture of appeasement'' grips the land.
Republicans, meanwhile, have moved beyond their obsession with ''monolithic''
Communism now that the ''China card'' seems like a valuable agent against the
Russians. But the Democratic convention, where liberals were able to push the
party to endorse spending $12 billion for jobs, also endorsed the multibillion
dollar mobile missile system, as liberals looked on in dismay. Like many others,
the defense issue strikes a chord of mixed feelings among Americans, who may
worry about overseas threats but who are also reluctant to sacrifice to meet
them. Thus, draft registration and the Soviet grain embargo are unpopular among
conservatives, and Mr. Reagan has moved to oppose them.

Of all the historical forces at play in the conservative mood today, few in the
end seem more powerful than the two-headed monster of energy scarcity and
economic stagflation. For in retrospect, it was economic growth - unimpeded,
generous, noninflationary and seemingly endless growth - that shone steadily
like bright sunlight on the greenhouse that was America in the mid-60's,
nurturing the liberal idea that boundless prosperity could bring economic
justice to all.

Before it foundered on the debate over Guns vs. Butter, the Great Society could,
therefore, indulge in the luxury of a debate over Butter vs. Butter. Prosperity
deferred the longstanding dilemma of politics regarding who should suffer at the
expense of whom. The liberal argument for a redistribu-tion of society's goods
found wide ac-ceptance as it became understood that everybody - rich and poor -
would end up with more goods. Poverty was to be wiped out - but painlessly.

''Production has eliminated the more acute tensions associated with
inequality,'' John Kenneth Galbraith proclaimed in 1958 in ''The Affluent
Society,'' in a classic summary of this liberal faith. ''And it has become
evident to conservatives and liberals alike that increasing output is an
alternative to redistribution or even to the reduction of inequality.''

Ten years after the book appeared, the liberal hope for justice began to strain
under the angry demands of students, black militants and others favoring a more
drastic and less gradual redistribution of the nation's wealth. Liberals failed
to realize it at the time, but the more serious threat to their hopes was the
end of the period of postwar economic growth as everybody had come to know it.

In the last seven years, the United States has experienced its two worst
recessions since the Great Depression, both of them more or less induced to help
cool the fires of inflation. And yet the underlying inflation rate continues to
grow, propelled by skyrocketing energy prices.

Almost in desperation, liberals in search of a solution to these woes are
blaming that old conservative enemy, the state, and the fact that government now
accounts for a staggering 32 percent of the nation's output. Talk of
''reindustrialization'' is in the air, coming from liberals and conservatives
alike. At the moment, the talk is in the laissez-faire tradition of reducing
government regulations, business taxes and other government burdens on private
investment, which is deemed the key to both improved productivity and economic
expansion. Even Senator Kennedy assured Business Week magazine this year that
the Federal budget should be reduced as a percentage of the gross national
product.

With liberals, and even radicals, rediscovering capitalism, conservatives find
themselves in some disagreement. When John F.  Kennedy proposed to stimulate the
economy with a tax cut in 1963, Republicans and conservatives opposed him on
ideological grounds.  Reduce government spending first and then cut taxes, they
said.

This year, ''traditional conservatives'' like Herbert Stein and George Shultz -
two former economic advisers in the Nixon Administration - hewed to that line,
advising Governor Reagan not to endorse the Republican-sponsored scheme in
Congress to cut taxes by 30 percent. But the ''populist conservatives,'' like
Representative Jack F. Kemp of Buffalo, N.Y., and economist Arthur Laffer, a
mastermind of the Republican tax-cut proposal, prevailed, and Mr. Reagan now
advocates a tax cut the Democrats are opposing as inflationary. The 1963 tax-cut
debate is repeating itself, with the roles reversed.  In like fashion,
conservatives are split over which tradition to follow in agricultural and
industrial policy. On the one hand, ''libertarian conservatives'' favor as
little government as possible, and oppose farm price supports and the bailout of
the Chrysler Corporation. On the other, ''traditional conservatives'' justify
such intervention, just as they did in the mercantile system of the 18th and
19th centuries. A ''new mercantilism'' has taken hold in Japan and West Germany,
where the governments long ago stepped in to stimulate production of exports,
these conservatives point out, and the United States ought to do the same if it
is to compete. Hence the genesis of America's ''industrial'' policy to help
remodel the automobile and steel industries, as a starting point.

Once again, liberals fit into this move by supporting it. No liberal alternative
to Government aid for private industry has yet emerged politically. Douglas A.
Fraser, president of the United Automobile Workers, for example, has gone so far
as to propose tariffs to save his members' jobs. No one worked harder for the
Chrysler bailout than Mr. Fraser's friend Senator Kennedy.

But before the conservative trend takes root completely in American society, it
will likely have to overcome the twin obstacles of its own internal discord, and
the deep American ambivalence to orthodoxy and dogma. These are the subtleties
of American sentiment contributing to the caution of Mr. Carter, Mr. Reagan and
Mr.  Anderson as they shade their views and compete for votes this fall.

Mr. Reagan, for example, has found it possible, so far, to mute the
disagreements in his camp over his massive tax-cut proposal, and over such
foreign-policy issues as the maintenance of relations with China. But, surely,
before the campaign is over, Mr. Carter's strategists will be trying to bring
these disagreements to the surface.

The next important debate between conservatives and liberals could take place
during the campaign as the candidates argue over how best to ''reindustrialize''
America. For now, conservatives in both parties are dominating this debate with
their prescription of free enterprise, but liberals are likely to point to the
''so-cial democrat'' models in Europe and Japan that encompass extensive
Government planning and Government-sponsored partnerships between labor and
business to achieve the high degree of industrial efficiency Americans now envy.
President Carter is being advised by many to follow this route, just as he did
in pushing for a huge Government-operated synthetic fuel corporation to create
new energy sources. Whatever level of Government involvement the President
selects, his choice is sure to be attacked by Mr. Reagan, and others, as too
much.

The ambivalence illustrated by the opinion polls cited earlier shows also how
uncertain Americans are about the future. And the uncertainties seem to be
feeding on themselves, even contributing to what Jimmy Carter, a year ago,
termed, perhaps too grandly, a ''crisis of confidence'' in the United States.
Mr. Carter has long since set aside that theme, even though his campaign
managers and many other opinion experts maintain that the diagnosis is accurate.
The irresolution is what causes voters to send mixed signals about Government,
and candidates to waffle when pressed to decide where they stand. Elections are
supposed to determine a nation's direction in decisive ways, and in some
respects the choices among the candidates are as ''stark'' as the candidates
themselves say. But because of the deeper undercurrents of uncertainty and
disagreement, the depth and force of the current conservative trend in the
United States may not be known for years to come.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jimmy Carter Photo of Sen. Gary Hart Photo of
Susan Brownmiller; Photo of Theodore H. White

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOT NORMAN ROCKWELL

BYLINE: By JAMES R. MELLOW; James R. Mellow is a freelance writer and art
critic. His new biography, ''Nathaniel Hawthorne in His Times,'' will be
published next month.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1359 words


AN AMERICAN SAGA The Life and Times of Rockwell Kent.  By David Traxel.
Illustrated. 248 pp. New York: Harper & Row. $15.95.

ROCKWELL KENT'S reputation has suffered a serious but explicable decline. By the
time of his death in 1971 at the age of 88, Kent was a nonperson on the American
art scene. Radical in his politics, reactionary in his art, he appealed to
neither the mass audience nor the mandarins of the cultural establishment.

Kent's highly romanticized paintings of virile men confronting nature and the
elements - ''Toilers of the Sea,'' ''Men and Mountains'' were typical titles
-might have been perfectly suited to middlebrow tastes; his political views
certainly were not. At the age of 22, Kent had joined the Socialist Party;
through much of his later career he was what could be termed, in the parlance of
the time, a Communist sympathizer. His much-publicized 1953 appearance before
Senator Joseph McCarthy's Senate subcommittee - at which Kent took the Fifth
Amendment rather than cooperate even to the extent of admitting that he had
never, in fact, been an official member of the Communist Party - had serious
repercussions in his professional life. His once lucrative career as a
commercial artist and illustrator dried up; a museum in Maine canceled the
retrospective exhibition it had planned and declined Kent's offer of a sizable
collection of his work.

In 1960, disgruntled, he gave the collection - some 80 paintings, 800 drawings
and copies of his prints - to the Soviet Union. There, he was regarded as a
cultural hero; his 75th birthday exhibition, a rare honor accorded a foreign
artist, had been a huge success with the Russian public. In 1967, awarded the
Lenin Peace Prize - the Soviet-bloc equivalent of the Nobel Prize - Kent donated
a portion of the money to the South Vietnamese Liberation Front for the medical
relief of women and children, a calculated gesture against American
participation in the Vietnam War that predictably brought him an avalanche of
hate mail and prompted angry editorials throughout the country.

If Kent's antiwar sentiments found favor with American intellectuals, his art
seldom did. When Abstract Expressionism became the reigning style of the
American and the international art scene, Kent announced in dogmatic fashion:
''Abstraction is the cultural counterpart of the atom bomb.'' Most serious
critics ignored him; if he was mentioned in the art histories being written at
the time, it was only a passing reference to his having been one of the
promising students of Robert Henri, the Ash Can School artist. It was, probably,
one of the harsher ironies of Kent's career that in the public mind he was so
often confused with Norman Rockwell, whose cheery barbershop-view of American
life was vastly popular. Kent regularly received letters from bewildered
admirers who wanted to know how he could hold such traitorous political opinions
and paint all those nice Saturday Evening Post covers.

David Traxel's aptly titled ''An American Saga'' is the first significant
attempt to reconsider Kent's case. Mr. Traxel's style is lean and understated, a
good match for the macho image of himself that Kent liked to project. Mr. Traxel
gives a vivid and not altogether flattering portrait of a man of monumental
energy and ego, a man with a sense of mission that bordered on the messianic.
Kent wondered, for example, ''why it happens to be I who has been chosen to
carry on for a while the cloud-hidden ideals of the race.'' Kent was an artist
with distinct literary tastes; his enthusiasm for Nietzsche and William Blake
illuminated his striving to be both superman and mystic in one. (Contrasted with
this was a lifelong tendency to play crude and frequently cruel practical jokes,
one of which sent its victim, a gullible radio-operator on a ship bound for
Chile, to a mental institution at the first port of call.)

Kent's liberated sexual views, as detailed by Mr. Traxel, were cut from the same
larger-than-life-size pattern. His rampant extracurricular activities with
Follies girls and wealthy young women were all duly reported to his three
successive wives who were expected - in true emancipated fashion - to be
cooperative and understanding. (During his college years at Columbia, however,
he exhibited an odd strain of priggishness, paying prostitutes the going rate in
order to harangue them about their sinful lives.)

Mr. Traxel offers no critical discussions of Rockwell Kent's work - only a
straightforward narrative of the progress of his career, the pictures painted
and the critical responses to his exhibitions.  Perhaps it is just as well: As a
painter and a commercial artist, Kent remained a highly competent illustrator in
a style that was cold and correct, occasionally romantic, but lacked the genius
that such a despised modernist as Picasso could bring to even his most casual
scrawl.

Where Mr. Traxel's narrative excels - because he has a real feeling for the
adventurous side of Kent's life - is in his descriptions of Kent's sea voyages
and his arduous expeditions to the outer reaches of civilization, his journeys
to Alaska and Greenland and his aborted attempt to round Cape Horn. Kent's
published accounts of his travels, such as ''Wilderness'' (1920) and ''N by E''
(1930), illustrated by himself, may prove to be his most enduring artistic
achievements - and the most accessible, since a large body of his work is behind
the Iron Curtain and a significant portion of his later paintings was destroyed
in a fire in his upstate New York farmhouse in 1969.

The real saga of ''An American Saga'' is political. Kent was never one of the
chic radicals who preach the good word on the cocktail circuit and champion the
poor at the dinner tables of the rich.  Throughout his opportunistic,
publicity-seeking career, he took hard, unpopular stands and paid the hard
personal consequences - though sometimes meeting with success. In 1957, for
example, he challenged Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, who had refused to
grant him a passport. (It had been revoked several years earlier when, without a
proper visa, Kent had attended a ban-the-atomic-bomb conference in Moscow.) Kent
carried the case - at considerable personal expense and energy - all the way to
the Supreme Court, which decided that the Secretary of State could not deny a
passport on the grounds of the applicant's ''beliefs and associations.'' It was
a landmark decision.

In his colorful and abrasive political career, Kent might well have passed for
that old-fashioned, sometimes admirable, but always difficult type -the
consecrated American radical or crank.  Unfortunately, his responses to the
Russian Government do not hold up under the same scrutiny. Kent could never
bring to bear upon the Soviet Union the same strict standards of justice and the
same rigorous criticisms he applied to his own country. Mr. Traxel explains that
Kent's faith in the promise of the Soviet revolution was unshakable: ''He held
to it in spite of the exposure of Stalin's misdeeds and the suppressions in
Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia,'' a list of political transgressions that it
would seem impossible any committed idealist, particularly a man of Kent's
feisty character, could overlook or explain away.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LETTERS;
Friends

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 639 words


To the Editor:

Catching up on my reading after a prolonged absence from the country, I find the
following sentence in the persuasive review (Aug. 3) by William Pritchard of a
book by C. David Heymann called ''American Aristocracy'': ''I strongly doubt
that he (Robert Lowell) was 'denounced ... as a traitor' by Arthur Schlesinger''
because Lowell opposed the war in Vietnam. Mr. Pritchard's doubt is correct, and
Mr. Heymann's allegation is fantasy.

Robert Lowell was a good friend of mine for many years, and the friendship only
ceased with his death. Because of my own criticisms of the Johnson policy, I was
not, as Mr. Pritchard points out, even invited to the White House literary
garden party. Someone in the Johnson White House, probably Bill Moyers, heard
that Robert Lowell intended to make an affirmation of some sort and asked me
whether I would find out what it was all about. I called Robert Lowell, who
explained what he had in mind, and that was it. I may have wondered why, given
his views, he had accepted the White House invitation at all, but I respected
those views and obviously never denounced him as a traitor.  ARTHUR SCHLESINGER
JR.  New York City

Assassination
To the Editor:

In his review of John Dinges's and Saul Landau's book, ''Assassination on
Embassy Row'' (July 27), Thomas Hauser asserts that ''the Carter Administration
appears to have made a genuine effort to bring Letelier's killers to justice.''
Presumably, this should be taken to mean that the Administration pursued the
extraditions of Manuel Contreras and his D.I.N.A. underlings diligently, but
that the effort was stymied by the Chilean Government's lack of cooperation.

This is a serious misrepresentation of the facts. That the Pinochet Government
consistently attempted to stonewall the case goes without saying. But anyone who
was close to the Letelier case, as I was (Ronni Karpen Moffitt, the wife of the
author of this letter was killed with Letelier), during the extradition
proceedings knows that the Carter Administration went out of its way to avoid a
confrontation with the Chilean Government over the extraditions.

Mr. Hauser should consider why, in the attempt to extradite Contreras, the
Administration restricted itself to an appeal to the Chilean supreme court when
Michael Townley had only been obtained after the United States threatened to
break diplomatic relations with the Chilean Government. Surely the Chilean
supreme court, whose chief justice Pinochet appointed, could not have been
expected to investigate an international assassination which implicated Pinochet
himself.

Yet the State Department consistently ignored Congressional pressure to get
tough with Pinochet because the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs feared that
either serious sanctions against Chile or a trial of Contreras in Washington
could conceivably have brought down the Pinochet Government. When the Chileans
realized that no meaningful sanctions would result if Contreras was not
extradited, they dragged out the legal deliberations indefinitely and mocked the
evidence the Jus-tice Department had amassed against Contreras.

Thus, as Mr. Dinges and Mr. Landau conclude, the Administration's unwillingness
to pursue the case to its logical conclusions allowed Pinochet and Contreras to
get away with two terrorist murders in our nation's capital.  MICHAEL MOFFITT
Washington, D.C.

Copyright
To the Editor:

It was a pleasure to read Julian Symons's sympathetic tribute to Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle (Aug. 3). Unfortunately, Mr. Symons is in error when he states that
Conan Doyle's works are free from copyright restrictions. This will be true of
the international copyright at the end of 1980, but many of his books and
stories will continue under protection in the United States. ...
PETER E. BLAU, Washington, D.C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOK ENDS;
ROYALTIES TO THE TREASURY

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 862 words


On Sept. 2, Frank W. Snepp will become the first American writer compelled to
turn over all the income from a book to the United States Treasury because he
had not first cleared it with the Central Intelligence Agency. It is not a day
that is expected to be marked in the annals of literary freedom.

His case has aroused authors, publishers and persons in and out of Government
who fear that it could lead to officially sanctioned suppression of sensitive
subjects. A fortnight ago, the author of ''Decent Interval,'' which criticized
the bungling evacuation of Saigon during the fall of Vietnam, personally
delivered a check for $116,658.13 to the Justice Department made out to the
Treasurer of the United States. This Tuesday, he will deliver another $22,000,
representing the balance of the money he has earned from this valuable work,
published by Random House in 1977.

Mr. Snepp served as the C.I.A.'s chief strategy analyst in Vietnam for
four-and-a-half years. A year after the collapse of Saigon, he resigned from the
agency, following several futile attempts to generate interest in an official
after-action report, and wrote ''Decent Interval'' as a private citizen. Without
hearing arguments, and with three liberal justices dissenting, the Supreme Court
upheld a lower court ruling that the author had violated a ''fiduciary
obligation'' and the C.I.A. should have been allowed to censor his book.

In a talk from his home in Virginia the other day, the 37-year-old writer said
that at no time in the extended litigation had he ever been accused of
publishing any secrets. He added ironically: ''If I had been convicted of
publishing secrets, the fine might have been a mere $10,000 instead of the
amount that I have been forced to give to the Treasury for writing a book that
was widely accepted by the public. I'm living on loans and advances from my
publisher.''

John Hersey, novelist and Authors League spokesman, says that what is at stake
is an author's livelihood; Mr. Snepp's case, he argues, could have a chilling
effect on writers' willingness to address themselves to subjects critical of the
Government. Robert Bernstein, chairman of Random House, says Mr. Snepp made it
possible for Americans to learn from our mistakes in Vietnam, and for this he
has been harassed and reduced to financial ruin by a court decision that gives
censorship the force of law. Townsend Hoopes, president of the Association of
American Publishers, says he hopes that guidelines can be worked out to limit
the use of secrecy agreements by Federal agencies in the future.

Meantime, Mr. Snepp is writing two more books for Random House.  One is about
his case; the second is a novel. He says, ''I am the first

American under court order to have a work of fiction cleared by the C.I.A.''

Isherwood Running

Observing an annual custom, we checked in with Christopher Isherwood because he
turned 76 on Aug. 26, and we were curious to hear what he was up to. From his
home in Santa Monica overlooking the Pacific, he said: ''I'm working on the next
volume of my autobiography for my publishers, Farrar, Straus & Giroux here and
Eyre Methuen in England. It should be a lot of fun because it covers my years
around the Hollywood studios. I'm also doing a small book about my friend Don
Bachardy's portraits of various people. My current book, 'My Guru and His
Disciple,' revolves around my spiritual mentor, Swami Prabhavananda. I'm not
writing anything for the movies now, but there is talk going on about filming 'A
Single Man' and the episode called 'Paul' in 'Down There on a Visit.' ''

How did he regard the current style of mingling fact and fiction?  ''I feel very
much part of the modern writing scene - not at all alienated from the kind of
thing Norman Mailer is doing, analyzing and embellishing fact. It's exactly what
I've been doing for years - even in the Berlin stories. All of my
autobiographical books are sort-of novels.''

The last time we saw him in California a few publishing seasons ago, he jogged
off down Sunset Boulevard after we said goodbye.''I'm still running,'' he
reported cheerfully.

Whirlybird Writing

The helicopter hasn't quite replaced the typewriter, but it has become an
offbeat writer-photographer's tool. Of late, several cities have been portrayed
in a different light: by views from above that show panoramic relationships as
well as close-ups. The technique requires mounting your camera on a gyroscope to
offset the shakes. In the latest such book, Alistair Cooke writes some 35,000
words of text for Robert Cameron's whirlybird color shots in ''Above London,''
copublished by Cameron and Company, San Francisco, and Bodley Head, London. Mr.
Cameron has produced similar books on San Francisco, Los Angeles, Hawaii and
Washington. In this book, writes Cooke, the Thames is the aerial story line.

''One of the big problems is obtaining permission to photograph above a city,''
Mr. Cameron said. ''A capital city like Washington or London is especially
difficult because of all the regulations. We found that, filming London, there
was still a feeling against planes flying too low - a carry-over from the
Blitz.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESSMEN LOG MANY MILES ABROAD

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 16, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 773 words


ALTHOUGH he is a lame duck who is not seeking re-election, Representative John
W. Wydler, Republican of Garden City, made five foreign trips at Government
expense within the last year.

Mr. Wydler was studying ''energy technology'' on the five trips - to the
Dominican Republic and Cuba; Hong Kong, Japan and China; Mexico; Britain and
France, and New Zealand and Antarctica. The trips covered a total of 31 days.

Mr. Wydler was one of five Long Island members of the House who made
taxpayer-financed trips to various countries, according to a compilation by the
Congressional Quarterly. Mr. Wydler did not respond to several telephone calls
seeking his reaction.

Only Representative Jerome A. Ambro, the Huntington Station Democrat who
represents the Third Congressional District, did not take advantage of one of
the ''perks'' of the House.

His fellow Democrat and one of the perennial champion travelers of the House,
Representative Lester L. Wolff of Great Neck, made five trips abroad totaling 39
days, or better than one month of the year.

Mr. Wolff visited a total of 12 countries as part of House Foreign Affairs and
Narcotics Committee missions, as a representative at the United Nations
Conference on Refugees in Switzerland and as a member of the delegation to the
funeral of President Park Chung Hee of South Korea.

In addition to South Korea and Switzerland, Mr. Wolff visited the Philippines,
Thailand, Burma, Malaysia, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Vietnam, Sri Lanka, Pakistan and
the Soviet Union.

The other Long Island Congressional travelers were:

- Representative William Carney of Hauppauge, the Conservative-Republican from
the First District in Suffolk -one trip to Panama as a member of the House
Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee.

- Representative Thomas J. Downey of Suffolk's Second District, three trips - to
France and the Soviet Union in April, France and Austria in June and Thailand,
Indonesia, Malaysia and Vietnam in August.

- Representative Norman F. Lent, Republican of Nassau's Fourth District, three
trips - to Panama with Mr. Carney; Japan and China, and Nigeria, South Africa,
Rhodesia, Tanzania, the Sudan and Italy.  One of the stated purposes of the last
nine-day trip was to inspect coalto-oil conversion plants.

Two Long Island Democrats who played major roles in Senator Edward M. Kennedy's
campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination are being courted by
President Carter's campaign organization.

The two are John F. English, the former Nassau Democratic chairman, and Harold
Ickes, the son of the Franklin D. Roosevelt's Secretary of the Interior. Mr.
English, a longtime friend of the Kennedys, was in the inner circle of the
national Kennedy campaign, while Mr.  Ickes's role, primarily as an election-law
expert, also extended to the national scene. Mr. Ickes is a friend of Vice
President Mondale.

Mr. English and Mr. Ickes are partners in a politically influential Mineola law
firm. Their Carter campaign roles are not settled. But it is almost certain that
neither will devote as much time or have as much influence as they did in the
Kennedy campaign.

The Long Island Trust Company, which has lent at least $550,000 to the
Republican State Committee, is continuing to ''unload'' the loans.

The state committee had borrowed the money for use in Perry B.  Duryea's 1978
gubernatorial campaign. The loans were guaranteed, usually in $25,000 segments,
by prominent Long Island Republicans, Mr. Duryea and his running mate, Bruce
Caputo of Westchester County, and Vincent F. Albano, the Manhattan Republican
chairman, and two of his friends.

About $400,000 of the loans guaranteed by Nassau Republicans, including the
county chairman, Joseph M. Margiotta, and Hempstead Town's Presiding Supervisor,
Alfonse M. D'Amato, had already been switched to other banks, and Long Island
Trust recently began exerting pressure for payment of $95,000 guaranteed by the
Albano group, $50,000 by Mr. Duryea and $50,000 by Mr. Caputo.

Mr. Caputo, who is wealthy in his own right, paid off the $50,000 from his own
funds. ''They asked and I paid,'' he said. Thus he lost $50,000 as well as the
election.

Mr. Albano said he was arranging for a loan from another bank to repay Long
Island Trust. ''They've been patient; this is one time I sympathize with a
banker,'' said Mr. Albano, who is a part-time banker himself in Manhattan.

Mr. Duryea could not be reached for comment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LABOR LEADER FEARS LOSS OF MORE NONDEFENSE JOBS IN STATE

BYLINE: By JOHN S. ROSENBERG

SECTION: Section ZZZ; Page 19, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1454 words


HAMDEN DESPITE the advent of Labor Day, John J. Driscoll is not in a holiday
mood. ''I feel that we've been fortunate and to some extent insulated from the
national recession,'' he said. ''But I doubt we can escape the brunt of it, and
I'm afraid what its long-term effect will be on Connecticut manufacturing.''

As president of the Connecticut State Labor Council, the legislative and
political voice for 175,000 active and retired workers affiliated with
A.F.L.-C.I.O. unions, Mr. Driscoll is the state's chief spokesman for organized
labor. In a recent two-hour interview at the council's headquarters, crammed
into a house in this New Haven suburb, he blamed state tax policies and energy
costs for the loss of high-paying manufacturing jobs, and assailed Federal trade
policies and decisions by American ''transnational corporations'' to shift
production to factories overseas.

Although Connecticut has an unemployment rate of 5.8 percent, 2 percentage
points below the national average, Mr. Driscoll warned: ''Were it not for
defense contracts we'd probably be in the same shape as Ohio or Indiana,''
heavily industrialized states deeply affected by automobile-industry layoffs.

Billion-dollar contracts for, among other products, jet engines at the central
Connecticut plants of the Pratt & Whitney Aircraft division of the United
Technologies Corporation and for nuclear submarines at the Electric Boat
division of the General Dynamics Corporation in Groton have bolstered the
state's economy. But defense work, Mr. Driscoll said, ''brings with it not only
job opportunities but also problems when the contracts are finished,'' as was
the case when spending for the Vietnam War ended.

Mr. Driscoll's concern is that these contracts conceal structural weaknesses in
Connecticut nondefense manufacturing. ''With recession creeping in all over
except in defense plants,'' he said, ''we're afraid more jobs will be lost
permanently.'' Among the completed or announced plant closings he mentioned were
the United States Steel mill in New Haven, the Armstrong Rubber Company tire
plant in West Haven, and brass mills in Bridgeport and Waterbury.

In response to those closings, he said, the council will renew its support for
controversial legislation that would require companies to give advance
notification of their plans. Beyond this, Mr.  Driscoll said, he supports ''not
just notification but compensation'' to workers in the form of extended
severance benefits until they find new jobs, and to communities to make up for
reductions in the property tax base.

''I think it's a pipe dream to talk about being able to continue as a
service-oriented state,'' he said. ''The higher wages in manufacturing have been
a major part of our prosperity. As manufacturing shrinks and we end up with just
banks and insurance and tourism, we end up taking in each other's wash.''

Nor does he see the problem being alleviated by the move of corporate
headquarters into Fairfield County. ''What good does that do?'' he asked.
''Relatively small office payrolls and high-paid executives - that's not a means
of putting to work the products of our high schools and colleges.''

Mr. Driscoll expects one sign of the state's economic vulnerability to show up
in the immediate future. ''Projections by the State Labor Department,'' he said,
''show they'll have to borrow from the Federal Unemployment Compensation Trust
Fund again next spring'' to pay benefits to laid-off workers.

Connecticut still owes $371 million that it borrowed to pay benefits in the
mid-1970's, and the state unemployment compensation tax structure weighs heavily
on cyclical manufacturers and construction companies, which undergo high
unemployment during recessions. Stable employers such as banks and insurance
companies pay up to $90 a worker in annual taxes, while companies with less
favorable layoff records pay up to four times as much.

While this system, which has been vigorously defended by the Connecticut
Business and Industry Association, matches the tax burden to each company's
unemployment record, Mr. Driscoll said it ignored the ability to pay and
penalized the manufacturers most likely to move out of state. Both Scovill Inc.
and Uniroyal Inc., he said, testified before the General Assembly a few years
ago that without a flatter tax rate structure, they would have to reconsider
their Connecticut operations. Since then, the affected factories have been sold
or shut down. ''The Legislature was warned and had no reaction,'' Mr. Driscoll
said. ''I suspect it's been a factor in the recent closings, too.''

High energy costs are also affecting state businesses, jeopardizing jobs, Mr.
Driscoll said. For instance, although Armstrong Rubber closed its Connecticut
plant, it continues to make tires in lowercost states such as Tennessee. While
he said he supports a variety of Federal energy actions, including a Government
oil-importing agency, Mr. Driscoll restated the council's support for nuclear
power in Connecticut. Of the Millstone III plant under construction in
Waterford, he said: ''We think that ought to be finished and we oppose a
moratorium on nuclear power until we have adequate alternative sources of
energy.''

The council, torn between members who work for Northeast Utilities and those who
use electricity in their homes, has taken no position on Northeast's request for
a $178 million rate increase. But it supports efforts to permit selective
burning of cheap, high-sulfur fuel oil, a measure supported by brass companies
and other users.

Mr. Driscoll also saw comprehensive state tax reform as a cure for some economic
problems. ''We believe that both the sales tax and the property tax are
regressive and they ought to be supplemented by a steeply progressive state
income tax,'' he said. Such a tax, he suggested, could provide $75 million in
business tax relief, perhaps by reducing the levy on personal property that
particularly affects manufacturers that use costly capital equipment.

Looking beyond issues before the State Legislature, Mr. Driscoll singled out
American trade policy for criticsm. ''We're particularly disturbed that we're
supposed to be involved in a free-trade world, but we're the only free-trade
nation,'' he said. Although Connecticut exports jet engines, machine tools,
helicopters and other manufactured goods, he said, exports ''account for only a
few percent of the gross national product.''

He dismissed arguments about protectionism and retaliatory tariffs as ''the kind
of myth-making that seems to be perpetuated in academia. If there are other
nations involved in free trade, O.K., we ought to get in on it, but why the hell
should we be the patsys?'' Imports, he said, had contributed to the problems of
U.S. Steel, Armstrong, Uniroyal and the brass industry. While foreign nations
restrict imports from the United States, Federal assistance payments for workers
displaced by imports of footwear, tires, clothing and flatware have gone to
10,000 Connecticut workers in the last two years.

The other side of free trade, Mr. Driscoll said, is a lenient policy toward
domestic manufacturers who set up production facilities overseas to maximize
profits. While praising the job-retention efforts of Edward J. Stockton,
Connecticut Commissioner of Economic Development, Mr. Driscoll said: ''It's
difficult for him to sell low-interest loans for new plants and equipment to
firms that are determined to go overseas.'' He attributed the failure of
Uniroyal's Naugatuck footwear operations, in part, to new factories in Asia,
Europe and Latin America.

''Unless the Federal Government changes its economic policies with respect to
incentives to transnationals to set up business abroad,'' he said, ''we're all
going to be in trouble. Unless people have jobs here making goods for Americans
to buy, there won't be enough taxes to pay for the weaponry needed to protect
the jobs that are here. If we ship all our technology overseas, there won't be
enough purchasing power here to buy the goods - it will be the 1920's all over
again.  That's not just a Connecticut problem, that's a national problem.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of James Driscoll

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LABOR DAY SYMBOLS VITAL TO 3 SEEKING PRESIDENCY

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1281 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 31


The traditional Presidential campaign begins tomorrow in Tuscumbia, Ala.,
Calumet City, Ill., and Jersey City, communities chosen not because they are
mass population centers that will expose candidates to huge crowds of voters but
because each fulfills a critical symbolic need for the candidate who picked it.

Their combined population of 280,300 is less than the attendance at some single
opening-day events of recent campaigns. But the scenes, the accents and the
backdrops are as important in carrying an opening message as crowds themselves.
There will be other occasions for mass rallies in the 65 days left of the race.

An election that once seemed to be Ronald Reagan's to lose has tightened up, at
least in national public opinion polls, to about even. But President Carter
remains unpopular both nationally and in several of the big states he must win
to repeat his victory of 1976.

For the President, Tuscumbia and its 8,615 inhabitants will be crowded with
another 20,000 or so participants at a picnic where Mr.  Carter will strive to
insure his Southern base against Ronald Reagan. The President will also use this
Labor Day event to promote last week's economic proposals as a worthy part of
the American future he hopes to help build.

Reagan to Be in Jersey City

For Ronald Reagan, an ethnic festival at Liberty State Park is more than a
device to use Jersey City's 232,137 inhabitants as a toehold for an assault on
the Garden State's 17 electoral votes. With the Statue of Liberty in the
background, it will also be an occasion to appeal to the themes of the historic
greatness that Mr. Reagan thinks he can recapture for the nation, and for a bid
to other ethnic voters uncomfortable with Mr. Carter.

For John B. Anderson, the independent candidate, the Labor Day parade in Calumet
City, population 39,548, is an event he can use both to reinforce his ties to
Illinois and to seek blue-collar votes.

Each of the candidates will be moving on to bigger cities later in the day, Mr.
Carter to Washington, Mr. Reagan to Detroit and Mr.  Anderson to Chicago, and
within a week their campaign commercials will be showing on television.

But even though the candidates have been making speeches for weeks, and can
expect to grip national attention only with the first nationally televised
debate (providing plans for such an encounter do not fall through), Labor Day
remains a key date on any political calendar.

Polls Find Dislike of Choices

The customary end of vacation season brings a sharp upturn in newspaper
circulation and television news watching, factors that will bring the campaign
home to the voter, like it or not.

There are widespread signs that the American electorate does not like it much in
1980. One opinion poll after another has recorded majorities who called the
choice unsatisfactory.

Peter D. Hart, a leading Democratic polltaker, said: ''Voters are making a
negative choice. As many as 50 percent will change their minds between now and
Election Day.''

Professionals talk about ''the volatility of the electorate,'' emphasizing
concern that the election is vulnerable to unforeseen events. Republicans worry
about an ''October surprise'' in foreign policy.

Anderson Impact a Big Uncertainty

But the surest uncertainty in this election is the impact of Mr.  Anderson's
candidacy. Many politicians report that his support has recently slipped, but
some major national polls do not bear this out.

Robert Teeter, a leading Republican polltaker, has observed of Mr.  Anderson,
''he's a critical factor even at 6 percent.'' Mr. Anderson, with 17 percent
support in the most recent Roper Poll, prefers to discuss his candidacy in terms
of victory rather than in terms of impact on other candidates. But because a
President is chosen as a result of 51 separate state elections, not on national
popular vote total, Mr. Teeter's point is key.

Even a handful of votes could enable Mr. Anderson to tip a key state and thus
the election. And New York, where the Liberal Party's decision in September on
whether to name him as its candidate emphasizes that argument at a critical
level: the state's 41 electoral votes.

For Mr. Anderson, short of money because he does not get the Federal checks for
$29,440,000 that the major party candidates receive, access to nationally
televised debates is of vital importance in establishing his legitimacy.

'Black Eye' Over Debates Possible

The belief that Mr. Anderson will take votes from the President is so firmly
ingrained in the Carter camp that it is weighing whether to take the blame for
blocking all debates if that is the cost of keeping Mr. Anderson out.

Tim Kraft, Mr. Carter's campaign manager, conceded there would be a ''big black
eye'' from such a decision. But he agreed with Patrick H. Caddell, the campaign
polltaker, who argued the 10-term Republican Congressman ''is certainly doing
more for his party and its candidate than he could if he were still there.''

The Reagan campaign is also in an uncertain state. After his easy march through
the primaries, the former Governor of California appeared to many to be headed
for a landslide victory.

Repeated Stumbles by Reagan

But in recent weeks he stumbled repeatedly over United States relations with
China and Taiwan, and injected Vietnam and evolution, issues of 1968 and 1925,
into the campaign, reviving fears of him as a conservative extremist.

In the minds of some key supporters, those fears among the public have combined
with the exclusionary attitudes of some very conservative backers and some of
the evangelical Christians whose support he has been gaining to make the Reagan
campaign a question mark.

Some insiders in both the Reagan and Carter camps observe that Mr.  Reagan's
problems are a consequence of coming out of the primaries triumphant but thinly
staffed because of financial problems, a situation similar to that of Mr. Carter
late in the summer of 1976.

But Mr. Carter then had a bigger lead than Mr. Reagan has ever enjoyed, and he
did not have the experienced opponents Mr. Reagan faces.

Laxalt May Join Camp as Adviser

Most Reagan leaders agree that the problems must be addressed immediately. One
widely mentioned possibility is having Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada, Mr.
Reagan's campaign chairman and old friend, along on the plane for continuing
political advice.

The other moves plainly in prospect are near-constant campaign emphasis on the
state of the economy, and a reliance on help from Reagan's well-staffed campaign
operation and from the resurgent Republican Party generally.

The Carter campaign, taking heart from recent polls and Reagan fluffs, now
displays a confidence that would have seemed remarkable a month ago.

One important reason is the post-convention support of Senator Edward M. Kennedy
and the professionals behind him. ''I'm a professional and this man is our
candidate,'' was how one Kennedy backer, George Dunne, chairman of the Cook
County Democrats, explained the new allegiance in Chicago last week.

A Clouded 'Vision of Future'

Carter managers acknowledge they have serious problems: inflation, the economy
and the hostages who may complete a year of captivity in Teheran on Election
Day.  Even when Mr. Carter's standing in the polls goes up, approval of his
handling of his job remains low. They Carter camp talks of his ''vision of the
future,'' but concedes a failure to convey it as a strong positive force for his
re-election.

The Carter managers believe that they are well organized, in position to take
advantage of the unexpected, and that there are simply more Democrats to come
home to them by Election Day.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ronald and Nancy Reagan in Upperville, Va.

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 2, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CARTER AND REAGAN OPEN FALL RACE WITH PRAISE FOR THE POLISH WORKERS

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: JERSEY CITY, Sept. 1


With the Statue of Liberty providing a background, Ronald Reagan formally began
his fall campaign today with an attack on President Carter's economic policies
that, aides say, is to be his main theme for the next two weeks.

The Republican nominee, casting aside his coat and necktie in the sweltering
heat, spoke from a stand erected on the Hudson River waterfront in Liberty State
Park. After his speech, Mr. Reagan was joined on the podium by Stanislaw Walesa,
father of the leader of the Polish workers' strike and a resident of Jersey
City.

Before the crowd of several thousand, Mr. Reagan said that Mr.  Walesa's son,
Lech Walesa, provided the kind of leadership that Mr.  Carter had failed to
deliver in the United States.

An 'Ethnic Picnic'

The event was billed as an ''ethnic picnic,'' and the flags of several Eastern
European countries, which Mr. Reagan terms ''captive nations,'' flapped in the
wind as he returned to the patriotic pleas and general economic criticism that
marked his speeches in the primary campaign.

''It is fitting that on Labor Day we meet beside the harbors - the waters, I
should say - of New York Harbor, with the eyes of Miss Liberty on our
gathering,'' Mr. Reagan said.

In its comments on the economy, the speech reflected the strategy consensus that
grew out of meetings between Mr. Reagan and his advisers over the weekend,
following two weeks in which they were forced to the defensive by press and
political reaction to Mr.Reagan's remarks on foreign policy, the Vietnam War,
religion, evolution and other subjects that Mr. Reagan's advisers regard as
peripheral.

Plans to Attack Carter

Now, a senior adviser to Mr. Reagan said today, the candidate means to stay on
the offensive by steadily attacking Mr. Carter's economic record.

Even so, Mr. Reagan used his speech to defend one of his controversial remarks.
Last week, he labeled the current recession a depression - a usage that his
economic advisers did not endorse.

The voters, Mr. Reagan said today, are not interested in ''semantic quibbles''
over the exact meaning of economic terms. ''They are out of work and they know
who put them out of work,'' he said. ''And they know the difference between a
recession and a depression.

''Let Mr. Carter go to their homes, look their children in the eye and argue
with them that it is 'only' a recession that put dad or mom out of work,''

Chiding About Debate

Mr. Reagan also attacked Mr. Carter for delaying a decision on participating in
a three-way debate including Representative John B.  Anderson of Illinois, the
independent Presidential candidate. ''I look forward to meeting Mr. Carter in
debate,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''confronting him with the whole sorry record of his
Administration - the record he prefers not to mention.

''If he ever finally agrees to the kind of first debate the American people want
-which I'm beginning to doubt - he'll have to answer to them and to me.''

One police estimate put today's crowd at 7,000, but a Reagan aide guessed that
the gathering was about half that. Envisioned by campaign advisers as an
''Americanism'' rally, the event was planned to provide a series of photogenic
patriotic tableaux. Framed by the Statue of Liberty and the New York skyline,
his shirt open to the third button, Mr. Reagan led the crowd in singing ''God
Bless America'' and clasped hands with Mr. Walesa. At the end, Mr. Reagan raised
both arms and gave the thumbs-up gesture of victory.

The Reagan campaign did not have its own film crews to capture the scene for
television commercials, but the press secretary, Lyn Nofziger, said the Reagan
campaign had an arrangement with one of the networks to buy the film it wants.

Sought Out Before Rally

According to Mr. Walesa's interpreter, the father of the Polish strike leader
was sought out by the Reagan campaign and invited to the rally.

Before the largely working-class audience, Mr. Reagan invoked the name of George
Meany, the late A.F.L.-C.I.O. leader, as one who had predicted that Mr. Carter's
polices would bring inflation and unemployment.

''Through his inflation, he has raised taxes on the American people by 30
percent while their real income has risen only 20 percent,'' Mr. Reagan said.

As he did last week, Mr. Reagan dismissed Mr. Carter's new economic plan as ''a
crazy quilt of obvious election-year promises.'' And as he did frequently in the
primary campaign, Mr. Reagan called the President an advocate of ''a no-growth
policy, an ever shrinking pie.''

''We can have a bigger pie,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''and that will mean bigger
slices for every one of us.''

----

Trip to Detroit Area

Special to the New York Times

DETROIT, Sept. 1 - Ronald Reagan brought his campaign today to this troubled
auto city where the Democrats used to open their national campaigns on Labor
Day.

Mr. Reagan did not go to Cadillac Square, which the Democrats have forsaken for
more than a decade after discovering that it was no longer possible to raise an
impressive crowd downtown on the long Labor Day weekend.

Instead, after his arrival from New Jersey, Mr. Reagan went to a backyard
cookout in the working-class suburb of Allen Park. There he met with a score of
steel and auto workers, about a dozen of whom are unemployed.

Mr. Reagan supplied the Polish sausage for the cookout, according to aides, and
Gov. William Milliken paid for the potato salad. The event was held at the small
brick house of Emil Petrie, a steelworker who complained that although he is
making more money than ever, ''I take home less.''

After being cheered by a crowd of about 300 neighbors as they left the quiet
street, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Milliken went on to the Michigan State Fair in
Detroit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 2, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Summer Dreams, Autumn Choices

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 678 words


For a few heady weeks this summer, salvation seemed to be at hand.  The
Presidential candidates swore it; the party platforms guaranteed it. All of
America's troubles required only a few swift policy adjustments.

The Russians, resenting their potrayal as variously 10 and 12 feet tall, had
apparently sent private assurances to all American leaders that they would again
let the United States dash ahead in military preparedness. So by one program or
another, give or take $10 billion, Americans were promised transformation of the
power balance into unquestioned American superiority, which would then be
ratified in SALT.

The OPEC nations, alternately threatened by Democratic conservation and
Republican drilling and mining, were obviously expected to respond by pumping
harder at a lower price.

Iran, presumably out of fear of what the Rapid Deployment Force might do to
Moslem liberty ports, would be driven to release the hostages soon. And threats
to move the American embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem would surely persuade
the P.L.O. to recognize Israel at last.

In the dreams of summer, Republicans even thought that Taiwan could be liberated
from China again, just for the asking. And by demanding fairer trade, the
Democrats seemed to expect Japan to turn every Toyota into a Chrysler.

It's been a typical election-year summer of self-indulgence - like the summers
when Ike vowed to roll back the Iron Curtain, when JFK traded rocks called
Quemoy and Matsu for peace with China, when LBJ envisioned phantom Asians doing
the work of Americans in Vietnam.  Indeed, among recent candidates, only Richard
Nixon had the decency to keep his summer fantasy, a plan to end the war, a
secret.

Normally, in such seasons, oratory supplants policy, and the cheapest words are
offered as responses to the gravest predicaments.  Until Labor Day. For voters,
if not always for candidates, today marks the start of a new season. Reality
beckons; there's a choice to be made.

In the real autumnal world, Russians grow to only about 5"9"", barely tall
enough to see beyond China, Afghanistan and Poland. But being human, they also
refuse to let America regain military superiority over them. They insist on
equal power and equal meddling rights around the globe. How, then, is the
unending competition with them to be managed? Where is the leader who will
explain that Americans will win some rounds, and lose some, without risking the
end of the world? Who can lead in containing the arms race even while containing
aggression?

In the real autumnal world, Americans finally need to be told the true cost of
energy, in lost national wealth, personal income and diplomatic influence. There
will be no allies worthy of the name if Americans keep burning gasoline that
costs less than half the price that Europeans and Japanese are made to pay.
There will be no economic revival for America so long as all its exports and
much of its capital are being hocked in Arabian markets.

A mature America is ready to hear that being No. 1 in weaponry, and energy, and
food, and political freedoms is no guarantee of either survival or prosperity.
The MX missile will not win the arms race. The sun will not soon replace Saudi
Arabia. The farm cannot be the only productive American enterprise. Talent and
freedom do not by themselves assure the creative organization of a society.

And even wisely harnessed, America's power and influence will never again be
great enough to organize the world. Germans will accommodate to business with
the Russians and Japanese will bow before Arabs so long as their survival depend
on it. Peace in the West Bank will not repair Lebanon, secure the Saudi throne
or depose the Ayatollahs. In the dreams of an electoral summer, America's
resources and resourcefulness are made to appear supreme. By autumn, they
promise not salvation, only opportunity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 2, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERAN GRATEFUL TO REAGAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 292 words


To the Editor:

Recently, Ronald Reagan said that our Vietnam experience was a ''noble cause.''
Since then, this comment has been cynically attacked in the press and on radio
and television as naive and simpleminded, and I understand that Mr. Reagan's
candidacy has suffered from it.

As a former soldier awarded two Purple Hearts in Vietnam (January and June
1968), I believe I speak for the millions of other American men and women who
are Vietnam veterans when I thank Mr. Reagan for his recognition of the price we
paid. I was a young man. I didn't know much. I believed we were fighting to
defend the freedom of South Vietnam's people and I still believe that today. I
don't know whether the American military presence in Vietnam was right or wrong
in some absolute sense, but I disagree with those who feel that the present
Communist governments in Indochina are bands of angels, given the millions of
their own countrymen who have been slaughtered, sent off to ''reeducation
camps'' never to be heard of again, or ruthlessly thrown into the sea.

Indeed, I believe that our Vietnam experience was a ''noble cause.'' I am proud
that I served my country in its hour of distress, and if needed, I would serve
again without the slightest hesitation.Perhaps it's just that freedom has a
special sweetness for those who have laid their lives on the line for it; or
perhaps I, too, am naive and simpleminded.

I am saddened that some Americans can criticize Mr. Reagan because he honors
those who offered their lives for America. But his voice is too lonely on the
present political stage. Those who served that ''noble cause,'' the survivors
and the dead, are grateful to have a spokesman in Mr. Reagan.
TOM CARHART, McLean, Va., Aug. 25, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 3, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OBSERVER;
A Few Words Of His Own

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


Ronald Reagan's early campaign flounderings disclose a severe case of McKay's
Syndrome, a deadly political affliction named for Douglas McKay, an Oregon car
dealer who ran for the Senate some years ago.

McKay's case became terminal during a rousing campaign rally in which he
delivered the customary speech stuffed with the customary banalities, evasions
and bromides, to the customary applause from the party claque. Not content to
quit while he was behind, McKay then laid aside his prepared text, looked over
the audience and said, ''Now I'd like to say a few words of my own.''

Needless to say, McKay did not become a United States Senator, and if Ronald
Reagan continues to insist on saying a few words of his own while dispensing the
gruel cooked up by his campaign technicians, he stands an excellent chance of
not becoming a United States President.

On four occasions during the past fortnight Mr. Reagan has yielded to the
impulse to say more than his technicians prescribed and each occasion has
gladdened the man of Georgia. In two of these cases - Mr. Reagan's
re-affirmation of the belief in the nobility of the Vietnam War and his
elevation of the Carter recession to the status of ''depression'' - the
candidate penciled in the troublesome phrases on his own behalf after the
technicians had armed him with safely bland material.

The comic march up the hill and down again on China policy and the inflammatory
suggestion that divine creation theory might also be taught in the public
schools both seem to have been adventures wandered into by a haphazard impulse
to work the jaw before the brain, or the technical brain trust, had been
consulted.

Mr. Reagan's urge to say a few words of his own is not without a certain quaint
beguiling charm. It has been a long time since we have had an important
politician willing to expose himself so candidly during a campaign. There is
something old-fashioned about campaign candor nowadays, however, which may
trouble a generation of voters bred to think of political campaigns as exercises
among masked men.

Presidential campaigns nowadays are perceived by most of us, though we might not
phrase it this way, as a form of marketing. Americans are a race whose intuitive
understanding is shaped by television.  They know, if only intuitively, that
successful marketing requires a highly skilled group of technical experts
capable of measuring the market's whims and coming up with a sales campaign
which emphasizes their product's ability to gratify those whims while obscuring
its less attractive side effects.

The tip of this iceberg is the TV commercial, and we are all television-wise
now; we know the rules of commercials. We know they do not deal in candor, and
the commercials know that we know, and since we are all playing by the same
rules, there is not a great deal of unhappiness about it.

Presidential politics having become essentially a TV commercial campaign, we
tend to think about the candidates in much the same way that we think about the
competing beers and scouring powders which campaign on the same stump with the
Reagans, Carters and Andersons.  In short, we do not expect candor.

Candor is a violation of the rules. It is upsetting. Candidates are not supposed
to tell us what they think or to say a few words of their own. They are supposed
to have technicians who find out what we desire to hear and copyreaders to
compose messages that will satisfy that desire and performers -Reagans, Carters,
Andersons - who will read the lines like professionals and not monkey with the
script.

Mr. Reagan's habit of saying a few words of his own disturbs some sense of
fitness bred into us by our television habit. It is a violation of the rules
that may be more damaging to him than whatever he says when he breaks away from
the technicians and begins operating as an individual, ignoring the professional
market manipulators.

This is one error President Carter rarely makes. When his market surveys tell
him to lie low in the Rose Garden, he lies low. He can change policy three times
in a year in response to his ever-shifting market surveys, and continue to
survive because of a public perception that though he may flit quixotically all
over the political spectrum, he is flitting at the command of the best
professional and technical advice available.

President Carter never says a few words of his own, and for good reason. Saying
a few words of his own leaves the impression that a candidate thinks he is
smarter than the technicians who run him instead of being merely the tip of the
iceberg doing his predetermined number with appropriate conviction right there
on the parlor tube.

If elected, you suspect, a man like that might ignore his technicians and do
something terribly upsetting. Mr. Reagan has been creating the disturbing
impression that, if elected, he might do a few things of his own. Perhaps he
should find a rose garden and hunker down there for the next several weeks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 3, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR STEWART LEADING IN CLOSE RACE IN ALABAMA

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


Senator Donald W. Stewart led yesterday in Alabama's Democratic primary, but the
son of a former governor was close to forcing him into a runoff election for the
party's Senate nomination.

In North Dakota, Attorney General Allen Olson defeated his opponent to win the
Republican gubernatorial nomination.  With 80 percent of the ballot boxes
reporting in Alabama, Senator Stewart led Jim Folsom, son of former Gov. James
E. Folsom, 180,378 to 129,014. Mr. Stewart had 49 percent of the vote and needed
50 percent to avoid a runoff.

On the Republican side in Alabama, Jeremiah Denton, a former prisoner of war in
North Vietnam, won nomination over former Representative Armistead Selden. He
led, 66,884 to 37,324, with 40 percent of the ballot boxes reporting.

North Dakota Race

In North Dakota, with 429 of 1,242 precincts reporting, Mr. Olson had 18,401
votes to 5,606 for Labor Commissioner Orville Hagen. Mr.  Olson will face Gov.
Arthur A. Link, a Democrat, who is seeking a third term. Mr. Link was unopposed.

In the Senate race in North Dakota, Kent Johanneson defeated Mike Saba, a
Bismarck businessman, for the Democratic nomination, 11,105 to 3,026, with 41
percent of the precincts reporting. The Republican candidate is Representative
Mark Andrews, who is vacating his House seat.

In the House race in North Dakota, state Senator James Smykowski of Cayuga led,
14,840 to 13,472, in his contest with Dr. Lee Christoferson, a neurosurgeon from
Fargo, for the Republican nomination. Tax Commissioner Byron Dorgan was the
Democratic nominee for North Dakota's lone seat in the House of Representatives.

Albert Lee Smith, a conservative from Birmingham, Ala., defeated Representative
John H. Buchanan Jr. in a race for the Republican nomination for Mr. Buchanan's
House seat. Mr. Buchanan, who repeatedly has faced Republican primary challenges
because of his liberal voting record, conceded defeat as Mr. Smith took 55
percent of the vote with more than half of the returns counted. With all the
votes counted, Mr. Smith had 25,531 votes to 20,691 for Mr. Buchanan.

Smith to Face Democrat

Mr. Smith will face Pete Clifford, the Democratic nominee, in the general
election.  Representative Bill Nichols of Sylacauga, Ala., won an eighth term in
Congress by defeating Charles Baiker of Jacksonville in the Democratic primary.
Mr. Nichols is unopposed in the general election.

In the Alabama Democratic Senate race, state Senator Finis St.  John of Cullman
was third with 41,779 votes. Mrs. Frank Stewart of Piedmont was a distant
fourth.

Mr. Stewart, 40 years old, was elected to the Senate in 1978 at special election
to serve out the remaining two years on the term of the late Senator James B.
Allen.

----

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 4, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABBIE HOFFMAN PLANS SURRENDER ON A 1974 COCAINE CHARGE TODAY

BYLINE: By TONY SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 798 words


Abbie Hoffman, the 43-year-old former Yippie and antiwar activist who has been a
fugitive for six years, said yesterday that he planned to surrender to Federal
authorities here this morning after living for the last four years on a tiny
upstate New York island under the alias Barry Freed.

Mr. Hoffman said in an interview in the Manhattan office of a friend that he had
instructed his lawyer, Gerald B. Lefcourt, to arrange his surrender on a 1974
charge that he had sold cocaine to undercover policemen. It was during pretrial
hearings in that case that Mr. Hoffman, fearing that he faced possible
conviction and a long prison term, decided to go underground.

Both Mr. Hoffman and Sterling Johnson Jr., the city's special narcotics
prosecutor, who has jurisdiction in the case, said that ''no deals'' had been
made. Mr. Johnson noted that Mr. Hoffman had failed to surrender several times
in the past after his lawyer told the prosecuter that he wanted to do so.

''If he appears, we'll process him like any other fugitive - there won't be any
deals,'' Mr. Johnson said.  Federal officials said they did not know whether Mr.
Hoffman would surrender.  Mr. Hoffman said he had been living since 1976 in
Fineview, N.Y., a tiny town on the St. Lawrence River, on the Canadian border.
The house is owned by Johanna Lawrenson, a 38-year-old former model with whom
Mr. Hoffman said he has lived since shortly after going underground. Miss
Lawrenson is the daughter of Helen Lawrenson, the author.

During much of the past week, Mr. Hoffman, working through aboveground contacts,
has been carefully orchestrating his planned surrender as a media event, aimed
at focusing the best possible light on his activities during the past several
years as the leader of a successful environmental battle to keep the St.
Lawrence River from being used for navigation during the winter.

Mr. Hoffman has long had a penchant for generating publicity, and attracting
attention, even during his years on the run. During that time, he has given an
interview to an independent television documentary group, published a book of
letters and gave a book publishing party for it at David K's restaurant in New
York City.

In the last several weeks, an associate of Mr. Hoffman phoned a reporter at The
New York Times, and Barbara Walters of ABC-TV News and offered exclusive
interviews with Mr. Hoffman, timed to appear after his planned surrender today.
Mr. Hoffman also made available documents from public officials, including a
letter from Governor Carey, attesting to the effectiveness of Barry Freed - Mr.
Hoffman's alias - in leading the fight to prevent ecological damage to the St.
Lawrence River.

Mr. Hoffman's personal appearance is noticeably different from what it was in
1974, and he said yesterday that he underwent plastic surgery on his nose in Los
Angeles shortly after going underground.  His hair is still dark and curly, and
yesterday he sported a full beard and dark glasses.

He said that during the last six years he had sometimes worn his hair straight
and in several colors. His voice retains the exuberant tone and Massachussetts
accent that it did before he went underground.

Mr. Hoffman cited several factors for choosing to surrender now, among them a
growing fear that too many people knew his secret and thus the risk had grown
that he might be apprehended. He also cited the current political climate, which
he felt would be less antagonistic to him.

'A Lot Has Changed'

''When I was arrested, the war in Vietnam was still going on, Rockefeller's drug
laws were just going into effect, and cocaine was considered the equivalent of
heroin. I think a lot has changed since then. The story of what I've been doing
in the past several years is part of my defense.''

Mr. Hoffman's planned surrender also coincides with the publication this week of
his sixth book, an autobiography, titled ''Soon to Be a Major Motion Picture,''
in which he believes he ''sets the record straight'' on his role during the
60's.

Mr. Hoffman also said that he had signed several months ago with Universal
Pictures as co-author of a script for a film based on his life, including his
past six years underground. The surrender, he said, will make it possible to
reveal more of the story. He said he had received a ''six-figure'' sum for the
script.

As to the specific timing, Mr. Hoffman said he had decided to wait until after
Labor Day, because that was when his 9-year-old son, America, returned to
school. Mr. Hoffman said that his son, who has his own alias, has been spending
summers with Mr. Hoffman in Fineview for the past several years. The child
spends the rest of the year with his mother, Anita Hoffman, who now lives in Los
Angeles. Mr.  Hoffman said that they were divorced.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 4, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IS EXPECTED TO ANNOUNCE 80% SIGNED UP FOR DRAFT

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 434 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 3


The Selective Service System expects to announce that more than 80 percent of
the young men subject to draft registration last July signed up, Carter
Administration officials indicated today.

The Director of Selective Service, Bernard D. Rostker, has scheduled a news
conference here tomorrow to disclose and analyze the preliminary figures.

A figure of 80 percent or more would appear to give ammunition both to the
Administration to assert that the registration was a success and to anti-draft
groups to maintain that it failed.

According to Administration officials, the registration was successful because
it fared better than the most recent precedent.

75 Percent in Vietnam War

During the war in Vietnam, those officials said, 75 to 77 percent of the
nation's young men registered when they were legally required to do so, on or
shortly after the 18th birthday. But many registered late, and 98 percent of
those subject to registration signed up within 18 months of the 18th birthday.

Because the initial registration over a two-week period in late July achieved a
signup rate higher than the Vietnam figure, officials suggested that the
Administration would claim success.

But antidraft leaders said they were prepared to assert that the registration
had failed because it failed to achieve the 98 percent compliance level that
Selective Service officials predicted in their testimony before Congress last
winter.

Antidraft leaders were expected to renew their calls that draft registration be
abandoned because of widespread defiance of the Government edict. Since slightly
under than four million men born in 1960 and 1961 signed up as they were
supposed to, those who failed to register apparently number about 600,000.

Problems in Enforcement

Opponents of the registration have asserted that it would be impossible to find,
indict and prosecute that many people. Failure to register for the draft is a
felony calling for penalities up to five years in prison and $10,000 in fines.

Antidraft spokesmen have also contended that it would be impossible to prosecute
alleged offenders because the constitutionality of the draft registration has
been challenged and is currently before the Supreme Court.

Ronald Reagan, the Republican Presidential candidate, has asserted that he
opposes registration or a draft in peacetime, and he was cheered at the
nominating convention when he said so. On the other hand, President Carter was
initially booed at the Democratic convention when he recalled that he had
resumed draft registration.  His supporters then rallied with applause.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 4, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ALABAMA SENATOR IS FORCED INTO DEMOCRATIC RUNOFF

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 394 words


Senator Donald W. Stewart of Alabama, elected two years ago to complete the term
of the late Senator James B. Allen, was forced into a Democratic runoff in
Tuesday's primary election. Jeremiah Denton, a former Vietnam war prisoner, won
the Republican nomination.

In North Dakota, a Bismarck lawyer, Kent Johanneson, won the Democratic
nomination for the Senate in Tuesday's voting, and the State Attorney General,
Allen Olson, became the Republican candidate for Governor.

With 87 percent of the ballot boxes reporting in the Democratic senatorial
primary in Alabama, Mr. Stewart had 193,265 votes, or 49 percent, to 140,616, or
35 percent, for Jim Folsom Jr. State Senator Finis St. John had 45,239, or 11
percent, while Margaret Stewart, no relation to the Senator, had 17,019, or 4
percent.

Mr. Folsom, the son of former Gov. James E. Folsom, and Mr. Stewart will meet in
a runoff on Sept. 23.

Loss for Ex-Congressman

Mr. Denton, who drew national recognition for his unswerving loyalty in more
than seven years as a war prisoner in Vietnam, defeated Armistead Selden, a
former Democratic Representative who changed parties, in the race for the
Republican Senate nomination.  With 77 percent of the Republican ballot boxes
reporting, Mr. Denton had 68,410, or 64 percent, to 38,169, or 36 percent, for
Mr. Selden.

Representative John Buchanan, an eight-term Congressman from Birmingham, who is
also a Baptist minister, was defeated by Albert Lee Smith for the Republican
nomination for a House of Representatives seat. Mr. Smith will face Pete
Clifford, a Democrat, in the general election.

With all boxes counted, Mr. Smith had 25,531, or 55 percent, to 20,691, or 45
percent, for Mr. Buchanan. Mr. Buchanan was the only Alabama House member
defeated for renomination.

In North Dakota's Democratic voting, with 963 of 1,242 precincts reporting in
the race for the Senate seat being vacated by Milton R.  Young, a Republican,
Mr. Johanneson had 24,182 to 7,154 for Mike Saba, a Bismarck businessman.

The Republican candidate is Representative Mark Andrews, who is vacating his
House seat. He had no opposition Tuesday.  In the Republican gubernatorial
contest, with 965 of 1,242 precincts reporting, Mr. Olson had 47,477 to 14,877
for Labor Commissioner Orville Hagen. Gov. Arthur Link was unopposed for
renomination as the Democratic candidate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW DELHI MEETING REFLECTS A WIDER ASIAN DEBATE Singapore and his wife,Geok Choo

BYLINE: By MICHAEL T. KAUFMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Sept. 4


Speeches by Prime Ministers Indira Gandhi of India and Lee Kuan Yew of
Singapore, within half an hour of the formal opening today of a meeting here of
16 heads of Asian and Pacific Commonwealth countries, established the divisions
in the area over policy toward Cambodia and Afghanistan.

Furthermore, they foreshadowed what is likely to become a recurring debate in
the United Nations.  Prime Minister Lee pleaded for a clear-cut condemnation of
the Soviet Union's actions in Afghanistan and Cambodia as he addressed the
opening session. He quoted Soviet publications and broadcasts from Hanoi radio
to support his contention that Moscow and its allies ''are establishing a new
doctrine of justifiable intevention outside the framework of the U.N. Charter -
precedents for open armed intervention.

''Both Kampuchea and Afghanistan had Communist Governments professing
nonalignment,'' Mr. Lee said. ''This did not save them from zealous interference
by their neighbors, self-righteous regimes, anxious to anticipate the future by
force, to establish the true millenium of Communism. What idyllic future were
they so anxious to secure for their neighbors?''

Economic Issues Emphasized

As Mr. Lee spoke, he appeared to look several times at Prime Minister Gandhi,
who in her own welcoming speech had sought to downplay the issues of Afghanistan
and Cambodia and had instead emphasized economic matters concerning developing
nations. Mrs.  Gandhi's is the only non-Communist government to have recognized
the Vietnamese-supported Government of Heng Samrin in Cambodia.

On Afghanistan, India has criticized the presence of Soviet troops but has
carefully linked this criticism with general condemnation of alleged Western
ambitions in the region. India has also abstained from United Nations votes
condemning the Soviet action.

Mrs. Gandhi emphasized the need for concerted action to restructure the world
economy and give greater advantage to developing nations.  She asserted that
wealthy nations were thwarting further dialogue between rich and poor.

At the same time, she continued to argue that issues like Afghanistan were best
dealt with in quiet diplomacy. ''The crisis is Afghanistan continues unabated,''
she said. ''We are against any kind of interference in the affairs of others,
but partisan postures or impromptu get-togethers are no substitute for
statesmanship in solving such complex problems which can have far-reaching
repercussions.

''No single power can claim a monopoly of wisdom or moral supperiority,'' Mrs.
Gandhi said. ''To condemn intervention in one place while tolerating it
elsewhere does not carry conviction,'' she declared. Those familiar with her
previous statements recognized this as a reference to what she feels was the
lack of indignation shown when China attacked Vietnam a year ago last spring.

Polish Workers Are Lauded

Prime Minister Lee, whose scheduled visit to Moscow last week was suddenly
canceled by the Soviet Union because of the illness of Prime Minister Aleksei N.
Kosygin, opposed any attempt to downplay events in either Afghanistan or
Cambodia. He lauded the actions of Polish workers who he said had ''demonstrated
their passionate desire for more food and some freedom from the straitjacket of
Communist society.''

Mr. Lee also asserted that the Afghan situation had delayed developing nations
from reaching economic objectives such as the transfer of technology, freer
trade, better terms for commodity producers and less protectionism. He said that
because of ''the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan'' the Western powers had been
forced ''on an urgent program to increase defense expenditure.''

After the opening speeches, the representatives of the 16 countries, which
include Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia and several
smaller nations, withdrew into private sessions that are to continue for the
next five days. Much of these private negotiations will be concerned with
whether to take a stand on the issues of Afghanistan and Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister
Lee Kuan Yew of

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

COMPLIANCE WITH DRAFT REGISTRATION IS PUT AT 93%

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 549 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 4


Bernard D. Rostker, the director of the Selective Service System, disclosed
today that 87 percent of the young men subject to draft registration in July had
signed up on time and that 6 percent had come in in later.

But Mr. Rostker declined to say that the registration, vigorously opposed by
antidraft groups, had been successful. He said he was ''not unhappy'' with the
outcome, though it fell below predictions he made in Congressional testimony
last winter.

Barry Lynn, head of the Committee Against Registration and the Draft, the
leading antidraft coalition, contended that the two-week signup ''had been
unsuccessful on its own terms.'' He said the Carter Administration had created
250,000 potential felons in two weeks.

Failure to register for the draft is a felony; the maximum penalties are five
years in prison and $10,000 in fines.

Fear of Draft Revived

President Carter called for renewal of draft registration last January, saying
it would demonstrate the determination of the United States to oppose further
aggression after the Soviet Union intervened in Afghanistan last December.

The proposal revived fear that a draft would soon follow registration, even
though the President said he hoped to avoid that.  Ronald Reagan and John B.
Anderson, Mr. Carter's chief Presidential rivals, have said they are opposed to
both registration and the draft.

Selective Service officials said at Congressional hearings that they expected 98
percent of the young men required to register to sign up, based on their
experience in the Vietnam War. Antidraft leaders predicted that 15 to 25 percent
would defy the registration order.

Mr. Rostker said that that 3.88 million men born in 1960 and 1961 were subject
to registration, a number that did not include men of those ages already in
military service.

Registration Is Continuing

Of that number, he said, 3,593,187 signed up in the last two weeks of July and
the first three weeks of August. Although the initial registration period is
over, young men can still sign at local post offices.

Mr. Lynn said he doubted the accuracy of the base population figure that Mr.
Rostker cited and the number of those who signed, and contended that many of
those counted had given false names or adresses.

Mr. Rostker said the agency had weeded out overage registrants and women, but
acknowledged that it had not yet had time to ascertain false registrations.

He noted that in 1973, the last full year of draft registration, 77 percent of
the young men required to register had done so on time, 83 percent had done so
within one month and 99.5 percent had signed within 18 months.

Heeding the President's Call

He said the registration this year had shown better results because of publicity
over the issue and that ''19 and 20-year-olds are patriotic, law-abiding
citizens heeding the call of the President.''

Mr. Lynn said that, to the contrary, the Administration had failed to achieve
its objective despite having ''touted it as necessary for national security.''

The Selective Service director told reporters that the count, which he said was
preliminary, was within 1 percent of accuracy because of double checks in the
system. He also said that a sampling showed that only 1.8 percent had registered
under protest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S CAMPAIGN SHIFTS TACTICS AND MOVES TO CURB MISSTATEMENMTS

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 732 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 4


In a bid to get off the political defensive after a string of admittedly costly
verbal gaffes by Ronald Reagan, the Reagan campaign shifted tactics today by
sharpening its attacks on the Carter Administration and moving to protect the
Republican nominee from further self-inflicted embarrassments on the stump.

Privately, Reagan strategists conceded that the trend of the first three weeks
of Mr. Reagan's campaign as the Republican nominee had been unfavorable. Some
acknowledged that it had set off internal arguments over how to regain some
momentum. And today there were two sharp new attacks on the Carter
Administration and a switch in handling the candidate himself.

In Jacksonville, Mr. Reagan accused the Administration of compromising national
security and disclosing defense secrets by deliberately disclosing information
about the so-called ''stealth'' bomber project ''for the sole political purpose
of aiding Mr.  Carter's troubled campaign.''

In Washington, William J. Casey, the Reagan campaign manager, called on
President Carter to ask for the resignation of Attorney General Benjamin R.
Civiletti. Mr. Casey contended that the Attorney General had not lived up ''to
the minimum standards of truthfulness'' by saying initially that there had been
no Justice Department communication with the White House in the Billy Carter
affair, only later to acknowledge that he had spoken to the President about it
himself.

Meeting With Kissinger Planned

It was a report in The New York Times today on a memorandum indicating that Mr.
Civiletti had requested a 10-day delay in Justice Department action on Billy
Carter's registration as a foreign agent, possibly to gain time to talk with the
President, that prompted his charges, Mr. Casey said.

Reagan campaign officials also disclosed that Mr. Reagan would be meeting at his
mansion in nearby Virginia tomorrow with former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger. An aide said the meeting could be a preparation for an attack on what
the Reagan camp has described as Mr. Carter's ''politicization of the State
Department.''

''We've traveled a rocky road these past three weeks,'' a Reagan aide
acknowledged. ''We haven't been able to make the points we wanted to make
because of our own self-inflicted wounds.''

The diagnosis of Reagan strategists is that Mr. Reagan's troublesome ad-libbing
about Mr. Carter's opening his campaign in what Mr. Reagan called the birthplace
of the Ku Klux Klan, teaching biblical creation as well as evolution, the
Vietnam War as ''a noble cause'' and his call for official United States
relations with Taiwan had captured the headlines, distracting attention from the
heart of the speeches that the Reagan camp had carefully prepared.

Adviser to Screen Speeches

As one remedy, the Reagan high command decided to assign a toplevel political
adviser to Mr. Reagan's traveling staff in an attempt to curb the former
California Governor's penchant for off-the-cuff remarks on the stump and to help
screen his speeches for comments that might stir controversy.

When Mr. Reagan flew to Florida today, he was accompanied by Stuart Spencer, the
widely respected California political consultant who ran his 1966 gubernatorial
campaign as well as President Ford's campaign four years ago.

''He really needs someone with him on a peer level,'' said one close associate,
''someone in whom he's got complete confidence, someone who's a friend, who has
good political sensitivity and who will level with him about these statements
that are getting him into trouble.''

In addition, Reagan strategists have dropped their early plan of having the
former Governor address a major new theme each week in several speeches, Reagan
sources said.

Instead, his political lieutenants have decided in the last few days to have Mr.
Reagan make only a handful of major policy addresses during the campaign and to
use one basic stump speech for most appearances, inserting material on various
topics.

One long-time political associate said that Mr. Reagan had come close to ''an
uncharacteristic cheap shot'' linking the President's Labor Day appearance in
Tuscumbia, Ala., with the Klan because Mr.  Reagan had been stung by comments in
Los Angeles on Aug. 7 by Patricia Roberts Harris, the Secretary of Health and
Human Services, that Mr. Reagan had been endorsed by the Knights of the Ku Klux
Klan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOFFMAN SURRENDERS ON COCAINE CHARGE

BYLINE: By PETER KIHSS

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1102 words


Abbie Hoffman, a counterculture leader of the 1960's who jumped bail in 1974
after being charged with selling cocaine, surrendered yesterday to
law-enforcement authorities in Manhattan. He was then released on his own
recognizance after his lawyer told a judge that Mr. Hoffman had become a
''hero'' in the remote upstate community where he had been living.

Sterling Johnson Jr., the state's special narcotics prosecutor, had recommended
a $100,000 bond or cash bail of $10,000. The charges involve the alleged sale of
three pounds of cocaine to undercover police officers for $36,000, punishable in
case of conviction by 15 years to life imprisonment.

Mr. Hoffman was released by Acting Supreme Court Justice Milton L.  Williams of
Manhattan about 3 P.M., five hours after he surrendered to Mr. Johnson in his
office at 80 Centre Street. most of the time was devoted to verifying by a
fingerprint check in Albany that he was indeed the wanted fugitive. Justice
Williams set another hearing for Sept. 15.

The 43-year-old founder of the Youth International Party, better known as
Yippies, told reporters that he wanted to keep up a career nationally in the
movements for better environment and against nuclear development.

Active in Environmental Effort

He had been living the last four years in Fineview on a St.  Lawrence River
island, where he was known as Barry Freed and where he became prominent in a
successful campaign against proposals to break up ice and destroy some small
islands so there could be winter navigation on the river.

His counsel, Gerald J. Lefcourt, told Judge Williams that Mr.  Hoffman had spent
his adult life as a writer and organizer, including civil rights and voter
registration efforts in the South, organizing a chain of Liberty Houses in the
North to sell crafts made by poor Southern blacks and then protesting against
the Vietnam War.

Mr. Lefcourt asserted that it was at risk to Mr. Hoffman's own safety that he
got involved in the fight over the St. Lawrence, in which the lawyer contended
that the proposed changes could have cost New York State ''millions of dollars
in lost revenues from tourism'' and from rail freight going over to shipping.
Mr. Hoffman's surrender, he said, was the act of a man determined ''to not run
any more.''

Mr. Johnson, the special prosecutor, stressed the seriousness of the original
charges, as well as bail-jumping. He earlier repeatedly told reporters that
there had been no discussion of any ''deal'' in return for Mr. Hoffman's return.


Charge Called Setup

Mr. Hoffman had originally pleaded not guilty to the 1973 charges involving the
narcotics sale. Three co-defendants had been allowed to plead guilty to lesser
charges - two to attempted criminal sale, with Carole Ramer sentenced to three
years in prison and John Rinaldi to up to five years, and the third, Diane
Peterson, to attempted criminal possession of a dangerous drug, given five years
probation.

Mr. Lefcourt told reporters that neither he nor Mr. Hoffman would discuss the
charges yesterday. However, a brother, Jack Hoffman, 40, of Framingham, Mass.,
said he thought the charge ''was a possible setup'' because of the failure to
convict Mr. Hoffman in ''a political trial,'' a reference to his eventually
being cleared of charges involving disorders at the 1968 Democratic National
Convention in Chicago.

Jack Hoffman and a sister, Phyllis Ramos of Mexico City, accompanied their
brother to his surrender. Their mother, Florence, joined them in court.

With them also was Johanna Lawrenson, with whom Abbie Hoffman, divorced from his
wife Anita, has been living for four years and whom he called yesterday ''my
running mate.''

Reasons for Surrender

Mr. Hoffman avoided a crowd of reporters by entering 80 Centre Street through a
back way to surrender. But after his release, he held a news conference at G. P.
Putnam's Sons, 200 Madison Avenue, which is publishing his autobiography, ''Soon
to be a Major Motion Picture.''

He said he had decided to surrender now because his son, America, also known as
Allen, had completed a summer stay with him; his lawyer had finished some
difficult cases and ''I felt the atmospherehad changed considerably'' from the
days when cocaine was equated with heroin so that ''the times are a little more
sophisticated.''

He said he had undergone plastic surgery costing $2,500 on March 4, 1974, but
''I was scared every day.'' He said he had an attic hideaway in which he kept
four boxes of talcum powder to scatter so dogs would lose his scent.

Once he was jailed in a small town, he said, because he didn't have enough money
to pay a hotel bill.  His brother, Jack, had said Abbie Hoffman became outraged
a year ago when he saw a movie script about his flight which wrongly depicted
him. Abbie said he had become consultant for about $25,000 on a coming movie
based on h is life, for which he said the rights had been given to ''people who
helped me.''

'Everyone Liked Barry Freed'

Two members of his Save the River Committee, Don Price of Wellesley Island and
Anthony Menkel of Chippewa Bay, accompanied Mr.  Hoffman to the special
prosecutor's office and the news conference to support him.

The committee held a news conference yesterday at its headquarters in Clayton,
N.Y., where another member, Richard Spencer, said ''everyone up here liked Barry
Freed,'' the name Mr. Hoffman used, and ''he has made a positive contribution to
this river - at some point, we hope he will come back to help us.''

Another, Jeremy Taylor, said: ''He was outspoken, honest.We all learned from
him, and we learned how to deal with bureaucracy. He didn't take over. He was a
teacher.''

A summer resident of the Thousand Islands area, Robert Cox, who is an elected
City Commissioner of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said ''he did a hell of a good job,
and he certainly gets my plaudits for his actions as Barry Freed.''

In Worcester, Mass., where Mr. Hoffman was born and lived until 1967, Elizabeth
Price, director of Prospect House, said ''Abbie was involved in a lot of good
things,'' having helped her to start the social service center.

Daniel Dick, librarian at Worcester State College, said ''Abbie got a lot of
things going,'' and recalled his part in the Phoenix storefront where discussion
groups met.

Joe Aboody, who runs the El Morocco restaurant there, said Mr.  Hoffman visited
a couple of times a year during the last five years.  The restaurant has a
picture of Mr. Hoffman with an El Morocco Tshirt hiding his face except for his
eyes; it's inscribed: ''A good place to eat when you're on the run.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCHANBERG BECOMING COLUMNIST; MILLONES SUCCEEDS HIM AS EDITOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 298 words


Sydney H. Schanberg, metropolitan editor of The New York Times since 1977, will
become a columnist for the paper's Op-Ed page, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the
publisher, announced yesterday. The new column, starting early next year, will
focus on metropolitan affairs.

''For some time we have felt the need for another voice to address the problems
and affairs of New York City and New York State,'' Mr.  Sulzberger said. ''As
metropolitan editor and a former Albany correspondent, Mr. Schanberg is
eminently qualified for the job.''

Peter Millones, an assistant managing editor of The Times, will succeed Mr.
Schanberg as metropolitan editor in the next few weeks, it was announced by A.M.
Rosenthal, executive editor. Mr. Millones is now responsible for administrative,
budgetary and personnel aspects of the news department.

Mr. Schanberg will take a leave of absence to finish a book he is writing about
Cambodia and will start the column early next year.  In 1975, Mr. Schanberg was
one of the few Western correspondents to witness the fall of Cambodia,
disregarding his editors' orders to leave Phnom Penh as the Communist forces
entered the city. He was awarded a Pulitzer Prize for international reporting
''at great risk'' for his coverage.

Mr. Schanberg, who was Albany bureau chief in 1967, served as The Times's
correspondent in New Delhi and Singapore and reported from India, Pakistan,
Bangladesh, Vietnam and other nations of Southeast Asia. He graduated from
Harvard in 1955, entered the Army and joined The Times as a copyboy in 1959.

Mr. Millones, who holds a degree in political science from Columbia, joined The
Times as a copyboy in 1956 and later became a metropolitan reporter, covering
labor and consumer beats as well as general assignments in the 1960's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sydney H. Schanberg photo of Peter Millones

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WEEKENDER GUIDE;
Friday;
BRYANT PARK REBIRTH

BYLINE: BRYANT PARK REBIRTH

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 972 words


A September festival is under way in Bryant Park, part of a drive by the Parks
Council to restore the site as a midtown oasis. Today at 12:15 P.M., you can
hear modern jazz by the New York Neophonic Orchestra, and at 5 P.M., you can
watch the Improvisational Dance Ensemble. The rest of the month, there will be
mime, gymnastics, dance, jazz, blues and bluegrass, with performances scheduled
Monday through Friday at the Lowell Fountain, Avenue of the Americas and 41st
Street, at 2 or 5 P.M. There's also a book market and cafe in the park and,
along 42d Street, 600 feet of new floral beds.  Information: 838-9410.

JAPANESE-CANADIAN FILM

The Japan Society, at 333 East 47th Street, opens its fall season of films
tonight at 7:30 with ''Keiko,'' a 1979 film by the Canadian director Claude
Gagnon, which was a critical and box-office success in Japan. Using amateur
actors and improvised dialogue, ''Keiko'' follows several loosely knit episodes
that lead a young Japanese working woman to an important decision about how she
must conduct her life. It will be shown again Sunday at 2 P.M. Admission is
$3.50.  Information: 832-1155.

Saturday

BROOKLYN HARVEST DAY

City gardeners, take note. An urban Harvest Fair is scheduled Saturday from noon
to 5 P.M. at Floyd Bennett Field in southern Brooklyn. So bring your heaviest
homegrown squash, your firmest eggplant or your largest sunflower head and maybe
win a prize. Those are just some of the categories. There's also one for the
most terrifying scarecrow. The winner last year was a boy whose stuffed figure
concealed a microphone and had a head that revolved in the wind. The free event
will also include bluegrass music, a hay ride, square dancing, exhibits and
workshops. For information, call the sponsor, the Gateway National Recreation
Area, at 630-0293.

ARSHILE GORKY IN QUEENS

Arshile Gorky, the Armenian-born artist, whose late paintings were influential
in the development of Abstract Expressionism in the United States, will be
honored with an exhibition starting Saturday at the Queens Museum in Flushing
Meadows-Corona Park. It will feature two mural panels inspired by aviation
images, created for Newark Airport under the Work Projects Administration's
Federal Art Project - the only surviving examples of Gorky's large-scale work.
More than 30 works will be shown in all, including studies for other mural
projects. Admission is free, but contributions are suggested. Hours: 10 A.M. to
5 P.M. on Saturday, 1 to 5 on Sunday. Information: 592-2405.

GREENPOINT AVE. FAIR

Strange goings-on are expected in the Sunnyside-Woodside sections of Queens on
Saturday. Luke Adams is going to hurl eight pies at prominent local citizens,
and 10 citizens will fling pies at him.  Mr. Adams is president of Gateway
Community Restoration, an organization dedicated to sprucing up the area, which
is sure to clean up after this pie-throwing feud. The organization is also
sponsoring other contests -watermelon eating for the elderly and a three-legged
race, for instance - as well as music and dance, and free charcoal portraits of
children. It's all part of a fair to take place from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. between
42d and 48th Streets along Greenpoint Avenue.

HAMPTONS MOVIE CLASSICS

The film society of the Guild Hall in East Hampton, L.I., begins a series of
five foreign classics by distinguished directors Saturday at 8:30 P.M. with
Vittorio De Sica's ''The Bicycle Thief.'' Following will be Max Ophuls's ''The
Earrings of Madame De ... '' (Sept. 13), Ingmar Bergman's ''Smiles of a Summer
Night'' (Sept. 20), Francois Truffaut's ''Jules and Jim'' (Oct. 4) and Luis
Bunuel's ''Belle de Jour'' (Oct. 18). Single admissions are $3 ($2.50 for
students and the elderly). You can see five films for the price of four or take
extra guests at a saving. Information: (516) 324-0806.

Sunday

PLAYFUL NEW ROCHELLE

Vintage toys - from Colonial times on - are the focus of an exhibition
GOG jump
opening Sunday at the Wildcliff Museum on Wildcliff Road in New Rochelle. Two
toy company executives will be on hand to talk about the toy-maker's craft,
starting at 3 P.M. The exhibition will remain on display through Dec. 28, along
with Sunday programs about toys, including dance and drama improvisations, a
marbles tournament and a blacksmith demonstration. Museum hours are 1 to 4:30
P.M. daily except Friday. Admission is $1.25. Information: (914) 636-2108.

WESTCHESTER RABBIT ART

On Sunday, the Museum of Cartoon Art in Port Chester, N.Y., will present Jerry
Dumas and Mel Crawford, creators of a new comic feature about a rabbit named
Rafferty and his friends. They will talk about and demonstrate cartooning at 2
P.M. The museum is on Comly Avenue, off King Street, a mile south of the
Hutchinson River-Merritt Parkway. Sunday hours are 1 to 5 P.M. Admission is $1
(50 cents for children and the elderly). Information: (914) 939-0234.

CHINATOWN FESTIVAL

The fifth annual Asian American Festival will be celebrated Sunday from 3 to 6
P.M. in Columbus Park, Bayard and Mulberry Streets, at the western edge of
Chinatown. Music and dance of Korea, Japan, Hawaii, India, China, Vietnam and
the the Philippines will be performed. The participants include the Asian
American Dance Theater, the Chinese Dance Company of New York and the Blue
Shadows Chinese rock-and-roll band.

INWOOD HILL HIKE

Prehistoric caves, the remains of a Delaware Indian settlement, the largest
trees in Manhattan and other unexpected urban wonders will be pointed out by
Adventures on a Shoestring during a Sunday walking tour through the 167-acre
Inwood Hill Park at the northern end of Manhattan. Meet at 1 P.M. at the
southwest corner of Seventh Avenue and 58th Street for a subway ride to the
park. The fee is $3.50. Information: 265-2663.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 5, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY;
From Superman to Vietnam veteran for Christopher Reeve.

BYLINE: By Carol Lawson

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1360 words


CHRISTOPHER REEVE, alias Superman, was describing his agent's pained, yet
tolerant reaction when he announced that he was going to spend the summer doing
''The Front Page'' and ''The Cherry Orchard'' at the Williamstown Theater
Festival in Massachusetts for a fraction of his seven figure Hollywood wages:
''He looked at it as a summer vacation and said, 'Well, you'll get all that
theater stuff out of your system.' '' But that is not how things turned out.
Somewhere, the agent can be found weeping, for Mr. Reeve has just turned down a
$1.5 million film offer to star on Broadway this fall. He will play the lead -
the role of a veteran who lost both legs in Vietnam - in Lanford Wilson's
''Fifth of July,'' opening Oct. 23 at the New Apollo Theater.

''Fifth of July,'' which began Off Broadway in the spring of 1978 at Circle
Repertory, was the first in Mr. Wilson's cycle of plays about the Talley family
in his native Lebanon, Mo. It concerns a group of friends who were classmates at
Berkeley in the late 1960's and meet for a reunion in 1977. Marshall Mason, who
directed the original production, will direct the play on Broadway. Mr. Mason
also directed Mr. Wilson's Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Talley's Folly,'' the second
play in the cycle, which is on Broadway at the Brooks Atkinson Theater.

''I know Lanford and Marshall from Circle Rep,'' said Mr. Reeves, who likes to
remind people that beneath his azure-eyed, matinee-idol exterior there lurks the
heart of a serious-minded actor. He was appearing in a small role in Corinne
Jacker's ''My Life'' at the Circle Repertory while Mr. Wilson was writing
''Fifth of July.'' He acted on Broadway in 1976 in ''A Matter of Gravity,''
which starred Katharine Hepburn.

''I've always wanted to stay connected to the theater,'' the 27-year-old actor
insisted. ''Once you hit it big in films, there's a temptation to take it easy,
to get by on your personality and bankability. There is a whole category of
leading men - Ryan O'Neal, Lee Majors - who don't care anything about the
process of acting.  It's not that I think I'm so good, but I've always wanted to
be a real actor. I've had a lot of training - and I want to use it.''

Alan Schneider, who was to begin rehearsals this week with Eva LeGallienne, Kim
Hunter and the rest of the cast he assembled for Joanna Glass's new play, ''To
Grandmother's House We Go,'' has been forced to withdraw from the production
because of illness. He has been replaced by Clifford Williams, the British
director, whose long list of credits includes ''Sleuth'' on Broadway.

When the revue ''Tintypes'' reopens on Broadway at the Golden Theater on Oct.
15, the producers will be Richmond Crinkley and Royal Pardon Productions.
Actually, the producers happen to be Mr.  Crinkley and Philip Anglim, the actor.
Mr. Anglim has quietly and successfully been going about the business of
producing under the corporate guise of Royal Pardon Productions.

Mr. Anglim is best known as the original Elephant Man. He played that hopelessly
deformed castoff for almost two years, first Off Broadway, then on Broadway and
finally on a cross-country tour.

Mr. Anglim's heretofore clandestine activities as a producer began with none
other than ''The Elephant Man'' itself. ''I saw it at the Hampstead Theater Club
in England, picked up the script and brought it to Richmond,'' he disclosed
during a chat the other day, dispelling the widely held notion that it was Mr.
Crinkley who discovered Bernard Pomerance's Tony Award-winning play.
Furthermore, Mr. Anglim said, he was the owner of the Off Broadway rights and
raised most of the money to get the play produced at the theater in St. Peter's
Church. Since ''The Elephant Man'' reopened on Broadway at the Booth Theater,
where it is still running, Mr. Anglim has been receiving a share of the weekly
profits, plus a royalty.

''Tintypes'' began in much the same way. Mr. Anglim said that he had acquired
the rights after the show closed at the Arena Stage in Washington. This time,
however, he is going public for the Broadway production by announcing that he is
one of two general partners, the other being Mr. Crinkley.

Why was he so secretive in the past? ''I felt that since I was virtually an
unknown actor, it would be unwise to make this known,'' Mr. Anglim replied,
adding that he wanted to avoid the appearance of putting on a vanity production.

''Before 'Elephant Man,' '' he went on, ''I was making a living as an actor, but
I was frustrated. I was doing some TV and regional theater, but not the kind of
exciting theater pieces I thought I should be doing. I was frustrated. I learned
you have to make your own opportunities.''

Carole King, whose popular recordings sell by the truckload, is making her debut
as a theatrical composer with the new musical ''Really Rosie.'' Opening night is
Oct. 14 at the Chelsea Theater Center.

Miss King's debut is only one of several in this production. The show is also a
first for Maurice Sendak, widely known as an author and illustrator of
children's books, including the popular ''Nutshell Library'' series. He gets
billing as author and designer.  Then, there's Patricia Birch, known as the
choreographer of ''Grease'' and other Broadway shows. This time, she gets
billing as director, as well as choreographer.

''Really Rosie,'' which was first staged two years ago at Stuart Ostrow's
Musical Theater Lab at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington,
was inspired by Mr. Sendak's book ''The Sign on Rosie's Door.'' ''Rosie lived
across the street from me on Avenue P in Brooklyn,'' Mr. Sendak was saying.
''She was a scrawny, nervy kid who excited the imaginations of the inert kids on
the block.'' Rosie and the five other characters in the show will be played by
youngsters ranging in age from 7 to 10.

''Everyone said it would be impossible to get Carole King,'' Mr.  Sendak noted.
''Her agent considered this a fearful project because she would not make a huge
amount of money. She finally called me on her own.''

In the revival of ''The Man Who Came to Dinner'' at Circle in the Square,
Roderick Cook does what he describes as his ''10-minute star turn,''
impersonating Noel Coward. He dashes onto the stage in an immaculately tailored
gray overcoat, steals the spotlight from his fellow players with a flurry of
amusing chatter about his innumerable accomplishments, stops briefly at the
piano to entertain with a bit of Cole Porter and exits with a flourish - ''to a
storm of applause,'' as Mr. Cook likes to describe it.

''When I was asked to do this play,'' the British-born actor was saying over
tea, ''I thought, 'Oh, God! Not Noel Coward again!'' Mr.  Cook has made
something of a career out of his acquaintance with Coward. He is still
remembered for the 1972 revue ''Oh Coward!,'' which he devised, directed and
starred in.

''The identification with Coward is very nice,'' Mr. Cook remarked, ''but it can
be rather limiting. It's finally coming to an end.'' The matinee Sunday will be
the closing performance of ''The Man Who Came to Dinner.'' After that, Mr. Cook
has no plan to play Noel Coward ever again - or anyone else, for that matter.

''I'm trying to phase myself out of acting,'' he said. ''I turned down a role in
'Amadeus.' Being an actor is like being the hired help. I'd much rather write
and direct and produce.'' Mr. Cook is working on two new projects along these
lines. One is his fourcharacter show, ''Just a Revue,'' which will open in Fort
Lauderdale, Fla., on Sept. 17 for a six-week tryout and then, if all goes well,
reopen Off Broadway. The other project is his ''$20 Million Musical,'' a love
story with a score of songs from Broadway flops. ''This is likely to try out at
Goodspeed next summer,'' he said, referring to the opera house in East Haddam,
Conn.

Still, Mr. Cook added, a bit of the identification with Noel Coward is likely to
remain: ''People think of Noel Coward as superficial and witty. They forget that
he worked extremely hard. He used to say, 'Work hard, press on and try not to
bore the seat off the pants of the audience.' In that spirit, I'll try to
continue being Noel Coward.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Roderick Cook

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Garwood Is Arrested On Child Abuse Charges

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 224 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, N. C., Sept. 5


Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marines, the former prisoner of war who is being
tried on charges of collaborating with his Vietnamese captors, was arrested
today on two sex charges involving a 7-year-old girl.

The Onslow County magistrate, Margaret Murrill, said that Private Garwood had
been charged in separate warrants with attempting to commit sexual abuse by
force against the girl and with committing and attempting a ''lewd and
lascivious act'' against her, both on Aug. 7. Each offense is a felony carrying
a maximum penalty of 10 years in prison.

Private Garwood was released on $10,000 bond. He is scheduled to appear in
Onslow County District Court on Monday.  The 34-year-old marine has been
stationed at the Camp Lejeune base near Jacksonville since May 1979. Selection
of a six-member jury for his court-martial was concluded yesterday and testimony
is scheduled to begin Sept. 17. If found guilty of desertion and collaboration,
he could be sentenced to life in prison.

The private, a native of Greensburg, Ind., returned to the United States early
last year after spending almost 14 years in Vietnam.  It was the second time
that he has faced civilian charges in the Jacksonville area. He was charged with
driving under the influence of alcohol last February.

He was fined $50 in that case and given a suspended sentence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

KOCH PREDICTS ASTORIA STUDIO'S REBIRTH

BYLINE: By C. GERALD FRASER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 608 words


The Astoria film studio, which has gone through several reincarnations since its
birth 60 years ago in the Astoria section of Queens, has been born again.

A new life is expected with the planned $11 million rehabilitation of the studio
announced yesterday by Mayor Koch at a news conference there. ''The motion
picture and television industry contributes more than $500 million a year to our
city's economy,'' said Mr. Koch.  ''It is essential that we encourage and
support its continued growth from now into the 21st century.''

George S. Kaufman, one of the studio's new developers, said the improvements
''will make this studio a production center on the highest level.''

Began With Silent Films

Astoria began its life with the production of silent films for Famous
Players-Lasky, which became Paramount Pictures. Among the stars who worked there
were Rudolph Valentino, Gloria Swanson, Lillian Gish, W.C. Fields, the Marx
Brothers, Gary Cooper, Claudette Colbert, Paul Robeson, Sylvia Sidney and, more
recently, Diana Ross, Ali MacGraw, Alan King, Myrna Loy and Roy Scheider. During
World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War, instructional films for the
United States Army were produced there. Film work ceased in 1970 and the studio
deteriorated until a revival in 1976, which brought ''The Wiz,'' ''Hair,''
''Kramer vs. Kramer'' and ''All That Jazz,'' among other productions, onto its
soundstages. Currently, Liza Minnelli and Dudley Moore are working there in the
comedy ''Arthur.'' In 1977, the Astoria Motion Picture and Television Center
Foundation was established to operate the studios.

The Federal Government, which owns the property - 13 buildings in all - at 35-11
35th Avenue, is transferring ownership to the city for $1. The city, in turn, is
leasing the entire studio to the Public Development Corporation, a
city-sponsored nonprofit commercial and industrial development agency.

Public Development Corporation will lease half of the studio complex to a newly
created company, Astoria Studios Incorporated, which is the name for a
combination of two developers -Kaufman Management Company of 450 Seventh Avenue,
and the Ziff Corporation, of One Park Avenue, one of the nation's largest
publishers of special-interest magazines, and owner of six television stations.
The developers may acquire leases on the other half of the studio within five
years if they choose.

No Taxes for 22 Years

Astoria Studios Incorporated will, in turn, lease its property to an operating
company, which will oversee the day-in, day-out functioning of the studios.
During the rehabilitation period -about 18 months during which the studios will
still be in use - the developers will pay no taxes on the property for the next
22 years.  In lieu of real property taxes, they will pay $1 a year to the city
for the first two years and thereafter $100,000 a year plus a percentage of the
increased assessed valuation. Rent for the studio, to be paid to the Astoria
Motion Picture and Television Center Foundation, will start immediately at
$75,000 a year plus 17 1/2 percent of the net income and will rise to $150,000
plus the same percentage over 12 years.

The developers are putting up $2 million and the city will contribute $500,000
as an equity investment in the studio. Federal grants and loan guarantees will
provide the remainder of the financing for the rehabilitation.

Besides Mayor Koch, representatives of government and labor as well as the movie
business attended yesterday's news conference - along with Miss Swanson, whose
photographs from films she made at Astoria nearly 50 years ago hung on nearby
walls.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gloria Swanson

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 6, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

PLAY IT AGAIN,SAM:REVISED ED.

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 999 words


The newly revised 15th edition of ''Bartlett's Familiar Quotations'' - the book
that for 125 years has made students and scholars and speechmakers seem smarter
than they are as they looked up erudite quotations and sprinkled them among
their own words - proves once again that ''all is ephemeral - fame and the
famous as well'' (Marcus Aurelius Antoninus).

Even writers of articles about the latest ''Bartlett,'' which Little, Brown is
bringing out on Sept. 29 in a 1,540-page edition at $24.95, can dip into the
book and then pretend to have an old acquaintance with the Romans, or
Shakespeare, or the Bible, or even an astronaut who, landing on the moon, said
-and we quote - ''That's one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind''
(Neil Armstrong).

Since the 14th edition appeared 12 years ago, much has happened in the world of
the bright remark, the poem, the comedic one-liner, the clincher, the celebrity
statement.

Reputations of poets and politicans have soared or been revised downward. Even
certain classical phrases have come and gone. For the most famous of all the
quotation books, first published in 1855 in 300 pages by John Bartlett, a
35-year-old bookseller in Cambridge, Mass., turns out to be a living organism of
language because - well, because ''language is the archives of history'' (Ralph
Waldo Emerson).

The editor of the 14th and 15th editions, Emily Morison Beck, daughter of the
late historian Samuel Eliot Morison, said she had been squirreling away
candidates for inclusion, and sometimes exclusion, for a quarter-century.

If you wish to dispute Mrs. Beck's selections, you had better come up with
scholarly credentials as impressive as hers: Radcliffe College, the Sorbonne,
Cambridge University. She has been backed up by Mary Rackliffe of Little, Brown,
and scores of many-splendored authorities (''By whose authority do you act?'' -
Ethan Allen).

''Probably the first quotations gathered for the new edition were Neil
Armstrong's historic moon-landing statements on July 20, 1969,'' Mrs. Beck said.
''The 1970's, finally emerging from domestic upheaval and from Vietnam, found us
at last recognizing the fragility of our environment, which Rachel Carson had
warned of in 1962'' (''As crude a weapon as the cave man's club, the chemical
barrage has been hurled against the fabric of life'' -Rachel Carson, ''Silent
Spring'').

Famous quotations, old and new, added to this edition include ''Inherit the
wind'' (Proverbs II:29); ''Speak silver, reply gold'' (Swahili proverb);
''Living well is the best revenge'' (George Herbert); ''Amazing grace!'' (John
Newton); ''Remember the ladies'' (Abigail Adams); ''The sleep of reason produces
monsters'' (Goya); ''Bah! Humbug!'' (Charles Dickens), and ''We hold these
truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal'' (Elizabeth Cady
Stanton). Other new addi-
tions are: ''Good morning - Midnight - I'm coming home'' (Emily Dickinson);
''The problem of the 20th century is the problem of the color line'' (W.E.B. Du
Bois); ''Oh bang the drum slowly'' (cowboy song); ''Never give in, never, never,
never, never'' (Winston Churchill); ''Time the destroyer is time the preserver''
(T. S.  Eliot); ''The medium is the message'' (Marshall H. McLuhan); ''I could
have danced all night'' (Alan Jay Lerner); ''Catch-22'' (Joseph Heller); ''Float
like a butterfly, sting like a bee'' (Muhammad Ali). Altogether, more than 400
new authors have been added, from football coaches (''Show me a good and
gracious loser and I'll show you a failure'' - Knute Rockne) to playwrights
(''You Can't Take It With You,'' ''The Man Who Came to Dinner'' and ''George
Washington Slept Here'' - Moss Hart) to Popes (''The greatness of work is inside
man'' - John Paul II) to novelists (''I'll make him an offer he can't refuse'' -
Mario Puzo) to journalists (''Radical Chic'' - Tom Wolfe) to Indian chiefs
(''Once they were a happy race.  Now they are made miserable by the white
people, who are never contented but are always encroaching'' -Tecumseh).

And then there people, or words, that have been pared in the new edition.
Nothing has been cut from the Bible, nothing from Shakespeare, very little from
the Romantic poets, who stand up remarkably well (''Poets are the unacknowledged
legislators of the world'' -Percy Bysshe Shelley).

Otherwise, the test in keeping instead of eliminating, Mrs. Beck said, was
greatness and relevance. Some of these could be deemed controversial cuts, or at
least highly subjective ones.

Stevenson Cuts and Additions

For example, Adlai E. Stevenson, the Democratic Presidential candidate in 1952
and 1956, arguably could be ranked as the most eloquent American politician of
modern times. He said: ''Let's talk sense to the American people.'' But the
book's editor cut the next line: ''Let's tell them the truth, that there are no
pains without gains.'' Why the cut? Mrs. Beck explained: ''The message comes
through more clearly when tightened up.''

Another Stevenson cut in the new edition: ''This is the first time I have ever
heard of a party going into battle under the slogan, 'Throw the rascals in.' ''
Why was it cut out? ''It was amusing in 1968, but we thought it too
partisan-political today,'' the editor said.

On the other hand, there are several additional Stevenson quotations, including
''The most American thing about America is the free common school system'' and
''Communism is the corruption of a dream of justice.''

The new edition of Bartlett also gave Mrs. Beck a chance to make a few
corrections, thanks to eagle-eyed readers. For instance, Molly Bloom in James
Joyce's ''Ulysses'' was credited in the 14th edition with saying ''My patience
are exhausted.'' Now the credit properly goes to Martha Clifford, another
''Ulysses'' charactr.

Which goes to show that, even among the most careful of scholars, ''When I make
a mistake it's a beaut!'' Fortunately, that wellquoted line from Fiorello H. La
Guardia has been added to the new Bartlett.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
In some editions of Metropolitan Re- port in The Times last Saturday, be- cause
of an editing error, an article about a new edition of ''Bartlett's Familiar
Quotations'' reported incor- rectly a quotation by Elizabeth Cady Stanton. The
correct quotation is: ''We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men
and women are created equal.''

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Emily Beck Drawing of Bartlett's Familiar
Quotations

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Soviet Carrier Reaches Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 56 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Sept. 6


The Soviet aircraft carrier Minsk has entered Cam Ranh Bay, Vietnam, the news
agency Kyodo said today, quoting Japanese military sources. The Minsk,
accompanied by a missile destroyer, was recently seen cruising southward in the
Sea of Japan, the first time it was known to have left its home port in Siberia
in more than a year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

L.I. Wedding Held For Anne Brower

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 71, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 263 words


Anne Parker Brower, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Prentice Willetts Brower of Lloyd
Harbor, Huntington, L.I., was married yesterday in St. John's Episcopal Church
in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., to Hutchinson DuBosque Jr., son of Mr. and Mrs.
DuBosque of Essex, Conn., and Waitsfield, Vt. The Rev. Carleton T. Lee performed
the ceremony.

Deborah Willetts Brower was her sister's maid of honor. The bridegroom's father
was best man.  The bride, who teaches nursery school, also works evenings as a
ward clerk at the Huntington Hospital. She was graduated from Rosemary Hall and
Wheelock College and was a member of the Junior Assembly. Her father recently
retired as a partner in the Huntington law firm of Toaz, Buck, Myers, Brower &
Bernst. Her mother, who is also retired, was president of the Carriage House, a
country clothes store in Cold Spring Harbor.

Mr. DuBosque attended the Hotchkiss School and Hofstra College and served as a
medic with the Army in Vietnam. He is Suffolk County district manager of the
K.E. Knott Company, manufacturers' representatives in Berkeley Heights, N.J. His
previous marriage ended in divorce. His father, former president of the East
Side Airlines Terminals Corporation, is president of Atlantic Cedars Inc., a
housing concern in Waitsfield. His late grandfather, George C.  Johnson, was
chairman and president of the Dime Savings Bank of New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of bride

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S PACKAGERS WORRY ABOUT LOOSE ENDS

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Last winter, most politicians reckoned that the Republican nomination was Ronald
Reagan's to lose if he didn't trip up. He had a scare at the start of the
primary season, but he didn't trip. By the summer the polls made it look as
though the Presidency itself was his to lose if he didn't stumble. And suddenly,
as his fall campaign opened, it looked as though he might boot away a golden
opportunity.

His lieutenants had drafted a series of thematic speeches to demonstrate Mr.
Reagan's Presidential depth. But before he could get the public's attention, Mr.
Reagan was upstaging himself with thoughtless remarks and indulging in wistful
throwbacks that left his advisers wincing. Last week, he linked President Carter
with the Ku Klux Klan in an uncharacteristic bit of pique over what he regarded
as the Carter campaign's attempts to connect him with the Klan.

Earlier, he launched George Bush, his running mate, on a mission to China with a
gratuitous quip about re-establishing official relations with Taiwan. He mused
aloud about teaching the biblical story of creation along with Darwinian
evolution. In Chicago, his remark that the Vietnam War had been ''a noble
cause'' stole headlines from a defense policy speech.

Mr. Reagan was like a prize fighter trying out in a new ring but still
shadow-boxing with old sparring partners. As he threw verbal punches left and
right, his eyes strayed off the main target. Some of his jabs bounced back
against his own chin.

A bit overconfident and headstrong, he was eluding and baffling his own
handlers. In a political campaign, handlers are as vital to a candidate's
survival as the seconds who send a boxer into each new round with a reminder to
keep his guard up and save his best punches for good openings.

As an actor, Ronald Reagan spent years in Hollywood listening to stage
directions. As a Presidential candidate, he is accustomed to coaching. But few
handlers have mastered the art of giving him tough advice to protect him from
the unvarnished enthusiasms of his conservative rhetoric.

In 1976, his campaign manager was John Sears, a tough-minded strategist, blunt
with his advice, hardnosed about the need for briefings, and determined to
control the candidate and the campaign.  He was hired again for the 1980 drive
but last February, Mr. Reagan chafed under Mr. Sears's tight rein; he fired him
and two associates. No one else has gotten clear control since then. ''I think
Reagan felt he was programmed too much then and he's resisted it ever since,''
said a high-level adviser. ''Once we have a number of these flaps, he'll stop
resisting.''

The basic difficulty is the Californian's penchant for speaking his mind and
giving conservative audiences what they like to hear, without anticipating how
his words may grate on more moderate ears.  ''When he looks at China and Taiwan,
he sees the issue so clearly that he doesn't see the troubles what he says will
cause with others,'' said one aide. ''Or in calling Vietnam 'a noble cause,'
he's so convinced of that he can't see the bad impact it will have.''

''Not enough people go in and tell him how things are going to sound,'' said
another Reagan operative. ''He'll take contrary advice if you give it to him
well. It's a failure of his staff when people don't. But to be effective you
have to be firm, and most people around big politicians don't like giving them
bad news.'' Last weekend, for example, at a staff review of the campaign with
Mr.  Reagan, participants said no one had the nerve to tell Mr. Reagan that his
goofs were his campaign's main problem.

By several accounts, too, his staff failed to warn him about the potential
consequences of his remarks about Taiwan. In Ohio, another embarrassment
developed when three staffer members - Lyn Nofziger, Michael Deaver and Ed Meese
- inserted the charge into an economic speech that the current downturn was a
Carter ''depression.'' But they failed to consult Alan Greenspan, a top Reagan
economic adviser who was nearby and who admitted the next day that the remark
was an overstatement.

The traveling staff did not spot political trouble in the ''noble cause'' phrase
that Mr. Reagan himself inserted into his Chicago speech. And it prodded him
into taking a swipe at President Carter for appearing in an Alabama town with a
Ku Klux Klan office. Reagan headquarters, hurt by a Democratic countercharge
that this was ''an insult to the South,'' ordered a hasty retreat.

A Shortage of Peers?

Insiders acknowledge that these events point up divisions within the Reagan
campaign command as well as an organizational looseness under campaign manager
William Casey. No one person is clearly in control, several aides lament.

The major difficulty is that the Reagan team is an amalgam of two groups with
different backgrounds and viewpoints - the old conservative California group
that has long served Mr. Reagan, primarily Mr. Meese, Mr. Deaver and Mr.
Nofziger; and another group with links to President Ford's Administration and
1976 campaign - Mr. Casey, William Timmons, James A. Baker 3d, Stuart Spencer
and Drew Lewis.

Some reckon the Californians are too close to Mr. Reagan to caution him about
the political land mines hidden in his rhetoric. But except for Mr. Casey and
Mr. Spencer, the Ford group has not yet won enough of Mr. Reagan's personal
confidence to take on the ticklish task of telling him how to trim his sails.
''He really needs someone with him on a peer level, someone who will level with
him about those misstatements,'' said a close associate.

One prospect is Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada, Mr. Reagan's national campaign
chairman and longtime friend. The situation has become serious enough that
others have coaxed Mr. Laxalt, despite his own re-election campaign, to start
traveling with Mr. Reagan.  Nonetheless, Mr. Reagan's advisers contend that the
damage so far has been modest, can be remedied, and still has not cost Mr.
Reagan his lead over Mr. Carter in the important swing states.

''Obviously, you can't continue that pattern for another month and not be hurt
badly,'' said Robert Teeter, a Republican pollster working the Reagan campaign.
''But so far, I'm not sure you'd notice a lot of fluctuation in the polls.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of members of Ronald Reagan's staff

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR JAVITS,ABOVE ALL;
Senator Javits, Above All

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 808 words


The main question in New York's Senate race is whether Jacob Javits deserves
re-election to a fifth term. A national figure and asset to his state and party,
he should be rejected only for compelling reasons.

Republicans must answer the question in Tuesday's primary, while Democrats
choose among four challengers. Yet even if, faithlessly, Republicans nominate
Alfonse D'Amato, the presiding supervisor of the Town of Hempstead, Mr. Javits
would still have the Liberal Party line in November. So the question of his fate
will remain before the electorate.

Our answer is clear. If, at age 76 and with a progressive disease of the nervous
system, the Senator can still expect to serve six years with intellectual vigor,
then everything argues for keeping him in office. Mr. Javits believes he can. So
do all his physicians, whom he allowed to discuss his ailment publicly in great
detail. Life is uncertain, but given the alternatives, a bet on Mr. Javits
remains a sound investment.

Mr. D'Amato, who knows suburban administration, offers conservative complaints
about Federal policies but no remedies that he could soon enact. The contending
Democrats - Elizabeth Holtzman, John Lindsay, Bess Myerson and John Santucci -
are all interesting personalities, yet the best of them would vote mostly the
way Mr. Javits votes. In fact, there is no compelling reason to cast aside a man
of his experience and stature.

Age and health aside, the main complaint against Mr. Javits has been that he is
too much the lofty statesman and not enough the grubby politician. It is an odd
grievance about the most successful New York Republican in this century, one who
has held elective office since 1946. But statesmanship, in the sense of national
and global preoccupation, is yielding to parochialism, the business of
horsetrading for more Federal aid. The trend marks a belated recognition of New
York's rightful claims upon the nation. It is personified by the state's junior
Senator, Pat Moynihan, whose appealing performance has become a model for other
Democrats.

Mr. Lindsay, for example, emphasizes how he would exploit a knowledge of
Congress and City Hall to obtain more help for New York. Some argue that his
spending and labor practices as Mayor only compounded the problems he now asks
Washington to solve. But his mayoralty had many admirable aspects, too, and he
has maturely reflected upon his executive experience. He holds conventional but
solid views on foreign and military affairs.

Miss Myerson, too, promises to ''get more'' for New York. She has not held
elective office and is un-tested on national and foreign issues. But she expects
to look to Mr. Moynihan, and also to Mayor Koch, for guidance in what to get,
and how. She has diligently kept herself in the public eye since she won a
beauty pageant 35 years ago, trading heavily on four years as Mayor Lindsay's
Commissioner of Consumer Affairs. Her apparently centrist political views make
her broadly representative of New Yorkers.

Representative Holtzman has a clearer political profile.  Intelligent and
aggressive, she has used four House terms to defend constitutional values, to
oppose military spending and to promote aid to the elderly, equal rights for
women and Nader-like consumerism.  Although she has not fully defined her
foreign and economic philosophies, she stands firmly to the left of her rivals.
She denies that she disdains compromise, but she is quick to find principles in
the issues of the day and to stand apart in their defense.

Mr. Santucci, a former state legislator, is the Queens District Attorney. He
occupies the right flank, articulating popular grievances against liberal
programs and taxes.

None of these Democrats would disgrace New York. Mr. Lindsay has the broadest
experience; Miss Myerson leads in middle-of-the-road appeal; Miss Holtzman is
the most doggedly liberal, Mr. Santucci the most conservative.

A fit Senator Javits, however, ranks far above all of them, even as
horse-trader. A legislator of enormous range, he devotes himself to tedious as
well as glamorous issues, from protection of the dollar to promotion of the
arts. The ranking Republican on the Foreign Relations Committee, he is an
influential champion, and also critic, of Israel; an independent voice on
defense; a sponsor of arms control. He shaped the post-Vietnam limits on
Presidential war powers. He managed a monumental reform of the pension laws. In
Congress, and beyond, he has earned the widest respect and influence for New
York, and he spends them well.

As long as he remains fit, Jack Javits has our vote.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
CAMPAIGN BEDTIME STORY;
by James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words


Go on, Grandpa, tell us a story. One of those funny political stories.  Politics
is no fit subject for children.  Please, Grandpa, don't be an old damper.  Well,
once upon a time there was an American President who was in terrible trouble,
and ...  What's new about that? What was his name?  Jimmy. And he was running
for re-election against a man named Ronnie.  You're making this all up.  Not at
all. This Jimmy was a good man with a big grin and a squeaky voice, but he
couldn't win for losing. Millions of people were out of work. Even professional
football players were down to their last yacht. The women were sore at the men
and the men were sore at the women, and both were sore at Jimmy, who was down to
his last peanut and was about to lose his job.

So what did he do, Grandpa?  Well, one night he called his staff together in the
White House and told them to come up with a plan to turn him into a winner and
turn Ronnie into a loser by 9 o'clock the next morning. ''Stiffen up,'' the
President said, ''the future of the Republic depends on it.''

And did they stiffen up?  They were stiff all night but they appeared next
morning with a 500-page report, proclaiming the achievements of Jimmy's
Administration and extolling the character-building virtues of adversity.

''Cut it down to 50 words,'' ordered the President. At this point up spake
Jimmy's political wizard. His name was Jurden but he pronounced it Jordan.

Why?  Shut up, stupid, let Grandpa go on.  ''Well,'' the Wizard said, ''we have
a two-part plan: Lucky Plan No. 1 and Lucky Plan No. 2.'' Grandpa, why didn't
Jimmy just deny he'd ever been President?  Don't interrupt, silly. What was the
plan, Grandpa?  The Secretary of State thought it would be useful if Ronnie -
the other guy - got sort of confused between the billion people in China proper
and the other Chinese folk on Taiwan. You know, sort of lost track of 900
million Chinese.

''You sound vaguely mad,'' the President said. ''What would be the point?''
''Well, if the voters got the idea that Ronnie could misplace China, maybe one
day he might lose track of Europe or Canada, and that wouldn't help his
campaign, would it?''

''You're raving, absolutely bonkers! Any other equally brilliant ideas?'' ''Yes,
the problem is to make the voters think of Ronnie's ideas instead of your ideas,
right?'' ''Right!'' A sage named Strauss thought it might also be useful if
Ronnie insulted the South by identifying it with the Ku Klux Klan, or said some
nice things about the nobility of the Vietnam War, or explained his personal
theory about the evolution of the human race. ''Ronnie also has the notion that
pollution doesn't all come from cars but from trees, and ...'' Strauss went on.

But Grandpa, any kid knows Ronnie wouldn't say anything as dumb as all that. Was
that the plan?  That was the first part of the plan. The second part, or Lucky
Plan No. 2, has to do with foreign affairs.  ''Here we have come up with an even
better idea,'' said the advisers.  ''I hope so,'' replied the President. ''What
we need is some big event that will demonstrate that the Communist world has
even more problems than we have. Something unusual that will make the voters
think.''

''Make them what?'' ''Make them think!'' ''You're going too far, but proceed,
quickly please.'' ''We were thinking of something like an uprising in Poland.
Muskie and Brzezinski think this would be a wonderful stroke of luck.  Strikes
among the Polish dockworkers along the Baltic and in the coal mines. Angry
editorials in Pravda, military maneuvers in East Germany and Czechoslavakia, and
all that. I think you get the idea.''

''Followed, I suppose, by appeals from the Pope for peace, understanding, and
freedom?'' ''Precisely. As we figured it, ideally of course, the Polish
Government would give in to the workers' demands; censorship would be lifted,
sort of; free trade unions would spread from the factories to the universities,
and Mass would be celebrated over all state radio and television networks. And
of course all this would have some effect on the rest of Eastern Europe.''

''Gentlemen, please,'' the President said, ''of all the wild and stupid notions
I have ever encountered, including my own, this is clearly the wildest and
silliest set of proposals ever placed before a President in the history of the
United States. How do you propose that we make all these wonderful fantasies
come true?''

''Leave it to Ronnie, Mr. President. Leave it to accident. But of course we are
only giving you policy guidance.'' What's the moral of the story, Grandpa?  I
told you before: You don't always have to be smart to win, but you have to be
lucky!

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE QUIET AMERICAN AT THE U.N.

BYLINE: By Bernard D. Nossiter; Bernard D. Nossiter is chief of The Times's
United Nations bureau.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 36, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5646 words


When Donald F. McHenry slips into his seat Tuesday for another opening session
in the blue-domed General Assembly chamber of the 153-member United Nations, he
is likely to feel like a man on a roller coaster. Just a year ago, he was
plucked from relative obscurity as the third man on the large United States team
to head the delegation and take the Cabinet seat in Washington that comes with
the job. Mr. McHenry was almost a faceless bureaucrat compared with his dynamic
precedessor, Andrew Young. But Mr. Young had been squeezed out after an
incautious meeting with the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. Politics, both domestic and external, demanded that the black Mr.
Young be succeeded by the black Mr. McHenry.

Slowly, carefully, quietly, Donald McHenry scored a dazzling string of
successes. Nearly every U.N. vote of consequence - Cambodia, Cuba, Afghanistan
and Iran - went the way the United States wanted, even if the practical
consequences were small. The cautious, unflamboyant Mr. McHenry was overturning
conventional wisdom, that the United Nations was an anti-United States engine
with a hostile automatic majority from the third world and the Soviet bloc.

But roller coasters fall as steeply as they climb. On March 1, Mr.  McHenry had
helped persuade the Carter Administration to caution Israel against pushing its
settlements into the territories seized after the 1967 war. So he cast his vote
with 14 other Security Council members, and Prime Minister Menachem Begin's
Government stood rebuked by its staunchest ally. Not for long. President Carter
pulled the rug out from under Donald McHenry, saying the vote had been a
mistake. An underground campaign began to paint Mr. McHenry, like Mr. Young
before him, as a black anti-Semite. And the McHenry magic touch seemed to have
vanished. Not only did his stature appear diminished but that of his country was
hurt as well.

Since then, he has moved deeper into the shadows. Typically, the head of a
delegation casts his nation's vote in the Security Council, the U.N.'s most
powerful organ. But as the Council, with wearisome repetition, censured Israel
for an endless chain of alleged misbehavior - raiding South Lebanon, deporting
Palestinian mayors, annexing the Arab sector of Jerusalem - Mr. McHenry was seen
less frequently. He would leave the vote to his deputy, William J. vanden
Heuvel, or, on a recent occasion, to the new Secretary of State, Edmund S.
Muskie. Israel, of course, wanted Washington to veto all these resolutions and
organized American Jewry automatically followed Israel's lead. But Washington
was torn: It was dismayed over Israeli aggressiveness that threatened the
fragile peace in the Middle East but it was equally worried about voters for
whom Israel can do no wrong. So the United States waffled, abstaining on almost
every ballot.  Mr. McHenry's role in and response to the crisis of the March
vote is one key to this curious, almost unknowable man. It is also a key to
whether he can restore his and his nation's effectiveness at the U.N.

When the vote was disavowed, black leaders across the country began ringing
alarm bells. They feared that Mr. McHenry was going the way of Mr. Young, that
for the second time in six months a black chief delegate would be driven from
office. The black leaders began preparing a defense in depth. But Mr. McHenry,
cool, cautious, the compleat bureaucrat who works within the system, quietly
passed the word to the Black Caucus on Capitol Hill, blacks in the State
Department and black leaders elsewhere: Lie low; no need to draw the wagons
around; McHenry never violates an instruction; McHenry's job is secure. A
planned protest melted away, and what could have been an ugly war of words
between organized Jews and blacks, like that following Mr. Young's resignation,
fizzled. Mr. McHenry's chief, Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, accepted the
blame for what was euphemistically described as a ''communications gap'' and
resigned not long after in protest over the abortive rescue mission in Iran.
But Mr. McHenry stayed in office, completing his first diplomatic season as head
of the United States mission.

That office has never seen anyone quite like him. ''He is the first career
officer with real influence who brings to the job an ethnic sensibility that
pervades everything he does,'' in the view of one shrewd man who once sat there
himself.

On one recent muggy day, Mr. McHenry, 43, a stocky man with a thick, black
mustache and receding black hair, draped his conservative gray jacket over a
desk chair and sat down in blue shirt sleeves at a glass coffee table the
Government issues to highranking officials. The shirt sleeves, of course, were
buttoned down and his patternless blue tie was carefully knotted. In measured
words, qualified and requalified, he talked about his job: ''I have no illusions
that we make policy here. We do not; we should not. We should, however,
participate in its formulation and I think we've been reasonably successful in
that.''

In fact, Donald McHenry is frustrated by officials at both the State Department
and the National Security Council who try to limit his role to deciding on the
text of resolutions, tactics and the tone of statements. ''There are those who
would like to narrowly define'' the policy range of his office, he concedes. As
the quintessential bureaucrat, he will not name those who block him or even
identify the policies that bear his stamp. A slight edge creeps into a carefully
cultivated voice that betrays neither geographic, class, nor ethnic origin as he
speaks contemptuously of one official who does parade his policy triumphs.

The job, more than most, has built-in frustrations, but he lacks the two
important ingredients for lessening the problems - a close, personal
relationship with the President and an independent constituency. Henry Cabot
Lodge, the first chief delegate to sit in the Cabinet, enjoyed both and
frequently ignored instructions from Secretary of State John Foster Dulles. Mr.
Young, too, possessed the vital characteristics. He didn't, however, work
diligently enough at the tasks at hand, relying more on charm than carefully
drafted cables to exploit his assets. ow that the furor over the March vote has
died down, Mr. McHenry concedes that it gave him some of his worst hours. ''It
was frustrating because there wasn't very much real analysis and some of the
statements - such as those of the Mayor - were, to put it mildly, out of
bounds.'' Mayor Koch had called Messrs. McHenry and Young ''viciously
anti-Israel,'' a choice of language that Donald McHenry says ''is not very far
from being called an anti-Semite.''

The history of the whole episode goes back to a dinner in the Pierre Hotel last
October, when Mr. McHenry carefully laid out the position adopted by the Carter
Administration. It called for both ''full security of Israel'' and the
fulfillment of ''the legitimate rights of the Palestinians.'' This meant that a
''just and durable solution'' was impossible ''without the active participation
of the Palestinians'' and recognized Israel's fear that Arab nations will only
pretend to accept Israel's existence and sovereignty. None of this implied ''any
change in our friendship and strong support for Israel, or our deep commitment
to her security.'' But it did amount to a call for ''a new chapter in relations
between Israelis and Pales-tinians.''

Yehuda Blum, Israel's U.N. representative, left the dinner convinced that Mr.
McHenry was less pro-Israel than some of his predecessors, notably Daniel
Patrick Moynihan and Arthur J. Goldberg, less emotional, more formal and less
sympathetic. Later, after private talks with Mr. McHenry, Mr. Blum was said to
conclude that Donald McHenry is not anti-Israel but pro-State Department, a far
more faithful follower of his instructions from Washington than previous United
States representatives. Mr. Blum's mission says that Mr. McHenry listens
carefully to the Israeli representative, has an open mind and understands the
Israeli point of view.

When Prime Minister Begin's Cabinet decided to move settlers into the tense,
West Bank Arab city of Hebron, the State Department condemned the move. Both Mr.
Vance and Mr. McHenry sought an acceptable Security Council formula expressing
the Administration view. There were long telephone calls between the two men the
night before the vote. Some State Department officials urged Mr. McHenry to see
the President personally, something he does infrequently, but he declined to do
so. In the end, the Security Council altered the resolution to come closer to
the United States position - a section implying criticism of Israel's treatment
of religious places in Jerusalem was deleted - and Mr. McHenry, in the debate on
the question, disassociated the United States from a call to dismantle existing
Jewish settlements on the West Bank. But the policy of moving settlers into the
area was condemned - and Mr. McHenry then cast his now famous vote.

In Washington, Ephraim Evron, the Israeli Ambassador, had met with Secretary
Vance, to argue for a veto or an abstention. Two days later, Mr. Evron took his
case to the White House, to Vice President Mondale. The Israeli Ambassador did
not need to point out that a complaint from Israel could automatically unleash
denunciations from organized Jewish groups and that the New York primary was
less than four weeks away. That night, President Carter said the vote was a
mistake, largely because of its references to ''occupied'' Jerusalem. But since
the United States had earlier voted for that language in the General Assembly,
U.N. diplomats regarded the explanation as a thin cover for domestic politics.

Even in private, Mr. McHenry loyally supports the official view that somehow Mr.
Vance and Mr. Carter misunderstood each other. The disputed resolution, Mr.
McHenry has said, accurately expressed American policy. The trouble was that
this policy was not supposed to be expressed in public - at least not before the
New York primary.

Mr. McHenry then became the target of an intense, if brief, media campaign to
label him as a foe of Israel and a naive supporter of Arab and other third-world
nations. Indeed, according to officials in the State Department and at least one
Israeli diplomat, the campaign was orchestrated by Israel's Washington Embassy,
a bureaucratic ploy to explain away its failure to stop the vote. Mayor Koch, in
an interview with The New York Post, capped the affair. He called Mr. McHenry
and Mr. Young, ''third-world oriented and viciously anti-Israel.'' For good
measure, the Mayor included Mr. Vance and Zbigniew Brzezinski in the
''anti-Israel'' camp. The Secretary of State is said to have then called Mayor
Koch and questioned his ancestry in terms not usually employed by a senior
partner in Simpson Thacher & Bartlett. Mr.  McHenry also telephoned the Mayor
but was, characteristically, restrained. ''I told him I was disgusted with him.
I told him I'd be glad to talk with him any time he wished. He said he was using
colorful language. It was irresponsible language. The Mayor and a few others
were out making statements that could very easily have increased friction in our
society.''

Although Mr. McHenry has abstained several times since then on Security Council
votes rebuking Israel and has vetoed one resolution that called for the creation
of a Palestinian state, the belief persists in some New York circles that he
tilts toward the third world and the Arabs.

''I think I have a pretty realistic view of the the third-world countries,'' he
says. ''They bring to the modern world hang-ups growing out of their past, a
whole series of things one can't be naive about. On the other hand, I don't
believe in confrontation politics; I don't believe in name-calling. I do believe
in communication with them, in stating my views, listening to theirs, respecting
their views, expecting them to respect mine. I don't believe their problems can
be solved in some East-West lens. I'm not surprised, as Senator Moynihan was,
that the third world would speak out on Afghanistan (against the Soviet
invasion). After all, it's a nonaligned country. The third world is jealous of
its own recently won sovereignty.''

His scorn for ''confrontation politics'' was an oblique reference to Mr.
Moynihan, whose blunt U.N. attacks on what he saw as the hypocritical assaults
of dictatorial third-world nations against American and Israeli democracies
first led to and then lost him the job Mr. McHenry now holds.

But above all, it is the pro-Arab and anti-Israel label that pains Mr. McHenry.
''There's a great deal of stereotyping and prejudice on the Middle East by all
parties,'' he asserts. ''The Mayor has made it very clear that all blacks are
anti-Jewish. Why are you anti-Jewish because you're black? Now that's stupid.
Now, similarly, I think many Arabs make the same mistake. Because you are black,
you must be pro-Arab. You must somehow have some kind of sympathy for their
problem, from their point of view. You take a great deal of heat in this kind of
situation if you try and deal with the problem on its merits.''

Daniel Moynihan is as well qualified as any to judge Mr. McHenry's alleged
softness on Arabs and developing countries. He says: ''We should use the U.N. in
a tough-minded way. McHenry tries to. The fact is he got better votes from the
U.N. than we've had in years. It's largely a question of events. The third world
was scared by Vietnam's invasion of Kampuchea (Cambodia) and the Russian
invasion of Afghanistan. But credit to the man who got those votes.'' Before the
fiasco over the Israeli settlements, Donald McHenry demonstrated that the
classic anti-American majority of the third world and the Soviet bloc was far
more fragile than generally thought. Moreover, he had made his point operating
quietly from behind the scenes rather than leading the charge out front.

He was able to block Cuba from a seat on the Security Council that Havana was
convinced it would own. After all, the Cubans currently lead the 92 nations who
group themselves as nonaligned and could count on the backing of the Soviet
Union and its friends. The confident Cubans sent Foreign Minister Isidoro
Malmierca Peoli to New York to nail down their triumph. But after 154 ballots,
the Cubans were still short of the two-thirds in the General Assembly they
needed for election.

Donald McHenry had found enough third-world nations who regard Havana as another
voice for Moscow and, with some Latin and Western countries, they composed a
blocking third. At one critical point, when it looked as if Cuba were coming
close, Mr. McHenry quietly called the attention of U.N. officials to some
suspicious double counting. The Cuban vote promptly fell back.

The automatic majority also crumbled over Afghanistan. The Russians vetoed a
Security Council resolution deploring their invasion and demanding the
withdrawal of their troops. But this promptly led to an emergency session of the
Assembly. Again, with Mr. McHenry playing an unobtrusive backstage role, the
Assembly condemned the Russians by an overwhelming 104 to 18, with most of the
nonaligned nations swelling the total.

Earlier, over strong Soviet protests, the Assembly voted 91 to 21 to urge the
withdrawal of foreign troops - meaning Vietnam's - from Cambodia.

Mr. McHenry's tact, his role as quiet American, has been appreciated at the
U.N., and, ultimately, in Washington. An Asian diplomat who played a central
role in the Cambodian affair says it was vital for the United States to be
''self-effacing. We didn't want to be seen as stooges of the West in an
East-West struggle,'' and he praised Mr. McHenry for ''even consulting us on
whether to speak.'' In Washington, a high official said that ''Don persuaded us
against trying to take over every show, to recognize you've got friends and step
aside. That's sometimes hard. We're a take-charge people. Don sold the President
and the bureaucracy, against considerable odds, that it was possible to get
support in the U.N.''

Mr. McHenry placed his stamp most firmly on the steady buildup of support in the
Security Council for the limited pressure the world body exerts to seek the
release of the American hostages in Iran. All nations communicate through
diplomats and all have a vested interest in the free movement of their envoys.
But the Soviet Union sees Iran as a target of opportunity, a critical nation
lost to the American orbit and ripe for inclusion in the Soviet world. Moslem
countries on the Council could sympathize with the plight of the hostages but
Iran's Islamic revolution touched off echoing strains in their restive
populations. Third-world nations generally are reluctant to punish their fellows
at the behest of a superpower, regardless of the issue. Mr. McHenry's patient
labors won a unanimous Council declaration calling for the urgent release of the
hostages.

Anything stronger, however, such as a call to cut off trade with Iran, was
heading for trouble, not only with the Soviet Union and Moslem states, but all
third-world countries and even Western Europe. Mr. McHenry, moreover, also had a
problem in Washington. The Carter Administration wanted to push ahead swiftly
with the greatest possible pressure, or at least make pressure publicly visible.
(Since Washington had frozen Iran's assets in the United States, Teheran could
buy nothing here and so an effective ban on purchases in the United States had
already been established.) At one point, Donald McHenry won an 11 to 0 vote in
the Council to impose sanctions if the hostages were not released in a week. He
had collected five third-world votes and persuaded two Moslem nations plus the
Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia to abstain. He had also persuaded Washington to
wait for a week while Secretary General Kurt Waldheim made his futile trip to
seek the hostages' freedom.

Abdalla Y. Bishara of Kuwait is one of those half-dozen envoys from small
countries who exercise an outsize measure of influence at the U.N. because of
sheer force of personality and intellect. At that time, he was also a Council
member, a Moslem, the representative of a Persian Gulf state, and strongly
opposed to sanctions. He was particularly courted by the United States chief
delegate. Mr. McHenry met Mr. Bishara in his office at the United States Mission
and laid out the arguments both for and against sanctions. He also reviewed the
strengths and weaknesses of Mr. Bishara's position. It was a vintage
performance, a demonstration of realism and willingness to absorb another point
of view.

The other day Mr. Bishara recalled: ''McHenry's handling of Iran was excellent.
This was a crisis regulated for his qualities, coolness, composure. He was not
necessarily convincing, but persevering. It didn't require revolutionary or
original characteristics (which Mr. Bishara admires in Mr. Young). He was
masterful because of the equipment he had.'' In the end, Mr. Bishara abstained,
but he did not vote against the American stand. That vote was taken when the
deadline passed. Mr. McHenry again picked up five third-world votes on the
sanctions question but his work was nullified by a Soviet veto.

To be sure, triumphs at the glass and concrete palace of the U.N.  are, more
often than not, in the eye of the beholder. There is an unmistakably abstract
quality about the votes. The triumphant resolutions have not removed a
Vietnamese soldier from Cambodia or dislodged a Soviet tank from Afghanistan. At
this writing, the hostages are still unfree. The world will not cut off trade
with Iran, although a few European allies are making some gestures of limited
utility. The exchange value of Iranian oil and the political temptations offered
by a revolution on the loose are far stronger than any words uttered in the
chambers on the East River. Israel and South Africa ignore scores of resolutions
demanding they mend their ways.

This, however, may be too literal a measure of what Mr. McHenry and the others
do. The U.N. manufactures climate, atmosphere, stage setting. No nation, even
the Soviet Union, relishes the degree of isolation implied in a condemnation of
five to one. Moscow prefers to see itself as the sword and shield of the third
world, not the object of its fear.

Mr. McHenry himself, as deputy to Mr. Young, spent more than two years
laboriously constructing an arrangement to end the guerrilla war in Namibia, or
South-West Africa, and to bring about elections under U.N. supervision. The
elections have still not taken place.  South Africa is in no hurry to give up
control. But someday, somehow, something like Donald McHenry's intervention
could be employed to bring peace and independence.

Similarly, Mr. Waldheim's unsuccessful commission of inquiry in Teheran could be
resurrected. When Iran's internal politics finally permit the captives' release,
the panel and its suppressed statement of Teheran's grievances may be a
necessary part of the drama's last act. Again, the growing support in the U.N.
for the Palestine Liberation Organization has, if anything, spurred Israeli
settlements in the occupied lands. But it has also raised fresh questions about
Israeli policy both in the United States and in Israel. Once the American
election is over, there may be new pressure to ''fulfill the legitimate rights
of the Palestinians,'' the phrase used by Mr.  McHenry nearly a year ago.For all
his skill in quiet negotiation, Donald McHenry is a remote man who keeps people
at a distance. ''He lacks warmth, amiability,'' says an Asian diplomat. Mr.
McHenry talks in carefully measured tones, weighing each word. He seems almost
incapable of spontaneity.  An Arab diplomat who has studied them both says,
''Andy Young is the U.N. charter - McHenry is the rules of procedure.''

He knows that others see him as a model of prudence, speaking with extraordinary
restraint. ''It's not something which is just here on the job,'' he says, and
adds with a smile, ''My children say the same thing when I'm at home.'' Mr.
McHenry's former wife, Mary, an English teacher and associate dean of studies at
Mount Holyoke, explains it this way: ''We are a very private people. All of us
blacks who grew up in the 40's, 50's and 60's had very little opportunity to be
ourselves. Think about what that meant. You didn't have the chance to fail. You
didn't have the luxury of a misstep. We didn't have the bonding experience. It
was loneliness, more than you can describe.''

Mr. McHenry is both sensitive to slight and fiercely insistent on being valued
for himself and not his color. At a press conference after the disavowed vote,
he showed emotion only once. A black reporter asked if he and Andrew Young were
victims of a State Department plot ''to denigrate black ambassadors.'' In heavy,
deliberate tones, he replied, ''I do not want to identify myself or my
predecessor as the 'black ambassador' of the United States. I represent the
United States Government and speak for it, and when I speak, it is the policy of
the United States Government.''

Nevertheless, black experience was etched into his character literally from the
moment of his birth. In 1936, maternity wards in his native East St. Louis, a
grim industrial town, were closed to blacks. So Dora McHenry had to cross the
Missouri River to bear Donald in St. Louis, then carry him back home to the
unpaved street where he grew up. The McHenrys were poor. His father, Limas, who
now works in the Ford Company's frame plant in River Rouge, walked out before
Donald was 5. His mother supported the three children. ''I can remember a couple
of times when there was no food; there were several crisis points, no food, no
money,'' he says. But his mother, ''a superior cook,'' would bring home samples
from the advertising agency where she worked testing recipes and preparing food
for ads.  He remembers drinking Pet Milk from coffee jars.

Dora McHenry imposed firm discipline. While she worked, the children could not
leave the yard to play in the street. Donald obeyed, but his younger brother,
Jerry, would slip away. ''He was the most venturesome,'' Mr. McHenry recalls,
''And the grapevine passed the word so he'd get back in time.'' Jerry is now a
policeman in East St. Louis. Their sister, Charlotte, an ex-school teacher, is a
housewife in Lexington, Mass. ''People thought we thought that we were much
better than they were because we wouldn't associate on the street with them,''
Mr. McHenry says. ''But it wasn't particularly lonely. There were lots of
cousins.''

The well-behaved Donald delivered papers, ran errands for a grocery store,
worked for a carpenter, learned to set type and run presses.  That last helped
pay his way through college. He did well in the all-black schools he attended.
He was president of his senior class, and his schoolmates predicted that he
would become ''President of the United States,'' but then, with the bitter
self-mockery of black students in 1953, added ''... Toothpick Company.'' He
passed up scholarships to black colleges to go to the integrated Illinois State
University in Normal. ''My mother's philosophy was that you have got to get out
there and compete now with those you will compete with all your life.''

Inevitably, he was drawn into the fringes of the civil-rights movement, but
there were no reckless rides to Mississippi. At first, rights were a practical
matter. There weren't enough dormitories at Illinois State and the white
landlords in town would not rent to blacks. Working as usual through channels,
Mr. McHenry ''got together with a couple of deans, put together a little meeting
and persuaded two or three white houses to be opened to blacks.'' By his senior
year, he had formed a chapter of the N.A.A.C.P. and become its president. But,
unlike other bright blacks of his time, this was not to be his life's work. ''It
never interested me, '' he says. ''I finally decided everybody had his
contribution to make and mine was in foreign affairs. I recognized that
everybody has a different role to play. Each marches to a different drum.''

He went on to graduate school at Southern Illinois University in Carbondale,
teaching speech, coaching the debate team and studying international affairs.
Adlai Stevenson had long been his model public servant. ''I was fascinated with
his approach, the intellectual possibilities he took to it. There was something
about Stevenson that encouraged believing in him. It wasn't that substantive.
Here's a man who is trying honestly and intellectually.''

From Southern Illinois, he moved closer to the center of foreign policy making,
to Georgetown in Washington for a doctorate that still lacks a thesis. Mr.
McHenry supported himself by teaching speech and coaching debate at Howard
University.

Somewhere in Washington, he met Harlan Cleveland, a former Stevenson aide and
then Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs, the
office that oversees the United States relationship with the U.N. It was 1963
and the State Department was looking for able blacks. Harlan Cleveland had no
trouble recruiting Mr. McHenry. ''I was eager,'' he recalls, and he began at the
bottom, a young officer looking at such recondite areas as Rhodesia and the
United States Trust islands in the Pacific.

Mr.McHenry spent eight years in the State Department and never left Foggy
Bottom. He helped prepare a brief for the International Court of Justice but it
failed to win a ruling that could have paved the way for Namibia's still
frustrated independence. He labored, unsuccessfully, to give Micronesians, the
residents of the Pacific Trust islands, a greater voice in their destiny.
Despite his conspicuous nonsuccess, his careful, detailed work brought State
Department awards and promotion to special assistant to the Secretary of State,
William P. Rogers.

But he suffered with Mr. Rogers as Henry Kissinger, the national security
adviser, remorsely stripped State of power. Mr. McHenry was angered by the
treatment of Richard F. Pedersen, William Rogers's counselor, whose telephone
was tapped. That, he said, ''comes very close to bugging the Secretary of
State.'' He was disgusted by ''this hideous invasion'' of Cambodia in 1971.

Others in the department left with angry protests. That is not McHenry's way.
''If I thought going with a bang would contribute to the principle I feel
strongly about, then I'd do it,'' he said. ''If, on the other hand, I'm in a
situation where a difference occurs among reasonable men and I'm not being
heard, I don't see any value in going with the bang.You don't burn your bridges.
I hoped to go back.''

So he left quietly to wait for change, stopping at pillars of the foreign-policy
establishment, writing a book - ''Micronesia: Trust Betrayed'' -teaching and
lecturing (at the Brookings Institution, the Council on Foreign Relations, the
School of Foreign Service at Georgetown and the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace). Mr.  McHenry returned to the State Department with the
return of a Democratic Administration.  Today, Donald McHenry fills his long day
meeting, talking, reading and editing cables, conferring with his staff (two
sessions daily with his press counselor, Jill Schuker, and one with his four
deputy delegates). He carefully puts aside each Monday for a trip to Washington
to touch base with power, the Secretary of State or the President. As a Cabinet
member, he insists on seeing Mr. Carter alone. He also reaches him with crisp,
one-page memos.

He endures but does not like the cocktails-and-dinner life that flows around the
U.N. He insists on two weekday nights with his daughters, Elizabeth, 15, and
Christina, 16, who live with him at the decorator-furnished, overstuffed
apartment that the Government provides its chief U.N. delegate on the 42d floor
of the Waldorf-Astoria.

Mr. McHenry and his former wife have joint custody of the girls.  She is as
reluctant as he to discuss their breakup, but insists there is still ''a close
family bond'' and ''we all watch out terribly for Don.'' Mary McHenry does
acknowledge that it is the searing memory of his own father's desertion that
drove Donald to insist on assuming the chief responsibility for the children.
Indeed, Mr. McHenry is so bitter about his past that he has cut off telephone
calls from his father and was angered when Ford public-relations men sent Limas
McHenry to his son's swearing-in ceremony. Donald McHenry says firmly, ''I think
fathers have a responsibility.''

For Mr. McHenry, who strides at a near run, there is always a schedule, a duty,
a routine. A man who watched him with Andrew Young saw this difference: ''If
Andy was off to a meeting, say, with the British and the Patriotic Front, he
would ask what hotel they were staying at and tell us to work the bar. He was
looking for tools to relax people. Don wouldn't think in those terms. He'd want
briefing books prepared and criticise them. He'd want talking points and make
comments in the margin. Don would spend as much time preparing for the trip as
the trip itself. Andy looked for ways to relax tensions.''

Now the United States chief delegate starts another session at the General
Assembly, a talkshop of 153 nations whose recommendations bind no one to
anything but serve as a crude barometer of world opinion. If Ronald Reagan is
elected President, Mr. McHenry will surely go. He may leave anyway. He
frequently talks of becoming president of a small college. And he knows that
from now to November, every move he makes will be dictated by the President's
electoral needs. But if Jimmy Carter is re-elected, Donald McHenry may well be
around for some time. You may not hear him, but in his own quiet way he will no
doubt continue the frustrasting task of trying to make some contribution to
world peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A PREVIEW OF FALL BOOKS

BYLINE: By RAY WALTERS; Ray Walters is an editor of The New York Times Book
Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 4139 words


THESE are anxious times in the world of books. During the 90 shopping days
between tomorrow and Christmas - what the trade calls ''the fall season'' -
publishers will be sending some 7,000 new titles to the bookstores. How will
they be received by the buyers and readers?

The bookpeople's concern is great because of the way recession and inflation
have been affecting their fortunes. Last fall, when the publishers thought the
titles they were offering were a ''good, average'' lot, distressing percentages
of them were returned unsold.  During the first half of 1980, sales continued
''way down.'' In recent weeks, an upswing has been reported, but it is still too
soon to tell how strong it is.

A survey of the forthcoming books has led us to some conclusions:

* Either by the intention of publishers or by sheer chance this will be a very
''commercial'' season. An unusually large number of ''good reads'' are being
published - novels designed to provide escape; biographies of celebrities,
living and dead, intended to entertain. Although many should keep the
booksellers' cash registers ringing, relatively few will evoke high praise when
literary awards are passed out next year.

* Many of the popular novels are the wwriters with established reputations.

* A number of the outstanding books are biographies of American literary
figures.

* It is a rich time for books about the present social and economic malaise but,
surprisingly in an election year, few volumes deal specifically with candidates
and issues.

Fiction

For most booksellers and their customers, the sea-son's most welcome news is
that two lordsof the best-seller lists, James A.  Michener and Ken Follett, have
new novels. Mr. Michener's ''The Covenant'' chronicles 15,000 years of the
history of South Africa.  Mr. Follett's ''The Key to Rebecca'' is a thriller
about Rommel's World War II campaign in Africa. His name is also on the title
page, as co-author with Rene Louis Maurice (a pseudonym for three French
journalists), of ''The Gentlemen of 16 July ,'' a nonfiction book about the
exploits of a Robin Hood-like European bank robber.

No matter what kind of popular fiction a reader prefers, there will be novels to
satisfy him by veterans of the best-seller lists.  For escape into faraway times
and places, there are Robert S.  Elegant's 17th-century China (''Manchu''),
Norah Lofts's olde England (''A Wayside Tavern''), Douglas C. Jones's Arkansas
during the Civil War (''Elkhorn Tavern'') and William Stevenson's Ger-man East
Africa during World War I (''The Ghosts of Africa'').

For thrills in a modern world where terrorism and violence are rife, there are
Helen MacInnes's ''The Hidden Target,'' Irving Wal lace's ''The Second Lady,''
Lawrence Sanders's ''The Tenth Commandment,'' Michael Crichton's ''Congo,''
Richard Condon's ''The Entwining,'' Alistair MacLean's ''Athabasca,'' Alfred
Coppel's ''The Hastings Conspiracy'' and N.  Richard Nash's ''Aphrodite's
Cave.''

Spookiness and things that go bump in the night? There's Peter Straub's
''Shadowland'' and Herman Raucher's ''Maynard's House.'' A woman's romance in
glamorous localesPalmer's ''A Time to Embrace,'' Phyllis A. Whitney's
''Poinciana'' and Dorothy Eden's ''The American Heiress.''

A woman facing midlife crisis? Cynthia Freeman's ''Come Pour the Wine'' and
Susan Isaacs's ''Close Relations.'' A man's midlife crisis? Avery Corman's ''The
Old Neighborhood.'' A behind-the-scenes look at a Broadway musical? Garson
Kanin's ''Smash.'' One of the season's few novelists whose past work has won
both a popular following and critical acclaim is E. L. Doctorow. In his last
novel, ''Ragtime,'' Mr. Doctorow depicted the ebullience of American life early
in this century; in his soon-to-be-published ''Loon Lake'' he follows an
ambitious young man in search of himself during the Great Depression.

Like Mr. Doctorow, Judith Rossner has enjoyed bestsellerdom - with ''Looking for
Mr. Goodbar'' -but thus far her reception by critics has been mixed. Her new
novel, ''Emmeline,'' is something a bit different - the love story of one of the
''mill girls'' in 19thcentury Lowell, Mass.

Like Mr. Doctorow, Mary Lee Settle has won literary awards, but she has yet to
win a large public. Her new novel ''The Scapegoat'' portrays a young woman's
devotion to what she thinks is right during a miner's strike in 1912 West
Virginia.  A quintet of writers whose past works raised high expectations are
returning. Alice Adams, who has written movingly of lost dreams in many short
stories and several novels, in ''Rich Rewards'' tells of a woman who
unexpectedly comes across an old love and wins the encounter. Barry Hannah,
author of a notable collection of short stories, ''Airships,'' describes, in a
novel called ''Ray,'' a Southern small-town physician's effort to escape his
feeling of guilt for what he did in Vietnam. W. M. Spackman of ''An Armful of
Warm Girl'' is back with ''A Presence With Secrets,'' a novel tracing 30 years
of adventuring by a Philadelphia Quaker libertine. Hilma Wolitzer, whose two
novels have been called ''beautiful and troubling,'' tells in ''Hearts'' of the
relationship that develops between a young widow and her teen-age stepdaughter.

A pair of novelists who over the years have become centers of cults have new
offerings for their followers. Tom Robbins - he of ''Even Cowgirls Get the
Blues'' - has ''Still Life With Woodpecker,'' which his publisher describes
merely as ''a seriocomedy, a sort of a love story.'' William Kotzwinkle - of
''The Fan Man'' -undertakes in ''Jack in the Box'' to answer a burning question:
Can a young man from a small mining town find happiness as a human being?

Three collections of short stories will enable readers to reappraise the careers
of esteemed veteran writers. ''The Collected Stories of Eudora Welty'' brings
together all the short fiction written since 1936 by this gifted portrayer of
Southern life. For her volume, ''Fifty Stories,'' Kay Boyle has selected and
arranged those that she believes illustrate how her craftsmanship has developed
over half a century. ''The Stories of Ray Bradbury'' assembles 100 examples of
more than 30 years' work by a writer often categorized as a science fiction
author, but whose compass is far wider.

Ella Leffland, whose fiction has won a number of prizes in the past several
years, offers 14 short stories in ''Last Courtesies and Other Stories.''

As in most fall seasons, two-or three-score writers will publish first novels.
The majority of them, in keeping with the spirit of the times, were written with
at least one eye on a best-seller listing or a movie sale. Among those with
ambitions that seem more serious are four whose debuts are already being talked
about in literary reviews. Ann Arensberg's ''Sister Wolf'' tells of an
aristocratic young woman's first, late surrender to passion. Dinitia Smith's
''The Hard Rain'' shows how the passage of a decade upset the situations of a
group of activists of the 60's. Rhea Kohan's ''Hand-Me-Downs'' and Joshua
Gidding's ''The Old Girl'' picture contemporary life in that strange place
called Southern California.

Remarkably meager are the season's imports from Europe. As usual, the most
interesting are English.  William Golding, who broke a long silence last year
with ''Darkness Visible,'' in his new ''Rites of Passage'' observes a
society-inminiature aboard a British vessel during a voyage in the Napoleonic
period.

After an exceedingly prolific and varied writing career, Anthony Burgess has
taken an unexpected turn. In ''Earthly Powers'' he tells of the relationship
between an eminent, homosexual English novelist and an Italian man of God who
becomes a beloved Pope.

Twenty years after ''The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner,'' Alan Sillitoe
portrays, in ''The Storyteller,'' a man whose ability to tell a tale well is at
first his forte and finally his fatal obsession.

After three decades of rich creativity, Angus Wilson is the subject of a
spirited critical study by Peter Faulkner, ''Angus Wilson: Mimic and Moralist.''
But this Scottish-born writer, now being hailed as ''one of Britain's foremost
living novelists,'' is still productive.  His ''Setting the World on Fire''
follows the soaring ambitions of two architect brothers.

From Italy there are two volumes of fiction worthy of close attention. Oriana
Fallaci, one of the world's leading journalists, describes the tragedy of a
Greek freedom fighter in ''A Man,'' a novel already highly celebrated in Europe.
Italo Calvino, one of Italy's most noted novelists, has selected and retold 200
stories from all regions of his country, ''Italian Folktales,'' translated by
George Martin.

Czechoslovakia's political history since World War II is told as if it were the
autobiography of a writer in Milan Kundera's novel, ''The Book of Laughter and
Forgetting.''

Criticism

The season is bounteously supplied with critical and biographical studies of
writers. Two of the most interesting are discussions of the novelist's art by
writers who are themselves novelists of distinction. ''Lectures on Literature''
is a collection of talks the late Vladimir Nabokov delivered while a teacher at
Cornell. In it he discusses great books by Jane Austen, Dickens, Flaubert,
Joyce, Kafka, Proust and Robert Louis Stevenson. In ''Ideas and the Novel,''
lectures delivered in London, Mary McCarthy laments the current unpopularity of
the novel of ideas and examines the works of a dozen writers to find ways of
restoring it to favor.

In several collections, the critics do not confine their discussions to
literature. Susan Sontag takes in many aspects of modern culture - from Leni
Riefenstahl to Paul Goodman - in seven essays gathered in ''Under the Sign of
Saturn.'' Almost as wide-rang ing are the subjects treated in the final volume
of the uniform edition of the works of the late Lionel Trilling: ''Speaking of
Literature and Society.''

Literary Biography

Among literary biographies, 19th-cent ury America is richly represented.
''Nathaniel Hawthorne in His Times'' by James R. Mellow is concerned not only
with a great American writer, but with his many important contemporaries.
Hawthorne's neighbors, the family of the brilliant, flighty Bronson Alcott is
the subject of ''The Alcotts'' by Madelon Bedell. ''Walt Whitman'' by Justin
Kaplan reconstructs the poet's life in full, fascinating detail.

The life of Alice James, the gifted younger sister of William and Henry James,
is at last being studied in ''Alice James: A Biography'' by Jean Strouse and
''The Death and Letters of Alice James'' by Ruth Bernard Yeazell. The shock that
her death caused her brother is also reflected in the third volume of Leon
Edel's edition of ''The Letters of Henry James,'' covering the years 1883-95.

John Dos Passos, an author who tried to interpret his own century in ''U.S.A.''
and other novels, and in so doing swerved from left to far right, is the subject
of Townsend Ludington's authorized biography, ''John Dos Passos: A Twentieth
Century Odyssey.'' And the career of The New Yorker's A. J. Liebling is
recounted by Raymond Sokolov in ''Wayward Reporter.''

This season, as usual, there are several biographies of British writers. Robert
Bernard Martin's ''Tennyson: The Unquiet Heart'' is the first full-lengt h
critical study of the poet in 30 years. Jenni Calder's ''Robert Louis Stevenson:
A Life Study'' considers Stevenson's writing in the context of his cultural
heritage and his own times. John Pearson's ''The Sitwells'' is a lively account
of a talented, eccentric family of letters.

An English novelist's memoir that is likely to be widely read this autumn
(because a series based on it will be televised on PBS) is ''Testament of
Youth'' by the late novelist Vera Brittain. This account of her experiences
during World War I, published in England in 1933, has until now been unavailable
in this country.

In ''Towards the Mountain,'' Alan Paton, the South African writer, tells his
life story up to the time he published ''Cry, the Beloved Country'' in 1948.

History and Political Biography

Some of the season's most promising works of nonfiction are in the field of
history and political biography. The life of the 19thcentury ruler who brought
Russia from the middle ages into the modern world is vividly described by Robert
K. Massie in ''Peter the Great.'' The only woman who was a member of Lenin's
cabinet and fought unsuccessfully for revolutionary social changes on the family
level is the subject of no less than three books: ''Alexandra Kollontai'' by
Cathy Porter, ''Aleksandra Kollontai: Socialism, Feminism and the Russian
Revolution'' by Beatrice Farnsworth, and ''Bolshevik Feminist: The Life of
Alexandra Kollontai'' by Barbara Evans Clements.

The English writer Bruce Chatwin, whose travel book ''In Patagonia'' won high
praise two years ago, narrates the life and times of a 19th-century African
slave trader in ''The Viceroy of Ouidah.''

The World War II partisan fighter who created modern Yugoslavia and ruled it for
three decades is appraised by Milovan Djilas, who once knew him well, in ''Tito:
The Story From Inside.''

War in its many aspects is represented in new publications. The last months of
World War I, when the seeds of World War II were already being sown in western
Europe, are the subject of John Toland's ''No Man's Land.'' The changes that
America's first venture onto European battlefields wrought in its own society
are thoughtfully discussed in David M. Kennedy's ''Over Here.''For World War II,
the tragic record of Field Marshal Lord Wavell, commander of the British forces
in North Africa, is told for the first time by Ronald Lewin in ''The Chief.''
The strange conduct of General George S. Patton in his hour of triumph is
examined by Ladislas Farago in ''The Last Days of Patton.''

The middle years of the 19th century are being given their due in three volumes.
Eric Foner treats the period in intellectual terms in ''Politics and Ideology in
the Civil War,'' William S. McFeely observes it through the career of an
extraordinary general who became a very ordinary President in ''Grant,'' and Roy
Meredith sees it through the work of a great photographer who was also a
remarkable social historian in ''Mathew B. Brady's Portrait of an Era.''

Two books concern that controversial member of the U. S. Supreme Court, William
O. Douglas: ''The Court Years,'' the Justice's own memoirs of the years 1939-75,
and ''Independent Journey,'' a judicious study of his whole career by James F.
Simon.

The 50's and 60's are also being recalled in a variety of ways. A man who
contributed immeasurably to the civil rights movement tells his story in ''Daddy
King,'' written by the Rev. Martin Luther King Sr. in collaboration with Clayton
Riley. In ''Naming Names'' Victor S. Navasky undertakes to discover what
motivated the people who cooperated with the Congressional investigating
committees of the 1950's and created the Hollywood blacklist. The activities of
the Yippies of the 60's are recalled by their leader Abbie Hoffman in ''Soon to
Be a Major Motion Picture.'' And this fall will also see the publication of
''The Next Whole Earth Catalog,'' edited by Stewart Brand.

Contemporary America

With America in the midst of economic troubles, there are many volumes that
assay the state of the nation and prescribe remedies - works by historians,
economists, journalists and popular philosophers. Perhaps because this year's
Presidential election involves so many uncertain factors and it takes so long to
transform a writer's thoughts from typewritten manuscript into a bound,
hardcover book, there are few volumes that deal specifically with the candidates
and the issues.

In ''All Things to All Men,'' Godfrey Hodgson, an English journalist, suggests
that at the heart of the nation's problems lies the fact that in modern times
the institution of the Presidency no longer works; he proposes changes to
restore its old efficacy. In ''Empire as a Way of Life,'' William Appleman
Williams, the revisionist historian, traces the roots of our predicament as far
back as Jefferson; he prescribes some drastic solutions.

Equally discussed and argued about is the present mood of Americans. In
''American Dreams,'' Studs Terkel, a veteran interviewer, puts 100 Americans on
the stand and emerges with diverse and in many cases surprising responses. On
the other hand, in ''Horatio Alger, Farewell,'' Celeste L. MacLeod argues that
for most Americans the dream of upward mobility is now irreparably dashed. In
''Revolt of the Haves,'' Robert Kuttner reports that many of those who have
moved upward in their lifetime are now staging revolts against high taxes.

The changes that are taking place are most evident in certain sections of the
country - as Marshall Frady reports in ''Southerners,'' a journal of an odyssey
he made through the New South, and as Joe McGinnis shows in ''Going to
Extremes,'' the record of his experiences in Alaska, a state ''about ten sizes
bigger than life.''

Science

The sciences and their implications for us all are the subjects of more
promising volumes than usual. One certain to be widely read is Carl Sagan's
''Cosmos,'' based on the PBS television series in which the Cornell astronomer
explains how 15 billion years of cosmic evolution have transformed matter into
life and consciousness.  Evolution on the planet Earth is also reflected upon by
the Harvard paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould in ''The Panda's Thumb.''

Perhaps the most compelling subject with which science can deal at present is
energy. The life and views of the German-American physicist who is the leading
authority on the subject are set forth in ''Hans Bethe: Prophet of Energy'' by
Jeremy Bernstein.

Show Business

With Americans eager for books offering entertainment and escape, it's not
surprising that there is a spate of books about entertainers. Last season the
admirers of the popular talk-show host Phil Donahue made his autobiography a
best seller. His rival Merv Griffin hopes that his fans will do the same thing
for his upcoming memoir ''Merv,'' which he has written in collaboration with
Peter Barsocchini.

Many of the other ''celebrity'' books that seem likely to be widely read are
about men and women - mostly women - who became legends through their
appearances on the screen. Gloria Swanson recalls her years in the Babylon that
was once Hollywood, including her numerous marriages and amours, in ''Swanson on
Swanson.'' Greta Garbo's exploits at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in the old days are
recounted in ''Garbo,'' written by Alexander Walker, a British author who has
used ''privileged material drawn from the studio's archives.'' Ingrid Bergman
remembers her life onstage and off, with some literary help from Alan Burgess,
in ''Ingrid Bergman: My Story.'' There is poignancy as well as glamour in
''Susan Hayward: Portrait of a Survivor'' by Beverly Linet.

The image that was Marilyn Monroe has long fascinated the novelist Norman
Mailer. He published a book about her half-a-dozen years ago; this fall, using a
portfolio of photographs of her and other women by Milton H. Greene, he
elaborates his theories about feminine charm in ''Of Women and Their Elegance.''

The changes that have transformed the business and art of the film over the past
half century are observed rather thoughtfully in books about two Hollywood
titans - a studio chieftain, in ''David O.  Selznick's Hollywood'' by Ronald
Haver; and a great director, in John Huston's autobiography, ''An Open Book.''
More conventionally gossipy in style is Sammy Davis Jr.'s ''Hollywood in a
Suitcase,'' a continuation of the reminiscences the actor began several years
back in ''Yes I Can!''

There is stardust as well in a number of upcoming books about the theater. It is
sprinkled thickly in ''Naked at the Feast,'' Lynn Haney's biography of Josephine
Baker, the black American who created a sensation as a Paris music hall
performer in the 20's. Many important stage people and their accomplishments are
recalled by John Gielgud in his thoughtful memoir ''Gielgud: An Actor and His
Time.''

Music

For music lovers, there are four volumes about classical composers that merit
attention: ''Mozart'' by Wolfgang Hildesheimer, ''Haydn: Chronicle and Works''
by H. C. Robbins, ''The Lioness and the Little One,'' an account of Frederic
Chopin's love affair with George Sand by William G. Atwood, and the second
volume of ''Cosima Wagner's Diaries,'' which covers the five years immediately
before Richard Wagner's death. A folk singer and song maker who contributed
importantly to America's musical heritage during the years of the Great
Depression is the subject of Joe Klein's ''Woody Guthrie: A Life.''

Art

Notable among the new books on the graphic arts is ''Edward Hopper: The Art and
the Artist,'' an elaborate text and picture ablum by Gail Levin. Its publication
is timed to coincide with an exhibition of Hopper's works which opens the week
after next at the Whitney Museum. Next month's exhibition at the Metropolitan
Museum, ''The Vikings,'' will be the occasion for a number of albums of early
Scandinavian art.

Sports

Windy reminiscence by celebrated sports figures are a commonplace on every
season's list, but this fall there are several worthy of serious readers. For
basketball fans, there is ''A View From the Bench'' by the New York
Knickerbockers coach Red Holtzman in collaboration with Leonard Lewin; for golf
fans, ''Triumphant Journey,'' a life of the late great Bobby Jones by Dick
Miller; for tennis fans, ''Bjorn Borg: My Life and Game'' as told to Eugene L.
Scott.

Business

During the past year books prescribing ways to get ahead in business have become
increasingly numerous on the best-seller lists.  The genre has many additions
this fall, bearing such self-descriptive titles as ''How I Turned $1000 Into
Five Million in Real Estate in My Spare Time'' by William Nickerson, ''How to
Become Financially Successful by Owning Your Own Business'' by Albert J. Lowry,
''Banks Are Dangerous to Your Wealth'' by Carol S. Greenwald and
''Inflation-Proofing Your Investments'' by Harry Browne and Terry Coxon.

Laughs

But you're looking for some fun and something unusual? The essays in
''Crackers'' by Roy Blount Jr., a born-and-bred Georgian, exuberantly describe
what it's like to be a Southern cracker in the North and, along the way, make
many funny and telling comments about the Georgian in the White House. And the
stories in Woody Allen's ''Side Effects'' touch topics as various as sex, world
politics and existential angst, yet always keep you laughing.

Lexicography

For writers and, indeed, all connoisseurs of words, some treats are in store. A
major lexicographical event will be the publication, in both hardcover and
paperback, of the ''Oxford American Dictionary,'' designed to carry on the
tradition of the monumental 13-volume ''Oxford English Dictionary'' in a single
volume suited to Yankee tastes. And, just for fun, there are Gyles Brandreth's
''The Joy of Lex'' and Willard R. Espy's ''Another Almanac of Words at Play.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of E. Welty, photo of V. Nabokov photo of H. James
photo of A. James/photo of E.L. Doctorow

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUNDAY SCHOOL REVIVAL;
ALEXANDRIA,Va.

BYLINE: By DEBORAH CHURCHMAN

SECTION: Section 12; Special Section Page 1; Page 1, Column 3; Survey of
Education Desk

LENGTH: 1634 words


IT is a hot summer's day in this Washington suburb, a sleepy, Southern town
saturated in the political heroes of the past. A descendant of Washington's
political system - a local member of the Virginia Senate - is down to
shirtsleeves in the 90-plus heat, wielding a soggy handkerchief as he lectures
his audience. The listeners are white, young and married -military careerists,
business managers, mothers of tots, a pediatrician. They hang on his every word,
answer his occasional questions politely, peer intently at his visual aids.

The subject, as the Senator, Wiley Mitchell, describes it, is the ability of man
to accept a new idea. Mr. Mitchell has a specific idea in mind. It is the idea
the Bible says God gave to Peter, a disciple of Jesus, that it was all right to
associate with people the Jews deemed ''unclean,'' with a view to converting
them.

Senator Mitchell is a teacher of a class of mre than 30 ''young marrieds'' at
the First Baptist Church here -the fastest-growing group of eight such classes
taught in the huge building. The other classes include divorced students (down
the hall in the Singles Again group), deaf students (40 of them meet weekly),
middle-aged students (they meet next door) or Young Adults (two doors down).
Only one older couple graces the group (''we're the parents''); the rest of the
elderly have their own meeting.

All groups work out of the same textbook, a quarterly magazine whose stated
purpose is to ''relate life needs to the work of the church.'' As Baptists, they
could use the more traditional Bible Book Curriculum, a nine-year plan for
studying each book of the Bible. Or they could turn to the International Sunday
School Outlines provided by a 100-year-old organization called the Uniform
Lesson Series.

All three of these curriculums are published by the Southern Baptist Conference
in Nashville, under their $100 million budget for literature.

But the Alexandria church chooses the series that most directly links the
resolving of life's troubles to the living of one's faith, and that, say the
Sunday school professionals, is significant. With themes like ''Biblical
Guidelines for Family Life'' or ''Work as a Divine Calling,'' the classes,
usually led by former Sunday school teachers, peruse the Bible for its
practical, problem-solving suggestions.

Adult Sunday schools like this one have burgeoned within the last five years,
according to the National Council of Churches. Even among the more traditional
Protestant churches, where membership wanes, enrollment in adult classes shows a
slight increase.

While there are no hard figures, in this bicentennial year of the Sunday school
movement, on the total number of adults taking part, the Southern Baptist
experience seems to represent the pinnacle of the leap. Since 1974, adult Sunday
schools of that faith have shown a net increase of 500,000 members.

There is some evidence that adult Sunday schools, an old tradition among many
churches in this country, are starting to spread overseas. ''We had some West
German Baptists come to see us about four years ago,'' said Robert Fullbright,
education specialist for the Southern Baptist Conference, ''and now they've
started up adult Sunday schools in their own country.''

What makes this growth all the more interesting to Sunday school leaders is that
the bicentennial finds the traditional Sunday school in less-than-healthy
circumstances, with such Sunday school scholars as Robert Lynn and Elliott
Wright concluding that ''it has probably seen its best days.''

The best days of its adult counterpart, it seems, are now. What accounts for the
difference?  While Sunday school professionals each have their own pet theory to
account for the increase in participation, all point to the growing conservatism
of the nation and its young people.

Mr. Fullbright puts it succinctly: ''Our society is going through some turbulent
changes,'' he said, ''and the Bible represents a constant. As society grows more
conservative, we find ourselves looking back to things that have proven
themselves consistent through time.''

Lindell Sawyers, spokesman for the United Presbyterian Church, agrees that the
study groups represent a search among old ideas for standards to use in these
''changing times.'' He reports that enrollment in the traditional Sunday school
for children, and in the straightforward Bible studies, have stayed steady or
decreased over the last five years.

''But the special groups that study life needs - everything from Christian
parenting to reading novels and plays in the light of our faith - have shown a
slight increase,'' he said.

He attributes this to ''pluralism'' in today's society. ''There are a large
number of belief systems in the country today, and this creates ferment, with
people not knowing what to believe or questioning basic beliefs about
everything,'' he said. ''The adult Sunday school helps people to determine their
beliefs.''

Some of the Presbyterian adult classes, participants say, become hotbeds of
philosophical thought. ''If they knew what atheists most of us really are,'' one
admitted, ''they'd probably stop the class.'' She sees her group as ''just
another version of a 1960's rap session.''

''To a large extent, these are the children of the 60's,'' said Joan Roll,
administrative assistant to the Sunday School Executive for the Council of
Churches, ''and their return to the church represents a backlash to the 60's.
They return in ignorance, not understanding the basics about church doctrine or
the Bible, so the adult Sunday schools act as tools for educating these people
into Christianity.''

Cecil Frazier, in charge of the Alexandria church's adult Sunday school program,
sees the 70's rather than the 60's playing a major role. ''It used to be that
when young people came to church with their children, they would volunteer in
the Sunday school because they wanted their kids to get good schooling in the
Bible,'' he said.

''But now, they want their kids to have Sunday school, and they want Sunday
school for themselves as well -they aren't as willing to volunteer,'' he said.
''I guess this is the 'me' generation.''

Across the country, however, the Southern Baptist adult classes bulge with the
elderly - ''41,000 new students in just the last 18 months,'' Mr. Fullbright
said. Population shifts account for the bulk of this increase, he added, with a
growing number of older people ''with the time and resources to devote to Bible
study.''

Then again, all Southern Baptist programs seem to be growing. Mr.  Fullbright
reported with pride that his religion was the ''largest single church in the
country,'' a leader among the evangelical and conservative churches -the fastest
growing Protestant religions in the nation.

A recent Gallup poll revealed that one of every three Americans considers
himself to have been ''born again,'' and adult Sunday school may be playing a
role in this ''rebirth.''

Open to all comers, the small classes are often the first point of entry for
those raised outside the church. And the classes strive to foster what one of
its teachers terms a ''genuine conversion experience.''

Small class size appeals to students regardless of background, and carries many
past their initial fear of the large churches sponsoring such studies. One of
Senator Mitchell's students, a blonde, energetic woman from Oklahoma, said that
''coming from a town of 350 people and a church of 25 to a place this big was
terrifying. But here, in our group, I've found my home.''

A sense of family and fellowship laces most discussions about the classes. ''I
don't want you to think that this is my only community,'' said an
elementary-school teacher. ''I have many communities - in my family, in my job,
in my neighborhood. But this is probably my most important community; this is
the one I couldn't live without.''

Senator Mitchell sees the community role as vital to the adult Sunday school.
''In most parts of the country, saying you're a Baptist makes you akin to a
snake charmer,'' he said. ''But in the South, the Baptist Church is one of the
most formidable institutions around. So saying that you're a Baptist to another
Baptist means quite a bit. It means you belong.''

This is said during the full half hour devoted to coffee and doughnuts before
the class begins - a half hour attended by nearly all students. It is followed
by the usual business announcements, and an opportunity for classmates to
request prayers from one another.

''I'd like you all to pray that Jimmy gets a job this week,'' said a quiet,
long-haired woman, sitting next to her husband, a Vietnam War veteran. ''I know
I've asked for it before, but this time I really mean it.''

The group accepts its responsibility gravely, and heads bow. Then the class
moves on to consider Peter and his ''unclean'' converts.  ''We're not just
talking about the Apostle Peter,'' the Senator admonishes these children of the
60's. ''We're talking about accepting new ideas, accepting change.'' To support
such change, he turns quickly to a 2,000-year-old text, the Bible.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Deborah Churchman, a freelance writer, teaches second-graders in a Sunday school
in Arlington, Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Sunday School

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COMMUNITY EDUCATION:RESIDENTS OF CHINATOWN AMONG THE BENEFICIARIES

BYLINE: By MARY ELLEN SCHOONMAKER

SECTION: Section 12; Special Section Page 9; Page 9, Column 1; Survey of
Education Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words


AT Junior High School 65 on Forsythe Street in New York's Chinatown, teachers
tell about the seventh-grader, recently arrived from China, who caused
discipline problems by being more aggressive than the other children and talking
disrespectfully to his teachers.  When a teacher questioned him, he explained
his behavior matter of factly: ''During the cultural revolution, we were told to
question authority.''

J.H.S. 65 is the headquarters for the local community-education program, one of
roughly 7,000 similar ones around the country. Like the others, the program
seeks to serve the needs of the area's residents, including its refugees and
their children who, like the quarrelsome seventh-grader, are trying to adjust to
a new culture.

Space in Chinatown's eight public schools, which have some of the highest
attendance rates in the city, is used after school, at night and on weekends for
day care, adult classes and other activities, while health clinics and other
social-service agencies come into the classroom from time to time to work with
students.

Nationally, the field of community education has grown by about 5,000 programs
in the last 10 years. Suburban districts facing declining enrollment find the
idea attractive because buildings can be kept open and vandalism reduced, and
they have tended to dominate the competition for Federal funds.

Janice McGuire, director of the Chinatown program, would like to see more
attention focused on urban programs. ''We are not the woodworking-for-Daddy and
macrame-for-Mommy type of program,'' she said, referring to the family-leisure
activities some programs emphasize. ''We are more coordinators, brokers really,
of essential services.''

She describes her job as plugging into the network of socialservice agencies
that exist in the neighborhood and finding areas of mutual benefit to the
agencies and the schools, bringing students, parents and services together.

Chinatown's population, estimated by the City Planning Commission at 50,000 to
60,000, has been increased by an undetermined number of refugees, both legal and
illegal, from China, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam. Some of the immigrants may
be eligible for welfare, but they are afraid of jeopardizing their chances for
citizenship. Many work in the more than 400 garment factories in the area.

''They work six and seven days a week, 10 to 14 hours a day,'' said David Hui,
director of Immigrant Social Service, an agency for refugees. Because of concern
that children, particularly teen-agers with language problems, might fall prey
to gangs, he has worked with Miss McGuire and the schools on the agency's
drug-abuse program.

Children also receive tutoring in English and assistance with their homework and
after-school classes run by Immigrant Social Services, and they are taught how
to use a Chinese-English dictionary, Mr. Hui said.

In the last year, adult refugees learned to speak and read basic English at the
agency with aid of a $68,000 grant under the Federal Right-to-Read program.
There were afternoon classes for young adults five days a week, a weekly all-day
class for restaurant workers on their day off, and Sunday classes for
seamstresses who work the other six days in garment factories.

''We only had funding for 100 people,'' Mr. Hui said, ''but we managed to enroll
169, about one-third of them new arrivals.'' Several groups, including
Hamilton-Madison House, a local settlement house, have had day-care programs in
the schools. On a recent day, little boys, Chinese, black and Hispanic, could be
seen practicing softball in the gymnasium of Public School 126 on Catherine
Street.

''We need day care, and parents are very happy about these programs,'' said
Nereida Cortes, a member of the community-education program's advisory board.
''Otherwise, parents have to take their kids to the factories, and those dusty
roach-traps are no place for children. Last year, a young girl fell down an
elevator shaft in one of them and was killed.''

The Chinatown Health Clinic has conducted a health-education and -screening
program in the schools, and this fall, Manhattan Community College will offer
English lessons for the refugees, who speak a variety of dialects.

Karl Matsuda, co-owner of a picture-framing shop in Greenwich Village, took a
small-business course the college offered at P.S. 124 on Division Street. ''I
couldn't have made it if it wasn't so near my home,'' Mr. Matsuda said.

Miss McGuire said it was a painstaking business building an urban program,
establishing contacts with a myriad of agencies, gaining the trust of the
community, and scratching for funds from a financially troubled school board.

The program was federally financed its first two years but reapplication was
rejected last year because, Federal officials wrote back, there was not enough
community participation and assessment of community needs. Last year, the
program got $38,500 in private grants and roughly $7,000 from the public
schools' Community District 2. The funds will run out next month, and Miss
McGuire is seeking new sources.

''The people in Washington think you can put out a notice, and everyone will
show up for a Jeffersonian-style town meeting,'' Miss McGuire said. ''Maybe you
can do that in the suburbs. But here people are too tired to come.'' She is in
the process of editing a parents' manual to encourage more participation in
school affairs.

In Washington, Ron Castaldi, director of the community-education office for the
new Department of Education, agreed that the scene had been dominated by
suburban programs. ''We are given so little money by Congress,'' Mr. Castaldi
said, ''and what they are saying is show us what the hotshots are doing.'' An
urban program might take longer to get off the ground, he said, ''but I can't be
on a repair mission.''

Mr. Castaldi has $1 million this year to award to 20 to 30 projects out of some
200 applications. The amount is a half million dollars less than last year.
About $2 million more goes to colleges for staff training and to about 25 state
departments of education.

Some states are trying to do more for urban programs. Jean Napper,
community-education coordinator for the New York State Department of Education,
said a two-day workshop was held last April in Chinatown so 40 educators from
around the state could study the program. But, she conceded, there were only a
handful of urban programs in the state, seven or eight compared with an
estimated 25 suburban and rural programs.

New Jersey is the first state in the country to set aside money for the
construction and renovation of community schools, according to Ronald Butcher,
Miss Napper's counterpart in New Jersey. Nearly $7 million will be awarded to
urban districts. So far, Mr. Butcher's office has received applications from
Newark, Paterson and New Brunswick, among other cities.

''It is frustrating,'' Miss McGuire said of the Chinatown project, ''that more
people don't realize what a ripple effect a community school can have, inside
and out.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Mary Ellen Schoonmaker writes on education for The Record, Hackensack, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 3 Photos

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

16-NATION PARLEY SAID TO CONDEMN AFGHAN ACTION

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section ZZZ; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 396 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Sept. 6


The 16 Asian and Pacific Commonwealth countries, including India, agreed tonight
to condemn foreign intervention in Afghanistan, calling it a serious threat to
world peace, sources close to the conference reported.

Senior officials from the Asian and Pacific countries attending the regional
Commonwealth conference here completed a statement on Afghanistan that will be
part of a communique to be issued Monday, the sources said.

The draft communique did not name any power and satisfied Prime Minister Indira
Gandhi of India, who has charged that the Soviet Union was forced to intervene
in Afghanistan because of outside interference, according to the sources.

No Consensus Yet on Cambodia

The officials have not yet reached agreement on Cambodia, the other major issue
facing the regional heads of government.  India, which recently recognized the
Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh, while its other Commonwealth
partners - Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and New Zealand - have condemned the
Vietnamese push into Cambodia and consider the Heng Samrin Government a puppet
of Hanoi.

The Commonwealth sources reported an apparent setback for Australia as a result
of the officials' decision not to establish a Commonwealth liaison office in the
region.  The liason office, proposed by Fiji and strongly backed by Prime
Minister Malcolm Fraser of Australia, was planned to coordinate cooperation and
aid activities between South Pacific and Asian countries. The conference sources
said that because a majority of countries either opposed the plan or did not
actively support it, the matter was not discussed.

Mr. Fraser sponsored the first regional Commonwealth conference in Sydney in
1978 in an attempt to give the small Pacific island countries a stronger voice
in international gatherings.

The officials' action could be overruled by the heads of government, who have
yet to approve the communique and meet in a final session Monday.

Commonwealth secretariat officials said that new programs on cooperation in
energy, agricultural assistance and industrial planning would result from the
meeting, the second regional Commonwealth conference in two and a half years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PSYCHOLOGISTS SPEAK OF RIVALS AND OF PAVLOV

BYLINE: By DAVA SOBEL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section ZZZ; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 945 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL, Sept. 5


''I never go to any of the sessions at these events,'' a Yale psychologist said
of the American Psychological Association's weeklong meeting, which ended here
today. ''I come to see old friends.''

''Besides,'' he continued, as badge-wearing conventioneers streamed through the
hotel lobby, ''it's so hard to go through the schedule and decide.'' To make his
point he held up the program book, a paperbound volume of more than 300 pages
listing 40 activities competing for attention at each hour of the day.

At 9 A.M. on Wednesday, for example, a participant could choose among a session
on memory, a symposium on treating Vietnam veterans, a film on the experiences
of battered children, a lecture on becoming a female psychologist, a business
meeting of the association's Council of Representatives and an advanced workshop
on the prevention and remedy of sexual exploitation of clients by therapists, to
name a few.

Approximately 12,000 members and many of their husbands, wives and children
came, as well as students and interested professionals from related fields.

Rivals of Psychiatrists

Although psychiatrists attended and even spoke at some of the sessions,
psychologists generally regard them as ''the enemy.'' Psychiatrists, who have
medical degrees, tend to have more political power and compete, in many cases,
for the same patients.

''They don't like us,'' Leo F. Graham, a Milwaukee psychologist, said of
psychiatrists at a symposium on working relationships with them. ''They have no
respect for us as a profession, and it wouldn't be a good idea to stand too
close to one of them on a crowded subway platform.''

The official purpose of this 88th annual meeting was ''to conduct the business
of the organization and exchange scholarly information,'' but the agenda also
included a dance, a marathon, a job placement service and an exhibit hall, where
one could make purchases ranging from psychology textbooks to a room full of
computerized equipment for administering psychological tests.

A major attraction is the chance to hear such eminent psychologists as B.F.
Skinner and Donald O. Hebb discussing their theories and their memories.

Admonished by Pavlov

Dr. Hebb told of a colleague, Boris Petrovich Babkin, who had worked under Ivan
Pavlov, the Russian physiologist, and was collecting gastric juice from a dog
when something unforgivable happened.

''The dog was bored, and whined,'' Dr. Hebb said. ''In the next room, with
connecting door open, was Pavlov, trying to write a paper. Suddenly through the
door came Pavlov with towel in hand, which he used to whack the dog over the
nose, telling it to shut up. Back to his room he went, with no word to Babkin.
Then he was back again, shaking his finger in Babkin's face, and saying sternly,
'Babkin!  Never strike a dog! Never, never, never!' ''

The association is too large for a plenary session, so official business
transpires in scattered meetings that interested members attend as their
schedules allow. The ''Broom Closet,'' however, as the dinner meeting of the
association's past presidents is called, is so private that even the invitees'
family members are excluded.

''We can't let anybody see what a group of doddering old fools we are,'' quipped
Nicholas A. Cummings, the most recent past president.

'We Are in Danger'

Another past president, George Albee, complained in an editorial in the special
convention issue of the association's newspaper that ''psychology has joined the
regressive movement toward self-interest and status.''

''We are in danger,'' Dr. Albee said, ''of becoming like the American Medical
Association and other fat-cat guilds -self-serving and manipulative.''

Psychologists engaged in this kind of self-scrutiny at session after session.
They assailed their subspecialty areas, questioning the success of sex therapy
and the validity of the prevailing theories of thought processes, for example,
and dared themselves to do better in the next decade.

They made fun of themselves, too, as when Frank A. Beach of the University of
California at Berkeley said at a symposium about human sexuality that his
knowledge of the field was ''based on book learning and nostalgic recall.''

Standards on Animals

In an open forum where members of the association could air their grievances
before the governing board of directors, including the Florence Denmark, the
association's president, Emmanuel Bernstein of Saranac Lake, N.Y., called on the
assembly to formulate standards for the protection of animals in experimental
research.

''I believe we've been led to treat human beings as objects by inflicting
unnecessary pain on animals,'' Dr. Bernstein said. ''These avenues are alien to
healing, which depends on compassion.''

Also at the open forum, Stephen F. Morin of San Francisco, a member of the
Association of Gay Psychologists, reported that a survey he conducted had drawn
admissions from 16 accredited graduate programs in psychology that they would
not accept candidates who were avowed homosexuals. And Ann T. Viviano of Pace
University in Pleasantville, N.Y., pointed out that women applying for positions
in psychology were still being asked about their marital status and family
plans.

''Thank you for making us aware of that,'' said Michael S. Pallak, executive
officer of the association, ''and thank you on behalf of my 22-month-old
daughter.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Stress Syndrome Cited In Veteran's Acquittal;
On Smuggling Charge

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section ZZZ; Page 40, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 246 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 6


A Vietnam combat helicopter pilot has been acquitted of charges that he planned
a drug smuggling operation. He had said that his war experiences had addicted
him to the need for dangerous adventures.

''This is a new proposition in the courts and I think we are going to have to
explore it with some care,'' Federal District Judge Walter Jay Skinner said
after the jury returned its verdict on the most serious charges yesterday.

Peter L. Krutschewski, 35 years old, of Lansing, Mich., still faces charges of
importing and possessing marijuana. A verdict is pending on those charges.

Case a First of Its Kind

Mr. Krutschewski's case is one of the first cases in the nation in which delayed
stress syndrome, a psychological malady linked to some who saw action in
Vietnam, was used as a defense in a nonviolent crime.

Mr. Krutschewski's attorney, Roger Craig, has asked the jury to find him
innocent of other charges as well on the grounds that his war service created in
him delayed stress syndrome, which forced him to seek thrills and excitement
through breaking the law.

In testimony Thursday, Mr. Krutschewski admitted that he had taken part in
smuggling 27 tons of marijuana into Gloucester, Mass., in 1975, but denied that
he had conducted the operation. The charge of which Mr. Krutchewski was
acquitted carried a mandatory minimum sentence of 10 years in prison.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LOS ANGELES,ALMOST 200,RANKS NO.2 AMONG CITIES

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1508 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 7


At the age of 199, it appears, Los Angeles has become No. 2.  This sprawling
city began a yearlong bicentennial celebration this weekend that will culminate
with the commemoration of the 200th anniversary of its founding by 44 immigrants
from Mexico on Sept. 4, 178l.

As the civic celebration was beginning, preliminary estimates from the 1980
Census were released indicating that Los Angeles was now the nation's second
most populous city, eclipsing Chicago, which had held that distinction since
1890 when it passed Philadelphia to become the ''Second City.''

Role of Mexican Immigrants

While few people dwelled on the matter, there was a pattern in the turn of
events: Los Angeles, a city founded by Mexicans, appeared to have become the
country's second largest city largely because of a renewed wave of immigration
from Mexico.

And as it began its bicentennial year, Los Angeles appeared to be on its way to
becoming the nation's first city where a majority of the population is made up
of immigrants from Latin America and Asia or descendants of earlier immigrants
from those regions of the world and Africa.

This city is still the Los Angeles of freeways, movie stars, earthquakes, palm
trees and smog, of experimental ways of life and unorthodox religious cults and
a seemingly omnipresent, benign sun.

Autos and Real Estate

It remains perhaps the quintessential American urban expression of the
automobile, a city that seems to have been experiencing a real estate boom
continuously since the first land developers and hucksters came from ''back
East'' a century ago and began to turn a sun-blessed semidesert into one of the
world's largest metropolitan regions by importing water from mountain ranges 300
miles away.

It is the economic center of a region containing more than 10 million people
that in the last decade has become the nation's major financial bridge to Asia,
a visibly thriving city whose downtown is currently experiencing a rejuvenation
involving more than $1 billion worth of new construction.

It is a cultural center that not only produces most of the world's movies and
prime-time television programming but, increasingly, exports original plays to
Broadway, has a world-class symphony orchestra whose musical director, Zubin
Mehta, was recruited by the New York Philharmonic, and is the setting for a
planned major museum of contemporary art that promises to be one of the most
ambitious museum projects in any American city in decades.

Annual Gathering of Migrants

Every summer, a 45-year-old southern California ritual recurs, when some of the
tens of thousands of migrants who moved west from Oklahoma, Texas, Iowa,
Nebraska and elsewhere in the 1930's gather at picnics to talk about old times.

But each year, there are fewer people at those picnics, because some of the
migrants have died and others have decided to move out of California to escape
the smog and congestion.

To fill their places, there is a new wave of migrants. Los Angeles is still
attracting people from other states, especially New York.  But more and more,
local officials say, the newcomers are from other countries.

''It's becoming a Hispanic city,'' said Charles Drescher, director of the city's
Community Analysis and Planning Division, which has estimated that the 1980
Census will show that non-Hispanic whites now make up 44 percent of the
population, as against 59 percent in 1970 and 72 percent in 1960.

But he said that the changes went beyond the tide of immigrants from Mexico and
other Latin-American countries who have been propelled northward by economic
deprivation and have changed the look and texture of life here.

He predicted that the census would also document a sizable influx of immigrants
from Taiwan, Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia and other thirdworld countries in the
1970's.  According to the local population researchers, it is this Latin and
Asian immigration, occurring in a decade when more than one million non-Hispanic
whites have left the city, that has allowed Los Angeles to challenge Chicago for
the position of the country's second largest city, after New York.

Although both cities are contesting the figures as too low, the preliminary
Census Bureau data indicate that Los Angeles now has about 152,000 more
residents than Chicago. The figures show Los Angeles with a population of
2,878,039, about 62,000 more than in 1970, and Chicago withh a population of
2,725,295, about 644,000 fewer than in 1970.

Breakdown of Population

The city's most recent estimates indicate that whites make up 44 percent of the
population; blacks, 21.5 percent; Hispanic residents 28 percent and Asians and
Pacific islanders about 7 percent.

The median age of the Hispanic residents is about 19, and the rate at which they
are increasing, through childbirth and immigration, has prompted some
researchers to predict that Latins could account for more than half of the
city's population by the end of this decade. By the year 2000, they say, the
Hispanic influx could make Los Angeles the nation's largest city. Hispanic
pupils already make up almost 40 percent of the student enrollment here.

The Spanish-speaking immigrants are becoming increasingly important economically
here, supporting not only retailing establishments but providing the labor for a
large garment industry, much of it operating in sweatshop conditions. The large
Latin population is also economically vital to the city's school system, whose
white population has plummeted in recent years.

The Latin residents have not yet translated their numbers into political
strength, but many people say they soon will.  ''It's only a matter of time -
it's already begun,'' Grace Montanez Davis, a Chicano, who is an aide to Mayor
Tom Bradley, a black, said recently in an interview.

Rivalry With New York

Although this is a city with a long history of self-promotion and civic
boosterism, the news that it appears to have passed Chicago in population is not
likely to bring much local applause. Many people here already believe that they
live in the Second City and have considered New York as their natural rival.

According to some observers, many Angelenos, as the people here call themselves,
have a kind of collective municipal inferiority complex. They say this is
especially true regarding New York City's image of supposedly superior cultural
riches and greater economic importance, in contrast with Los Angeles's
reputation as a kind of vast, shallow tinsel town - ''19 suburbs in search of a
city,'' as several generations of Eastern writers have depicted it.

The differences in reputations seems especially to trouble many of the New
Yorkers who have moved here. A study by the Security Pacific Bank last year
indicated that about 16 percent of this region's new residents in 1979 came from
New York State.

For many displaced New Yorkers, a move here results in a kind of love-hate
relationship involving the two cities, and they seem to be forever debating the
cities' relative merits. Many of them have been known to return to New York for
quick visits to confirm their decision to move here, or to import items, ranging
from Nedick's orange soda to New York pastrami, for comfort.

Neil Simon's Solution

Neil Simon, the playwright, moved here five years ago after tiring of New York's
problems but now divides his time between this city and Manhattan. Recently he
decided to try out his next play outside Los Angeles because of his
dissatisfaction with reviews in The Los Angeles Times.

Sandy Fox, a Brooklyn-born lawyer, holds a party each year at which 100 or so
former New Yorkers nostalgically play stickball and other games from their
childhood.

Reflecting on the dispute over the cities' respective cultural values, Gordon
Davidson, a former New Yorker who runs this city's respected Mark Taper Forum,
an innovative theater organization here, said:

''I'm bored with it. It's a silly argument. There's the problem of geographic
sprawl, but there is a lot of activity that's bubbling here in many areas in the
performing as well as the visual arts. The cultural situation in Los Angeles is
different than it is in the East. The East looked to, and benefited from, the
cultural heritage of Europe, but it's also been weighed down with it. Here we
can benefit from the things that occur on the Pacific rim and take advantage of
our Mexican and Hispanic influence.''

The bicentennial observance will include more than 150 community projects,
ranging from art shows to the commissioning of a ballet and plays that stress
the city's history. Angelenos are trying to use the event to enhance the city's
image. Admittedly inspired by the imagebuilding power of the ''I Love New York''
slogan, the bicentennial planners devised their own slogan: ''L.A.'s the
Place.''

Margo Albert, the wife of Eddie Albert, the actor, is co-chairman of the
celebration. ''This will be a fine opportunity to show that Los Angeles is a
great city instead of 'tinsel town,' and all that flaky stuff,'' she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo (Page B8)

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A TREASURE IN OPIUM IS RIPE FOR THE PLUCKING IN GOLDEN TRIANGLE

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 7


A bumper crop of opium poppies is ripening in the mountains of the Golden
Triangle after a two-year drought. A senior American narcotics official
predicted that beginning in January, when the harvesting starts, ''We will be
facing the supreme test.''

Intelligence reports from the growing areas in Burma, Thailand and Laos indicate
that after two bad harvests the mountain tribal people who grow the poppies have
so increased the areas planted and stretched the planting season that a crop of
700 tons is expected.  The normal production is 400 to 500 tons. The harvest
during the drought was about 240 tons.

Heroin made from Southeast Asian opium accounted for 38 percent of the drug
market in the United States last year, despite the drought, with 45 percent
supplied by Mexico and 17 percent coming from Southwest Asia, mainly Iran and
Afghanistan.

The most frightening development for Southeast Asia is that pure heroin,
introduced to the region by Americans during the Indochina war, did not leave
with the Americans. The heroin refined in Thailand, Burma and Laos has found a
new market in Asia.

70 Percent Consumed in Region

Narcotics officials report that many Asians who traditionally smoked opium have
become heroin addicts as a result of the wide availability of the drug. Seventy
percent of the Golden Triangle's production is consumed in the region.

Thailand reports that it has 500,000 to 600,000 addicts, mainly injectors of No.
4 heroin, the most highly refined. Burma lists 125,000 addicts, a number that
American experts believe to be a vast underestimate. Hong Kong is the other
major consumer.

Whatever the changes in the consumer market, the production and trafficking
networks show little variance from the past. Most of the Golden Triangle's opium
is grown in Burma, in the areas of the northern Shan and southern Kachin states.
The growing area is largely controlled by the Chinese-supported Burmese
Communist Party, which is in rebellion against the Rangoon Government.

Evidence has grown in recent years to show that the Communists collect heavy
taxes from the growers and traders to finance their military operations. The
area of the town of Tangyan, southeast of Lashio, is the major stockpiling point
for the highest quality opium.

Controlled by Shan United Army

Caravans of mules and individual porters begin the descent toward the refineries
on the Thai border, across the region of Monghsu.  They traverse the Salween
River to reach Mongping before crossing a mountain pass near Monghsat, arriving
at Mae Sai in Thailand in the forbiddingly mountainous area southeast of
Tachilek, Burma.

The border area is largely controlled by what experts believe to be the world's
leading opium distributor and heroin refiner. Although it bears the name of the
Shan United Army, it appears to pay little attention to its stated political
goal of Shan autonomy. Estimated to comprise 3,500 to 5,500 soldiers bearing
modern arms, its sole occupation is said to be trafficking in opium and jade.

Although the Shan United Army professes to be anti-Communist, its commercial
relationship with the Burmese Communist Party is close.  Its troops either
escort the caravans southward from the Communist areas or contract the job out
to related organizations.

Its leader is Chang Chi-fu, a 49-year-old Shan-Chinese who is also known by the
Thai name of Khun Sa. His chief of staff, and possibly the dominant figure in
the trafficking, is Chanrisu-chuan, a former officer in the Nationalist Chinese
divisions that crossed into the Burma-Thailand region after the Communist
victory in 1949.

Controlled With a Heavy Hand

The two men, who may be related, have headquarters on the Thai side of the
border around Ban Hin Taek, east of the Sai River. They control about two-thirds
of the traffic and control their troops with a heavy hand, paying them about
$1.50 a month and rice for their families and maintaining discipline through
terror.

The Shan United Army controls two complexes of heroin refineries, near Tachilek
and further south across from the Thai town of Mae Hong Son. A third complex,
situated between them, is run by the Lahu National Liberation Army, another
tribal group of political pretensions but largely smuggling interests that is
believed to be second in importance in the opium traffic.

From 12 to 15 refineries are active at any one moment, situated from a few yards
to a few miles inside Burma. Even when the Burmese Army disrupted the refineries
in the Tachilek area in a major attack in January they were back in operation
three months later.

The Shan United Army and the other tribal groups active in opium trafficking and
refining supply a number of trading networks in Thailand made up largely of
ethnic Chinese, who have links to compatriots in countries through which the
trade passes.

Smuggling Routes Diversified

While in the past the traffickers could count on considerable complicity from
local Thai authorities and were able to channel most of their products by road
from the border to Bangkok for transshipment, Thailand's growing awareness of
the problem has caused diversification of the smuggling routes.

Large quantities of heroin and partly refined opium now cross Burma by land to
the southern coast. From there it is carried by fishing trawler to southern
Thailand, where a number of refineries have sprung up on the Thai side of the
jungle border with Malaysia, and to the Thai island of Phuket and the Malaysian
island of Penang.

The international airports at Bangkok and Penang are the principal points of
exit for the couriers who supply the American and Western European drug
cultures. The couriers are usually young men and women who are given as much as
$2,000 and an air ticket for carrying a suitcase to a hotel room reserved for
them in Amsterdam, Frankfurt or Barcelona. Others are independent entrepreneurs
who want to turn $20,000 into five times that much by buying a kilogram of
heroin in Bangkok or Phuket and taking it to Europe or America.

Thirty-eight Americans are in Thai prisons, 18 serving sentences of from two and
a half years to life and 20 awaiting trial. Last year Thai authorities arrested
206 foreigners on narcotics charges.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of opium-smuggling route

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EVANGELICAL GROUP QUIETLY AND ANGRILY UPSETS ALABAMA PRIMARY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words

DATELINE: MONTGOMERY, Ala., Sept. 7


''It was the Moral Majority movement that very quietly, but very effectively,
covered my district like a tent,'' said Representative John H. Buchanan Jr., a
16-year veteran of Congress who was defeated in the Republican primary last
Tuesday.

''It was a quiet thing,'' Stuart Gaines, executive director of the Moral
Majority of Alabama, agreed. ''But it's always an angry thing.''

Mr. Buchanan, a Baptist minister, lost to Albert Lee Smith Jr., a Birmingham
insurance agent, 55 percent to 45 percent.  Moral Majority, a fundamentalist
religious group that is seeking to rewrite the political bible in this
stronghold of Southern Baptists, is also given credit for increasing the margin
of victory for Adm.  Jeremiah Denton of the Navy, retired, who won the
Republican nomination in the United States Senate race in Alabama. Admiral
Denton, who had been a a prisoner of war in North Vietnam, overwhelmed Armistead
Selden, a former Democratic Congressman, by a margin of 2 to 1.

Many Politicians Are Concerned

''Other members of Congress may not be feeling their strength yet,'' Mr.
Buchanan said, but added that already his loss ''has shaken up a great many
people here and in the Congress.''

Moral Majority, founded by the Rev. Jerry Falwell, is a national organization
whose Alabama branch took root only six months ago. Now, said Mr. Gaines, it
prints publications ''in batches of 40,000'' and counts among its supporters
Gov. Fob James of Alabama, a Democrat.

By the time officials of the Buchanan campaign recognized the alliance between
Mr. Smith and Moral Majority, they were powerless to stop it.

''Especially in a fundamentalist church, what the preacher says is gospel,''
said George Seaborne, Mr. Buchanan's campaign manager. ''If the preacher says
John Buchanan has an immoral record, not many are going to get hold of a copy of
the Congressional Record to see what the vote was.''

Public opinion polls also failed to detect the groundswell.  Natalie Davis, Mr.
Buchanan's poll-taker, said her surveys showed that Mr. Buchanan was ''in
trouble,'' but ''we were unable to measure the intensity, the numbers involved.
The turnout far exceeded any of our predictions.''

Churches Transported Voters

Church buses brought some voters to the polls. ''Rural areas which had been
polling eight to 10 Republican votes came through with 150 votes for Smith,''
Mr. Seaborne said. ''One church can turn out that number with no trouble.''

''We knew they were out there,'' Mrs. Davis recalled, ''but no one came in and
said, 'Oh my God, they're out there!' '' Since the primary, Mrs. Davis says,
poll-takers in other regions of the country have called her to tell of their
difficulties in finding the pulse of the movement and to ask her what she had
learned.

Moral Majority draws many of its members from Presbyterian and Baptist churches
and from the fundamentalist Church of Christ and the Church of God. Mr. Gaines
said that two beliefs united its members: all were ''basic Bible-believing
Christians,'' and all were ''sick of the really asinine legislation coming out
of Washington.''

Some of that legislation bore Mr. Buchanan's stamp, the group contends. He
angered members of the group by voting to extend the deadline for ratification
of the proposed equal rights amendment and for putting into effect the Panama
Canal treaties. The group also judged him to be too soft on military matters and
welfare.

Likened to John Birch Society

George Lewis Bailes, chairman of the Alabama Democratic Party, has described
Moral Majority as ''the John Birch Society wrapped in the flag of the church.''
He added, ''The general election is going to be a real cliffhanger because of
this thing.''

The clearest evidence of the tactics and power of Moral Majority came in the
race for Mr. Buchanan's seat. By Mr. Smith's account, more than 2,000 volunteers
stumped the hills of Birmingham's six districts, visiting some homes three
times, passing out campaign literature and sometimes offering to pray with the
residents. Since Mr. Smith's own campaign was organized partly through the
churches, his volunteers and Moral Majority often overlapped.

Combining persistence and old-fashioned grass roots organization with
evangelical fervor Mr. Smith brought down Buchanan strongholds as Democratic
voters crossed over in large numbers to vote for him in the Republican primary.

Mr. Smith ran strongly in Birmingham's wealthiest suburb, Mountain Brook, where
he was expected to do well, and showed surprising strength in white
working-class areas of the district. Black voters, making up about 35 percent of
the district, remained loyal to the Democratic Party and were not an important
factor in the race.

Endorsement Wasn't Permitted

Because of laws relating to its nonprofit status, Moral Majority does not make
conventional political endorsements, Mr. Gaines said.  ''The Moral Majority made
no endorsement of Albert Lee Smith, but it's one that can hardly be missed,'' he
said.

Mr. Seaborne, the Buchanan campaign manager, noted that Mr. Smith had appeared
on television with a leader of Moral Majority, and that Mr. Falwell, the founder
of the group, ''took a couple shots'' at Mr. Buchanan at a Birmingham rally. He
also recalled that a Christianformat radio station reported that Mr. Buchanan
opposed school prayer. ''They broadcast that for the whole day and never called
us once to confirm it,'' Mr. Seaborne said.

In fact, Mr. Buchanan once supported a school prayer amendment in Congress.
Questioned about that, Mr. Gaines replied that he looked for ''a general
attitude, not just votes.'' He said, ''John Buchanan may have voted for it
somewhere, but basically he was against it.''

Mr. Smith, whose Democratic opponent in the general election will be Pete
Clifford, a Birmingham city councilman, minimized the role that Moral Majority
played in his victory. Instead, he stressed the effectiveness of his campaign
organization and the popular appeal of his loyalty to Ronald Reagan, the
Republican Presidential nominee.

'No Way to Attack Churches'

Mr. Seaborne contended that Moral Majority regularly distorted Mr.  Buchanan's
votes and his positions. Describing how difficult it was to oppose the group, he
said, ''There's no way to attack churches.''

Mr. Gaines, the leader of Moral Majority in Alabama, sees a bright future for
the group in Alabama and around the nation. He said that success in the primary
election had already boosted the group's membership in Alabama. ''We're going to
broaden our base, be spectacularly large,'' he predicted. ''We're going to have
full-time lobbyists in Montgomery. We will have people in Washington who know
the dog trails as far as Congress is concerned, know the path of legislation. We
intend to have an effect on government.''

Mr. Bailes, the Democratic chairman, agreed that Moral Majority was not going to
fade away. ''We are going to have them to contend with from here on,'' he said.
''They have much more going for them than any other group. They are very
dedicated people who really believe that government should only guard the coast
and carry the mail.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Representative John Buchanan Jr.

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Analysis;
FIRST WEEK OF THE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN: A FLURRY OF WORDS, BUT NO FATAL
MISTAKES

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 7


Single events do not decide Presidential campaigns, and so nothing that happened
last week won or lost the 49th Presidential election in the history of the
nation. But Presidential votes are the accumulation of bits of judgments about
policy and character and skills and seriousness, and the opening week of the
fall campaign did provide a series of occasions that seem likely to matter to
that eventual collective decision.

In appearing to link the South to the Ku Klux Klan during a Detroit appearance,
Ronald Reagan hurt himself in two ways. First, he gave a region that likes him
the impression that he would sacrifice its pride for political gain elsewhere.
Second, he added one more example to a growing list of unfortunate comments that
have made him look less than considered and thoughtful.

But, under fire, he came back with an attack on President Carter that suggested
that the incumbent would spend a key military secret, the so-called invisible
bomber, to buy his own re-election. Mr.  Carter, while capitalizing on the Klan
issue, also said Mr. Reagan did not believe in peace, worrying advisers who
think personal attacks seem un-Presidential.

John B. Anderson was reinforced as a factor in the election, though less by
anything he did than by what outside forces did for him. His platform and his
choice of Patrick J. Lucey as his running mate had a smaller impact than the
ruling by the Federal Election Commission that he would almost certainly become
eligible for Federal campaign funds, and the indication from the Liberal Party
that it would make him its candidate for New York's 41 electoral votes.

Commercials Stress Peace

These were just the messages that came through in the news of the first week.
Mr. Reagan started showing campaign commercials that scarcely mention Mr.
Carter's name and that sounded a note of reassurance. The opening message of the
first was, ''Of all the objectives we see, first and foremost is the
establishment of world peace.''

The Carter commercials, not mentioning Mr. Reagan at all, also began popping up
on television screens. They combined the usual incumbent President dealing with
world leaders with repeated emphasis on how hard a job the Presidency is, all
day and all night. The unstated message was clear: Mr. Reagan is not up to those
burdens.

The effect of commercials, however, is gradual. Over time, day-today campaign
events accumulate impressions, too, but to a staccato beat.

The main event was Mr. Reagan's criticism last Monday evening at the Michigan
State Fai, of Mr. Carter for opening his campaign in Tuscumbia, Ala. Mr. Reagan
said, ''I am happy to be here where you are dealing at first hand with economic
policies that have been committed, and he's opening his campaign down in the
city that gave birth to and is the parent body of the Ku Klux Klan.''

May Be a Snowball Effect

For some in political circles, it was just another ill-chosen comment, like the
distractions the former governor had created for his own campaign about Taiwan,
evolution and the ''noble cause'' in Vietnam. ''This one or that one isn't going
to have any serious electoral effect,'' said Robert Teeter, a leading Republican
pollster, but ''sooner or later it's going to snowball'' into a perception of
Mr. Reagan as foolish.

Key Reagan supporters, who had been blandly assuring reporters the previous week
that this sort of problem would not recur, had to do it again. In the process,
their repeated suggestions that he needed a ''political heavy'' to travel with
him implied a lack of confidence in how well Mr. Reagan could do on his own.

It hurt in another way. Mr. Carter's criticism, though intense, might have been
discounted as the normal back-and-forth of a campaign. But the seven Southern
Governors who condemned Mr. Reagan for his comment were not wound up and trotted
out by the Carter-Mondale committee. They were angry.

Their efforts were stimulated by Gov. William Winter of Mississippi, who had
been at Tuscumbia when the Klan demonstrated and Mr. Carter denounced them
Monday. He reacted angrily when he heard of the Reagan comment. ''I thought it
was a particularly unfair slap at our area of the country,'' Governor Winter
said later.

He called the other Governors, reaching George Busbee of Georgia in London, and
put out their response. The joint initiative suggested strongly that for the
affected region at least, Mr. Reagan's comment was more than just another
campaign blooper.

The Klan flap did Mr. Reagan one other piece of harm. Reagan. It obscured a
statement that Mr. Carter made the next morning in Independence, Mo., a comment
so harsh that one of his top advisers conceded, ''I winced when I heard that.''
Mr. Carter, explaining how different Mr. Reagan was from him, said:

''I believe in peace, I believe in arms controls, I believe in controlling
nuclear weapons, I believe in the rights of working people of this country, I
believe in looking forward and not backward, I don't believe the nation ought to
be divided one region from another. In all these respects Governor Reagan is
different from me.''

That is the kind of overreaching rhetoric Mr. Carter's aides have been trying to
get him to leave to others. But the Klan exchange overshadowed it and any
possible reproof to Mr. Carter for going too far.

On the Attack

Mr. Reagan moved more surely to the attack the rest of the week.  On Wednesday
he assailed Mr. Carter for inconsistency in the Middle East. His criticism of
the announcements on the ''stealth'' bomber, saying secrets had been revealed
for political reasons, drew furious denials from the Carter Administration, and
any public verdict on the matter was plainly in doubt.

But it was plainly better, politically, for Mr. Reagan to be on the attack than
on the defensive. One aide observed Friday, with relief, ''We've succeeded in
changing the subject.''

While Democrats in various areas said that Mr. Reagan had been a lot of help
last week, they were at least as pleased by his distraction from such issues as
the economy as by any expectation of lasting damage from a single event like the
Klan comment.

Reagan officials said that word from the field showed no serious damage. But
they acknowledged that even though one mistake, or two or three, rarely decides
an election, this does not mean that they don't matter at all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

OLD AND NEW CHARGES HEARD ON EVE OF VOTING IN SENATE PRIMARY TODAY

BYLINE: By MAURICE CARROLL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words


The four candidates for the Democratic nomination for United States Senator from
New York traveled together yesterday on the final day before the primary
election, still debating.

But the two Republicans went their separate ways. Senator Jacob K.  Javits made
the traditional flying tour across the state and his opponent, Alfonse M.
D'Amato, shook hands amid Wall Street crowds.

Today, more than a million New Yorkers are expected to pick the major-party
nominees for the seat Mr. Javits has held for 24 years.  The voters also will
choose candidates for Congress and the Legislature.

In Connecticut, Republicans will choose between James L. Buckley and Richard
Bozzuto for Senator and vote in six Congressional primaries. Pleasant, sunny
weather is forecast during most of the day for both New York and Connecticut.

New Charges Raised

The New York Democrats heard new charges raised against Elizabeth Holtzman by
people who telephoned questions to a broadcast studio where the candidates were
appearing - that she voted against resolutions critical of North Vietnam and
that her attendance record in Congress was low.

They heard an old charge renewed against Bess Myerson - that she failed to quit
as a Citibank consultant when the bank bowed to the Arab boycott of Israel.

The other candidates, John V. Lindsay and John J. Santucci, were overlooked in
the squabbling, Mr. Lindsay reacting with impatience, Mr. Santucci with amused
resignation.

As in a seemingly endless series of debates, more than a dozen in the final two
weeks, the Democrats were together in broadcast studios, starting at noon with
Barry Gray at WMCA and ending late at night on Channel 5, for the last day of
the campaign. .

''How many debates have you had?'' Mr. Gray asked as they settled in.  ''About
104,'' Mr. Santucci said, and everyone laughed.  But the two-hour discussion
produced unpleasant moments for all four. Mr. Santucci declined to promise to
support the winner. Mr.  Lindsay's face hardened as a caller asked how he had
the ''audacity'' to talk about safe streets, given his record as Mayor.

For the Democrats, today's vote -with about 800,000 expected at the polls -will
decide who will be on the general election ballot in November.

For the Republicans, today's vote by 450,000 or so party members is a warmup for
another contest; the Senator has the Liberal line in November, Mr. D'Amato has
the Conservative and Right To Life lines.

Mr. Javits spoke at airport rallies upstate, accompanied by a phalanx of
Republican luminaries, including former Gov. Malcolm Wilson and former Attorney
General Louis J. Lefkowitz.

On the La Guardia Airport tarmac, before leaving, Mr. Javits was asked if he was
concerned that his lead might be narrowing.

Always Runs Scared

''I always run scared,'' Mr. Javits said. ''I even ran scared when I took my
finals every term in public school.'' He was asked about the D'Amato TV
commercials, which focused on Mr. Javits's age (he is 76) and his health (he has
motor neuron disease, which hampers him in walking, climbing stairs and such).

''I thought some of it was pretty low level,'' Mr. Javits said.  ''But my
attitude is, 'Let's go on.' '' Mr. D'Amato, the Presiding Supervisor of
Hempstead, walked through the crowded sidewalks of the financial district and
onto the New York Stock Exchange trading floor yesterday, shaking hands and
saying that Mr. Javits had ''lost touch with the common man.''

In the hubbub on the trading floor, a man in a gray suit asked, ''What about
this letter?,'' referring to a charge that Mr. D'Amato had shared in an alleged
policy of political kickbacks by Nassau County employees.

Some Backward Looks

''It was nine-and-a-half years ago,'' Mr. D'Amato replied. ''If you want to talk
about integrity, let him look at four years ago. How do you think his wife got
the Iranian contract?'' His allusion was to a job Mrs. Javits held at a public
relations agency that worked for an Iranian Government airline.

Before coming together for their debates, two of the Democrats made morning
stops at Manhattan subway stations.  Miss Holtzman, who represents a Brooklyn
district in Congress, waved a copy of The New York Post above the crowd at the
station at 53d Street and Lexington Avenue and said she was ''very encouraged''
by its headline, which said a poll indicated she would win.

A florist, Kostas Vellios, gave her two red roses and a hug for the cameras.
Someone asked about suggestions that the campaign had turned ''dirty'' at the
close. ''I've just tried to put across the kind of person I am,'' Miss Holtzman
replied.

Koch Is Back and Bellowing

Miss Myerson, the former Consumer Affairs Commissioner of New York City, stood
at 77th Street with Mayor Koch, who yelled ebulliently, ''Hi, everybody, I'm
back. Back for Bess. We need your help.''

Someone asked about Miss Myerson's late shift to TV ads criticizing Miss
Holtzman for voting against defense appropriations.  ''It was absolutely
essential to tell the story,'' Miss Myerson replied.

She said that the debates had been ''debased'' by bickering that strayed from
issues.  Soon the four were together before the WMCA microphones and soon the
squabbling started.  Mr. Lindsay, the former Mayor of New York, said he had the
most experience.  Mr. Santucci, the District Attorney of Queens, said he spoke
for the middle class.

Attendance Record Cited

Miss Myerson riffled through a sheaf of papers and read Miss Holtzman's 1980
attendance record in Congress, the worst, she said, of the New York delegation.
''On the vote on moving the American Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, you
were absent, Liz,'' she said.

Miss Holtzman said her attendance record had been ''exemplary'' until she
started campaigning late in 1979.  Telephone callers questioned Miss Myerson on
the charge that she had stayed on Citibank's payroll while the bank bowed to the
Arab boycott and questioned Miss Holtzman on votes against banning
''reparations'' to and condemning ''flagrant violations'' by North Vietnam.

Miss Myerson, as she had previously, said she stayed on to change bank policy.
Miss Holtzman denied on the program that she had ''voted for reparations.'' An
aide said afterward that the 1977 vote had been ''meaningless.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

COMMONWEALTH PARLEY ENDS WITH CRITICISM FOR MOSCOW AND HANOI

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 327 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Sept. 8


Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India, yielding to pressure from 15 other heads
of government, joined them today in a veiled condemnation of the Soviet Union
and Vietnam for their roles in Afghanistan and Cambodia.

A joint communique, issued at the end of a five-day conference of Asian and
Pacific members of the Commonwealth, said the 16 leaders differed on
''perceptions as to the circumstances leading up to the present situation'' in
Afghanistan but agreed that ''it carried dangerous implications for the peace
and stability of the region.''

''They expressed their full support for the independence, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and nonaligned status of Afghanistan and other countries
of the region,'' the communique said. ''They urged the concerned parties to work
toward a settlement which would insure that the Afghan people would determine
their own destiny free from foreign interference and intervention.''

On the situation in Cambodia, the communique was more forthright.  ''The heads
of government expressed grave concern over the persistence of foreign
intervention and interference in Kampuchea,'' it said, using the traditional
name for Cambodia. ''They were convinced of the need for the withdrawal of
foreign forces from that country.''

Besides India, the conference was attended by Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Singapore,
Malaysia, Australia, New Zealand, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Kiribati, Nauru, Western
Samoa, Fiji, Tonga, and the Solomon Islands. All were British colonies that
became members of the Commonwealth after independence.

India is the only country at the conference to have recognized the Heng Samrin
regime in Cambodia. That regime was installed by Vietnam, is backed by the
Soviet Union and is sustained by Vietnamese troops.

Mrs. Gandhi, who conducted the news conference at the meeting's conclusion, said
India's recognition of the Phnom Penh regime was based on the fact that it
controls ''a major part of the country.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 623 words


Canadian town struggles to take root above the Arctic Circle A3
Human-rights groups says Chile stepping up arrests and torture A4
Commonwealth parley condemns Soviet Union and Vietnam A5
U.S. arms expert begins talks with Chinese A6
Syrian chief in Libya for talks on merger A7
Israeli Labor elections show preference for Peres A8
Hungarian Foreign Minister to visit Bonn A9
Information center is set up for Poland's union organizers A10
Warsaw Pact forces begin maneu- vers in East Germany A10
U.S. plans more aid for El Salva- dor A13
Around the World A15

Government/Politics
Representative Pepper celebrates his 80th birthday A16
U.S. Attorney resigning on Coast after bribe controversy A16
A former C.I.A. spy is suing the Government for $1 Million A16
Westchester passes bill requiring notice in minors' abortions B2
Campaign Report D18
Anderson pursues key support on campuses D18
Two defendants granted separate trial in Abscam case D19

General
Around the Nation A16
The City B3
First day at school: a visit to P.S.  51 in Manhattan B1
Residents of a Jersey township sue SCM in pollution case B3
Poe's name comes back to haunt him - on a street sign B3
Pollen levels distress allergy suf- ferers in New York area B3
The Region B6

Science Times
Tranquilizer prescriptions drop sharply, as does abuse C1
The Hudson: portrait of a river under attack C1
Satellite serves as a 'party line' in its old age C1
New scanner watches the brain at work C2
Psychologists at convention ques- tion their identity C2
The charms of brute force C2
Science Watch C3
About Education: technology training given new impetus C6
Questions & Answers C7

Industry/Labor
Four businesses ordered to move to make way for ballfield B5
U.S. to appeal ruling on women in hazardous jobs B9
School strikes idle or disrupt classes in nine states B10

Arts/Entertainment
The Times names Frank Rich chief drama critic C8
Fassbinder's ''Third Generation'' on the Public's screen C9
Agatha Christie's legacy proves a bonanza for her heirs C9
Philip Glass's opera ''Satyagra- ha'' given world premiere C10
Todd Gitlin's study of the New Left is reviewed C11
Quiet but far-reaching changes re- shaping radio C11
Carl Ratcliff Dance Theater in program of modern works C13

Style
A program with no age limit for sit-ups C12
Montana's first furs: sporty, casual and modern C12
For Ann Getty, a view of the Bay - and beyond C12

Obituaries
Barbara Fallis, ballet dancer and teacher D17
Ernest Lass, editor and chairman of The Asbury Park Press D17
Dr. Leon Zussman, obstetrician and expert on human sexuality D17

Sports
Cosmos anticipate a tough Aztec defense C14
Jane Gross on Borg's morning after C14
Kuhn keeps Jenkins on sidelines pending to drug charges C15
Yankees defeat Blue Jays, 7-4, with rally in ninth C15
Roy White finds Japan a mixed blessing C15
Giants aware they must improve, despite big opening victory C15
N.B.A. steps up campaign against drug use C16
Cowboys face Redskins with crip- pled secondary C17

Features/Notes
Going Out Guide C8
Notes on People C13

News Analysis
Frank Lynn on Liberal Party en- dorsement of Anderson A1
John Darnton assesses the new Polish leadership A11
Gene I. Maeroff on whether read- ing in N.Y. schools improved?  C6
Hedrick Smith on the Presidential debate decision D18

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18

Paying for Poland's meat Fueling the Tarapur reactor Primary Day election
choices Letters A18
Flora Lewis: meditations at the national navel A19
James Enstrom: another look at the causes of bad health A19
Bruce Babbitt: on the rights of states A19
William Lunch: shadows of '64 and '72 A19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


By John Leonard
THE WHOLE WORLD IS WATCHING.  Mass Media in the Making and Unmak- ing of the New
Left. By Todd Gitlin. 327 pages. University of California Press.  $12.95.

TODD GITLIN was president of the Students for a Democratic Society from June
1963 to June 1964, before the press discovered the New Left and turned on what
he calls ''the spotlight'' that became ''a magnifying glass'' that burned
everybody to a crisp. He is now a sociologist at the University of California at
Berkeley, and he looks back through a thick academic lens at the experience of a
brief generation of young radicals, mostly male and entirely pale.

He feels that 1965 was a crucial year. Until then, nobody had paid much
attention to the S.D.S., a small group, or ''friendship clump, '' of
upper-middle-class university students who organized ''face to face'' on a
variety of issues ranging from civil rights to socialist economics to
anti-imperialism. On being noticed, this ''Old Guard'' suddenly needed
''spokespersons'' who just as suddenly became ''celebrities'' no longer
accountable to their rank and file, which rank and file was swollen by all the
publicity.

Upping the Ante

What happened in 1965, according to Mr. Gilin, is that the S.D.S.  under the
magnifying glass was interpreted to be a single-issue fringe group specializing
in extravagant gestures against the war in Vietnam. This ''macho media'' image
attracted thousands of young recruits - ''Prairie Power'' - who wanted action
and whose only experience of radical community was watching their ''leaders'' on
television instead of arguing with them in committee meetings. There was no
coherent program from the Old Guard, merely an upping of the ante on each
successive rally of the troops, until the late 60's, when the Leninists and
Maoists took over, with the terrorists frothing in the wings. They were
misperceived, and they miscarried.

Mr. Gitlin's business is to contemplate the coverage of the S.D.S.  in 1965 by
The New York Times and CBS News, to identify the effects of that coverage on
S.D.S. membership, strategy, tactics and selfimage, and to generalize about the
role of the press in legitimizing or trivializing or anathematizing a vocal
opposition to the policies and ideology of a ''liberal,'' ''late-capitalist''
''national security state.'' Mr. Gitlin's argument is that the press,
consciously or unconsciously, subscribes in general to an American ideology: the
system works, or can be made to do by moderate reform.

His argument requires him to consider the assigning of stories and their
''framing,'' the selection and emphasis and ''wrap-up,'' the ''containing'' and
the ''coding'' of history instead of the reporting of it. He must look as well
at corporate ownership, slippery notions of ''balance'' and ''objectivity,'' the
''personalizing'' and ''mediating'' of reality, the ''contracting'' of time and
the ''decontextualizing'' of experience on page and screen, the
''contradictions'' of bourgeois culture and the infantilism of a Left deluding
itself into believing it was a vanguard in a revolutionary ''situation'' when it
was instead a moment on prime time.

The obligatory references are made to Antonio Gramsci and ''hegemony.'' We are
usefully reminded that ''the process of making meanings in the world of
centralized commercial culture has become comparable to the process of making
value in the world through labor.'' We are told that ''celebrity,'' like money,
bore a credit rating, can be ''parlayed'' into more celebrity, which leaves us
with popularity instead of leadership. Revolutions are not the same thing as
audience-popularity ratings.

By the late 60's, with antiwar sentiment on the rise among various American
''elites'' and the usual liberal constituencies, the press would employ its
image of the New Left as one extreme against the other extreme of failed
jingoism; the guilty reformist middle, wearing a tie and pushing a baby
stroller, became the reality. A radical critique of the national-security state
was ''imaged'' to be either bloody (the Weathermen) or a joke (Abbie Hoffman),
or both.

Well: any working journalist who has ever visited a college resents the naivete
of professors who theorize about journalism; we have just left the scene of an
accident and have a deadline. Nevertheless, we swim in our jobs, and it seldom
occurs to us to wonder about the nature of the water, the concept of wetness.
Mr. Gitlin, a very intelligent man, shoots some important fish.

No Fathers, Only Children

And: anybody who got anywhere near the New Left in the late 60's noticed that
the ''fatherless'' young people needed a ''nurturing'' and maternal television
to tell them at night that what they did during the day was real. They lacked
any other reality principle. Mr. Gitlin is appalled. There were no fathers;
there were only children.

But - and Mr. Gitlin knows this, too - times change, and so did The Times and
CBS; bourgeois culture accommodates its contradictions by patching up a new
consensus. How sinister is ''framing'' if, as he points out in his appendix, The
New York Times, The Los Angeles Times and The Washington Post, during a
five-month period in 1977, rarely agreed on the important story of the day and
one-fifth of the time didn't agree on a single front-page story? The fathers
don't know what they're doing, either.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 9, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN HITS CHICAGO STREETS WITH A VISIT TO LITHUANIANS

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS E. KNEELAND, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Sept. 8


Ronald Reagan came to Chicago today to challenge Illinois Democrats on their
strongest home ground.  Heeding Gov. James R. Thompson, who had counseled the
Republican Presidential nominee to make a strong effort to take away blue-collar
ethnic votes from President Carter in his bid to win the state's 26 electoral
votes, Mr. Reagan plunged in, with a walking tour of a Lithuanian neighborhood.

As hundreds of residents of the Marquette Park neighborhood, an area heavily
populated by whites of Eastern European background, watched from sidewalks or
swarmed around him in the street, Mr.  Reagan began the walk at Washtenaw Avenue
and strolled with Governor Thompson along a street known as Lithuanian Plaza to
the Ramune Restaurant and Deli.

One incident marred the event in this customarily Democratic city.  Robert
Bernard, a youthful neighborhood resident who was holding a sign saying, ''Don't
Let Ray-Gun near the Button,'' was accosted by several middle-aged men who tore
the sign from his hands, ripped it up and stuffed it into a waste can.

Confrontation in Neighborhood

''Get out of here,'' they yelled at him, telling him that it was a Lithuanian
neighborhood. ''Get over by the Nazis over there,'' one shouted, pointing toward
nearby 69th Street, where the American Nazi Party has its headquarters.

''This is an American neighborhood,'' Mr. Bernard said before a police officer
ushered him away from the men.  ''I fought for two years in Vietnam for the
right to be here,'' said Mr. Bernard, who added that he represented no group,
but was opposed to Mr. Reagan's election.

Soon after, Mr. Reagan moved on to the Palmer House, where he stayed, to meet
with a group of Polish-American leaders.

Dinner With Former President

Later he and Mrs. Reagan had dinner in their suite with former President Gerald
R. Ford, who was in the city on other business.  Mr. and Mrs. Reagan began their
day with breakfast in Philadelphia with John Cardinal Krol, one of the
best-known Polish-American members of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in the United
States.

Then the Republican nominee went to Kokomo, Ind, to begin a threeday swing
through the crucial industrial states of the upper Midwest.  In a speech before
a sizable crowd at the Kokomo mall, Mr. Reagan concentrated on the nation's
economic ills.

More Talk of Depression

Speaking in sight of two large automotive parts plants that have recently had
many layoffs, Delco Electronics, a General Motors subsidiary, and Chrysler
Transmission, Mr. Reagan resumed his quarrel with President Carter about whether
the country is in a recession or a depression.

Declaring that unemployment was not spread evenly around the country, Mr. Reagan
said that it was 19.5 percent in Kokomo and 25 percent in Flint, Mich.

''Those are the figures of the Great Depression of the '30's,'' he said to the
cheers of the crowd. ''That's not the recession he speaks of, that's
depression.''

Touching on the topic of his long-awaited major speech on economics in Chicago
tomorrow before the International Business Council, Mr.  Reagan said the 30
percent across-the-board reduction in income taxes that he promises to propose
over the next three years ''is only a reduction in the built-in increases in
taxes.'' He said that the cuts he would propose next year would total only about
$20 billion out of ''a built-in increase of $86 billion.''

New Charge About Education

Last night in Philadelphia, addressing campaign volunteers in the fieldhouse at
St. Joseph's University, Mr. Reagan leveled a new charge, accusing the
Department of Education of ''planning all manner of things to limit and restrict
institutions of this kind, because their faith is totally in public education.''

Asked today to explain the candidate's remark, Lyn Nofziger, his press
secretary, said Mr. Reagan believed that officials of the new Department of
Education would ''justify their existence by adopting restrictive regulations.''

Mr. Nofziger said the Reagan camp also had heard the department was making a
study ''in which the Government rather than the schools themselves would handle
the accreditation.''

Asked if he meant accreditation for private schools, he replied: ''Yes, the
Government would do it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Number of Vietnamese Who Flee Declines for Third Straight Month

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 92 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 9


The number of Vietnamese refugees leaving for other Southeast Asian nations by
sea declined in August for the third consecutive month, the United Nations High
Commission on Refugees said today.

There were 6,121 Vietnamese refugees last month, compared with 7,769 in July and
10,202 in June, the commission reported.  Hong Kong, Thailand, Malaysia,
Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Japan and Macao reported the arrival of
refugees in August. In addition, 1,078 refugees from Vietnam and Laos arrived in
Thailand by land, the commission said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Judge Orders Air Force To Readmit Homosexual

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 241 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 9


A Federal district judge, ruling that the military had confusing standards for
dealing with homosexual service personnel, today ordered the Air Force to
reinstate Leonard Matlovich five years after he was dismissed from the service
for admitting his homosexuality.

Judge Gerhard A. Gesell, who had upheld the Air Force's ouster of Mr. Matlovich
four years ago, reversed himself and directed the service to readmit the
37-year-old man. Mr. Matlovich also was awarded back pay for five years.

Judge Gesell said the Air Force had not fully explained its reasoning for
dismissing the former technical sergeant and Vietnam veteran.

In 1975, the Air Force dismissed Mr. Matlovich, who was stationed at Langley Air
Force Base in Virginia, when he admitted his homosexuality in an effort to test
the Air Force's regulations. Judge Gesell upheld the action in 1976, but urged
the service to re-examine its policy.

The sergeant appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia, which sent the case back to Judge Gesell in 1978, saying that the Air
Force had not clarified possible exceptions under which Mr. Matlovich could have
remained in the service and directed the service to explain its policy.

Mr. Matlovich said he wished to return to the service to set an example for
other homosexuals. Air Force officials had no immediate comment on the decision.

Mr. Matlovich said he wished to return to the service to set an

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE WRONG SIDE OF THE 'NOBLE CAUSE' IN VIETNAM

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 465 words


To the Editor:

I am writing to assure Tom Carhart (letter Sept. 2) that many of us who refuse
to accept Mr. Reagan's attempt to rewrite history do so with no intent to
dishonor those who fought in Indochina. Of course, the whole intent of his
speech about the ''noble cause'' in Vietnam was to associate those who would
bring us out of the Vietnam-era approach to foreign policy with dishonor to the
vets.

Let nobody doubt that there was a noble cause to be fought for in Vietnam. The
cause was the right of the people of Southeast Asia to choose their own future.
There is as much honor in fighting for such causes as any in history.

Unfortunately, our Government had made sure that no American could fight for
that cause long before Mr. Carhart or any other U.S.  soldier got to Indochina.
I urge anyone who doubts this to read what they can on the Geneva Accords of
1954.

We made it clear then that, although we had to agree to free elections, we
wouldn't allow those elections if they would mean the election of a Communist. I
understand this policy went back even further.

Nobody could find honor in supporting the totalitarian regimes which are today
grinding Southeast Asia into the dirt. But we must remember that these are not
the governments which would have been elected 26 years ago had we not stood in
the way.

Maybe they are better; probably they are worse. We did not cause the worsening,
but we made it possible with the time, the ''emergency'' excuse, the support of
large sections of the populace and the weapons for the extremists to set up
governments which are not just totalitarian but outright fascist.

The frightening part of Reagan's speech was the implication that we lost in
Vietnam simply because we were unwilling to give the military what they needed
to win.

This simply ignores the facts.  It ignores the fact that for a long time the
Southeast Asian command kept getting all it asked for. (Each new increment, we
were calmly told, was ''all we need to finish this off in a year.'') It ignores
the fact that by the time such requests started being turned down, Vietnam had
already escalated (''escalation'' was what we called it back when they got
everything they asked for) into the most densely fought war in the history of
man. It ignores the fact that there has never been any evidence that application
of still greater force in the area would have made any difference.

I am considering volunteering for military service soon. If I do so, it will be
to serve in the army of Tom Carhart and others like him. I pray I do not find
myself fighting in the army of another Richard Nixon, risking my life for some
''peace with honor'' which could have been achieved 20 years earlier with no
bloodshed.
DAVID MCCORKHILL, Brooklyn, Sept. 3, 1980

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JAVITS,VOWING FIGHT ON LIBERAL LINE,CALLS FIRST LOSS SINCE'46 A HEALTHY

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 933 words


EXPERIENCE

By CLYDE HABERMAN

By 10 P.M., the projections apparently proving correct, the friends slowly began
to leave. It was, as more than one of them kept saying, ''the end of an era.''

On the night that Jacob K. Javits lost his first election, his friends and
supporters gathered at the Roosevelt Hotel in Manhattan, quite aware from the
start that this might not be their night.

But as they clustered around television sets in a room not far from the suite
where the Senator was following the election returns himself, they had trouble
believing the margin by which Mr. Javits was losing to Alfonse M. D'Amato.

''Nobody believed it - nobody accepted,'' said Richard Lewisohn, a finance
administrator when John V. Lindsay was Mayor.

Remnants of Moderate Wing

Those in the room were, like the Senator himself, among the remnants of the
Republican Party's moderate wing that had for many years dominated state
politics.

They included State Senators Roy M. Goodman of Manhattan and John J. Marchi of
Staten Island and Representative S. William Green. Also on hand was Bill Brock,
the Republican national chairman.

''I would have to say it's sort of glum,'' said Mr. Lewisohn's wife, Jean.  If
anybody knew what was on Mr. Javits's mind, nobody was saying.  Even the
Senator's press secetary, Steven Matthews, walking about in a ballroom that had
been set aside for reporters, said he was having trouble getting in touch with
the Senator and his closest campaign advisers to determine their feelings.

One thing, however, was clear: After 24 years in the Senate, Mr.  Javits was not
about to concede defeat quickly.  ''We're not making any concessions,'' Mr.
Matthews said at 9:45 P.M.

To Run on Liberal Line

At 10:50 P.M. the Senator, accompanied by his wife, Marion, and older daughter,
Joy, went to the ballroom where his supporters had gathered to concede defeat.

He said that he would run in the November general election on the Liberal Party
line and that he would campaign ''vigorously and aggressively.''

It was, he acknowledged, the first time that he had lost in 10 elections going
back to 1946..  ''I've lived a full and interesting life,'' the 76-year-old Mr.
Javits said. ''But there's one thing I haven't had and that is a defeat at the
polls. So I think it's very healthy.''

Four times, from 1946 to 1952, Mr. Javits won elections to the House of
Representatives. He was elected New York State Attorney General in 1954 and was
the victor in four general election campaigns for United States Senate, starting
in 1956. In winning, Mr. Javits defeated people such as Robert F. Wagner, Paul
O'Dwyer and Ramsey Clark.

This year marked the first time that the Senator had to endure a primary
campaign, and he reacted to the challenge with more than a touch of disbelieving
hauteur. Never one to take himself any way but seriously, he was mindful that
Senate administrative aides once listed him as the ''brightest'' among all the
senators and second only to Henry M. Jackson of Washington in overall
effectiveness.

The Budget, War and Pensions

His impact has been broad, whether as the ranking Republican on the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, or in his role in reasserting Congressional
authority over the Federal budget, or in limiting the President's power to wage
war, or in getting legislation passed to protect workers' pensions.

For all that, he has always been something of an outsider on Capitol Hill - a
fact lending mild, if unwitting, irony to Mr.  D'Amato's repeated complaint that
Mr. Javits was too much a part of the Senate's ''clubby'' environment.

As a liberal he was a minority in a minority party, and as a New York Jew he
long had trouble winning acceptance in a political body dominated by Southern
Democrats. ''I don't like you or your kind,'' Senator James O. Eastland of
Mississippi once told him during a particularly intense debate. That was in
1965, eight years after the New Yorker's arrival in the Senate.

Mr. Javits also has acquired detractors for an admittedly cautious manner that
caused him, for example, to be relatively slow to denounce the Vietnam War and
to criticize President Richard M. Nixon during the Watergate scandal. Others
have been troubled by his brusqueness. But even his detractors never minimize
the Senator's powers of persuasion, his breadth of knowledge, or his diligence.

Preferred Politics to Law

Born in 1904 in a Lower East Side tenement that he once called the New York
equivalent of ''a log cabin,'' Mr. Javits began his political career in 1932,
working for Fiorello H. La Guardia's Republican-Fusion mayoral campaign. A
lawyer by vocation, Mr. Javits found that he preferred politics and sensed that
he would have more opportunities as a liberal Republican, even in an
overwhelmingly Democratic city.

His first race, in 1946, appeared initially to be a thankless chore, running in
an Upper West Side district that had not sent a Republican to Congress for more
than two decades. But he won respectably, and over the years he kept winning
with ease - by as much as 1.1 million votes in 1968 when running for his third
Senate term.

The Senator has been married twice, with the first marriage ending in divorce.
His second wife, Marion, has been a controversial figure herself, shunning the
customary duties of a politician's spouse and determinedly pursuing her own
interests.

It is no different for her husband, according to Mrs. Javits, who once told an
interviewer: ''He just loves it when Frank Sinatra sings, 'I did it my way.'
Every time he hears the song, he cries.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 382 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 11, 1980 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

EXTERMINATOR

BYLINE: By Tom Buckley

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Cultural Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 324 words


IN ''The Exterminator,'' which opened yesterday at the National and other
theaters, the title character metes out rough justice to loathsome characters.
He ties up the gang punks who crippled his Vietnam buddy in an abandoned
tenement for the rats to eat.

A Mafia don who preys on the wholesale meat trade is lowered slowly into a jumbo
hamburger grinder. A procurer of young boys for homosexuals is soaked with
lighter fluid and set afire.

You've seen the good man taking the law into his own hands before. Charles
Bronson did it in ''Death Wish'' and Clint Eastwood did it in ''Dirty Harry.''
Those films look like high art in comparison with this one. Even connoisseurs of
violence will be disappointed in ''The Exterminator'' since its grisly events
are not actually shown on screen.

The leading performers - Robert Ginty in the title role, Christopher George as a
detective and Samantha Eggar as a physician - are undone by the screenplay and
direction of a beginner named James Glickenhaus and by lighting, camera work and
sound that would rate an ''F'' at film school.

Vigilante Justice

THE EXTERMINATOR, directed by James Glicken- haus; screenplay by Mr.
Glickenhaus; director of photography, Robert M. Baldwin; edited by Corky O'Hara;
music by Joe Renzetti; produced by Mark Buntzman; released by the Avco Embassy
Pictures Corporation. At the National, Broadway and West 44th Street; Orpheum 2,
86th Street and Third Avenue, and other theaters. Running time: 101 minutes.
This film is rated R.

Detective James Dalton . . . . . Christopher George
Dr. Megan Stewart . . . . . Samantha Eggar
John Eastland . . . . . Robert Ginty
Michael Jefferson . . . . . Steve James
Chicken Pimp . . . . . Tony Di Benedetto
Gino Pontivini . . . . . Dick Boccelli
Central Intelligence Agent Shaw . . . . . Patrick Farrelly
Maria Jefferson . . . . . Michele Harrell
State Senator . . . . . David Lipman
Candy . . . . . Cindy Wilks
Frankie . . . . . Dennis Boutsikaris


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

JAPAN ATTEMPTING TO ENHANCE ITS POLITICAL ROLE IN ASIA

BYLINE: By MIKE THARP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Sept. 9


The Japanese Government is attempting to assume a more influential political
role in Asia through a 12-day, 5-nation diplomatic mission undertaken recently
by Foreign Minister Masayoshi Ito.

For some time the United States and other nations have encouraged the Tokyo
Government to increase its diplomatic stature to a level commensurate with
Japan's economic power. The Japanese have preferred to follow what they call an
''omnidirectional foreign policy,'' which often meant that they waited to see
what position other governments took on an issue before adopting any policy of
their own.

Recently, however, there have been signs that the Japanese Government intends to
play a more assertive role on the world stage.  Mr. Ito's trip to China, India,
Pakistan, Thailand and Burma represented, at least to Japanese diplomats,
another example of that trend. A Foreign Ministry spokesman said: ''Mr. Ito told
the Cabinet on his return that we should play a more active role for maintaining
peace and stability, rather than only strengthening technical and economic
aid.''

Three Purposes to Trip

Foreign Ministry officials said that the trip, Mr. Ito's first official venture
overseas, which ended early this month, had three main purposes. These were to
stress the importance Japan attaches to relations with the five nations he
visited, to focus on political as well as economic cooperation and to confirm,
through various economic cooperation packages signed during the trip, Japan's
intention to increase its aid efforts in the region.

The political issues that most affect Japan and the nations visited by Mr. Ito
include the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia,
the question of who represents Cambodia at the United Nations and Japan's own
candidacy for a two-year term on the Security Council.

Government officials here said leaders of all five nations he visited had
confirmed their opposition to the Soviet action in Afghanistan and their desire
for the withdrawal of Soviet troops.  ''There was some degree of difference,''
said a Foreign Ministry official, ''but even India joined.''

Mr. Ito flew to an Afghan refugee camp during his visit to Pakistan and visited
two refugee camps in Thailand. Japan has been criticized for its stringent
immigration requirements on the admission of refugees, but it has contributed
more money to the United Nations High Commission on Refugees than any other
nation except the United States. For the fiscal year ending in March, Japan is
expected to contribute a total of $100 million for refugee relief, up from $90
million last year.

Most Supported Pol Pot Regime

Every nation except India endorsed Japan's support of the deposed Pol Pot regime
as the legitimate representative of Cambodia at the United Nations. India and
the Soviet Union are two prominent backers of the Heng Samrin regime, which was
installed by Vietnam.

Japanese officials said their candidacy to assume the Asian seat on the Security
Council, which has been held by Bangladesh for two years, was strongly endorsed
by the five nations visited by Mr. Ito.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Prime Minister Pierre Elliott

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 11, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA TO SUPPLY U.S. WITH METALS FOR MAKING PLANES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sept. 10


China has indicated it would be willing to sell the United States some of its
plentiful supplies of three metals that are critical for defense manufacturing
but which America lacks, a senior Pentagon official said today.

Dr. William J. Perry, the Under Secretary of Defense for Development, Research
and Engineering, said Chinese and American experts met today for a preliminary
discussion on the sales. The metals - titanium, vanadium and tantalum - are
lightweight, heatresistant and necessary for aircraft production.

Dr. Perry also said that negotiations between China and private companies in the
United States for the purchase of American military equipment were proceeding
''at a brisk pace'' despite a cutback in Peking's military budget.

Peking has made no purchases since the Carter Administration announced last
winter that it was willing to sell China military equipment and technology but
not weapons, Dr. Perry said. The Pentagon has granted licenses to American
companies for such sales and Dr. Perry said he expects some sales within a few
months.

'Add Substance' to U.S. Policy

Dr. Perry is leading a 22-member Defense Department mission of technical and
scientific experts on a 13-day visit to China. The trip follows one by Secretary
of Defense Harold Brown last January and is part of an effort to ''add
substance'' to Washington's policy of making United States military technology
available to China, Dr.  Perry said.

Dr. Perry said the Chinese had again sought permission to buy weapons, but he
said he had told Chinese military officials, including a deputy chief of staff,
Liu Huaqing, that the Carter Administration had not changed its restrictions on
arms sales.

He said the Chinese had not exerted any pressure on the United States. ''We
believe, and they do too, that there is ample room for progress under the
current guidelines,'' Dr. Perry said at a news conference at the home of
Ambassador Leonard Woodcock.

Sale of Computer Approved

He also disclosed that he had told the Chinese the United States had approved
the sale of an advanced high-speed computer made by the Western Geophysical
Company of Houston to process oil and gas prospecting data. The Chinese have
sought permission since last year to buy the computer, which has possible
military applications.  Secretary Brown had given them preliminary indications
that the purchase would be approved.

The computer is more advanced than any American equipment approved for sale to
the Soviet Union, Dr. Perry said.  He said the technology and equipment the
Chinese had shown the most interest in were electronics, semiconductors, testing
equipment, instrumentation, radar, radios and transport helicopters.

Bell Helicopter is reportedly negotiating to build a helicopter factory in
Harbin in the northeast, not far from the Soviet border.  About 400 licenses for
dual-use technology - technology with both military and civilian applications -
have been approved by the Pentagon, Dr. Perry said. The Defense Department has
also cleared 10 or 20 applications for licenses for sales of military support
equipment, he said, adding that American companies must now complete the sales.

Publicity on Glamor Weapons

China has been cautious about buying arms, despite widespread publicity about
its possible orders for glamorous weapons like Britain's Harrier jump jet or
French antitank and antiaircraft missiles. A major stumbling block is China's
low military budget.

It was announced last week at the National People's Congress, the nominal
legislature, that the military budget would be cut by $2 billion this year
because the army overspent last year during the brief border war with Vietnam.
The cut will reduce military spending to $13.1 billion.

Gen. Shi Shiyu, a member of the Military Affairs Commission, was quoted by the
New China News Agency as urging ''understanding and support'' on all sides over
the low level of appropriations for defense.

Dr. Perry and his delegation left Peking today for visits to Chinese military
bases and research and production facilities. He is scheduled to visit Xian,
Nanjing, Hangzhou and Shanghai.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: HERBERT KLEIN ON THE YEARS WITH NIXON

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 922 words


HERBERT G. KLEIN, who served as Richard M. Nixon's campaign adviser, press
secretary and director of communications over 30 years, did not like to play
''hardball'' with the press and public during his long tenure and in the final
days when the White House was beginning to collapse under the weight of
Watergate.

That is one of the reasons President Nixon replaced him with Ron Ziegler, who
came out of hard-sell public relations rather than newspaper ranks. Another
reason is that Mr. Klein wanted to return to newspaper work. In an interview
this week, he said that it was with something of a sigh of relief that he went
back to The San Diego Union as its editor in 1973. Today, he is editor in chief
of the Copley newspaper chain.

Mr. Klein says that his new book, ''Making It Perfectly Clear,'' published today
by Doubleday & Company, is not another Watergate book and that he purposely held
off writing it until now. He wanted to gain perspective on the Presidency and
the events of the Nixon career and Administration, he says. Mr. Klein's theme is
summed up in the book's subtitle: ''An Inside Account of Nixon's Love-Hate
Relationship With the Media.''

What was Mr. Nixon's undoing in this relationship? Mr. Klein said: ''His poor
relationship with the media was of his own making. He missed opportunities to be
candid, yet after the first year in office the press was probably unfair to him.
Even when the press treated him objectively, he was not appreciative. Too often,
he allowed the personalities of some of the newsmen and resentment of the
liberal philosophic inclinations of reporters in general to cloud his view and
his working relationship with the press. Later, his downfall came from the way
he handled events while in office, including Watergate.''

The book includes ''eyes only'' memorandums between Mr. Klein and H.R. Haldeman,
Mr. Nixon's chief White House aide. Again and again, the papers show, the
Haldeman emphasis was on image-making - ''strategy, points of attack.'' In one
of Mr. Klein's replies, he wrote that the counterpunching should be done by Vice
President Spiro T. Agnew while Mr. Nixon should emphasize the positive. Mr.
Klein also suggested that the Presidential strategy should include humor - which
was not exactly regarded as Mr. Nixon's forte.

Today, Mr. Klein is somewhat amused that he helped gain attention for Mr. Agnew.
Aside from the bribe scandal, he does not regard Mr.  Agnew as much of a Vice
President. ''Basically, I still liked him personally until the day in 1973 when
he lied to me about his involvement in the Maryland scandals which eventually
led to his resignation,'' Mr. Klein says.

There can be improvements in the Presidency-press relationship, Mr. Klein says:
less hit-and-run coverage, greater attention to texts instead of excerpts, less
media image-making. ''The elections are still covered in about the same fashion
as a baseball game,'' he says, ''with key elements being hits, successes or
runs, strikeouts and crowd attendance.''

On the government side, he says there is a need for more highcaliber
professionals with experience in communications. ''If I were a new President
appointing government officials,'' he says, ''the qualification of strong
communications aptitude would get top priority.'' In this respect, he recommends
having two press secretaries -one to deal with reporters covering the President,
a second to coordinate the news operations of the rest of the government.

''An intelligent President who fully understands the need for substance and for
sensitive communication with the American people, giving full weight to both,
could reverse the history of running warfare between the media and the White
House,'' Mr. Klein says.

Robert Kirsch, who died at the age of 58 at his home in Santa Barbara, Calif.,
last month, chalked up more book reviews regularly than any modern critic - six
days a week for 23 years in The Los Angeles Times. In his spare time, he wrote a
dozen books, fiction and nonfiction, and last year he served as editor of the
late Dalton Trumbo's uncompleted novel, ''Night of the Aurochs.''

The Brooklyn-born Mr. Kirsch once summed up his career and self in what could be
his epitaph: ''In the end, all of it is an attempt to recapture Coney Island and
the lesson I learned there: 'Live, read, grow and be a mensch.' ''

Writing Walter Lippmann's biography was a vast undertaking in paperwork for
Ronald Steel, author of ''Walter Lippmann and the American Century,'' published
by Little, Brown. He said that the Yale library had 100,000 letters and
documents. The late Richard Rovere started to edit the papers but halted. Some
have said that he was overwhelmed; also, that he wished to delve too deeply into
certain episodes of the columnist's personal life.

''Rovere suggested that I do a critical biography,'' said Mr.  Steel, a New
Yorker. The book is quite outspoken on such matters as Lippmann's avoidance of
writing on Nazi Germany's treatment of the Jews (the columnist more or less
concealed the fact that he was Jewish). The book also recalls Lippmann's finest
hours - his early and steady opposition to the Vietnam war.

Like other researchers into Lippmann's career, the author was helped by Robert
O. Anthony, a Brooklyn business executive who kept track of Lippmann's writings
purely as a hobby since 1931. Mr.  Anthony, who now lives on Cape Cod, added his
own Lippmann papers to Yale's collection. Mr. Steel observed, ''Anthony,
fortunately, had an intellectual crush on Lippmann.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Herbert G. Klein

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 12, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Marine's Court-Martial Delayed

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 88 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Sept. 11


Because a defense attorney is sick, a delay has been ordered in the scheduled
Sept. 17 start of the court-martial of Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine
Corps on charges of desertion and collaboration with the enemy in Vietnam, the
Marine Corps said yesterday. The judge, Col. R.E. Switzer, said the court would
reconvene as scheduled Monday, when Private Garwood's two other defense
attorneys are to present their requests for defense witnesses to be brought to
court. Opening arguments have been postponed at least a week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 13, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WALDHEIM,IN HIS ANNUAL REPORT,MODIFIES WORDING ON PALESTINIANS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 331 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 12


Secretary General Kurt Waldheim declared in his annual report today that peace
in the Middle East required that each state in the area recognize the right of
the others to exist. In doing so he moved to repair the damage from a rhetorical
omission that touched off recent criticism.

Mr. Waldheim drew protests from Israeli officials and others in July because of
speech before the Arab League in which he urged the formation of a Palestinian
state but said nothing about the right of each state, including Israel, to
exist.

In his annual report Mr. Waldheim renewed his call for ''selfdetermination'' for
the Palestinian Arabs but refrained from offering a more explicit formulation on
a Palestinian state.

Elsewhere in his report the Secretary General appeared to break little new
ground. He singled out Israel for rebuke several times, directly and indirectly.
He accused it of interfering with United Nations peacekeeping forces in southern
Lebanon by supporting the socalled Christian militia of Maj. Saad Hadad.

'Ominous' Development Noted

He said he found it ominous that the United Nations had been denounced over its
role in the Middle East, an apparent allusion to Israel.  Mr. Waldheim also
expressed concern that so many United Nations resolutions had been ignored by
member states and warned that ''continued frustration breeds extremism.''

This was read as another criticism of Israel. Israel, however, is not the only
member to have ignored recent resolutions; Iran ignored a call to release the
Anerican hostages, the Soviet Union has declined to remove its troops from
Afghanistan and Vietnam has refused to pull its forces out of Cambodia.

Mr. Waldheim also warned that delay in freeing South-West Africa, the disputed
territory called Namibia at the United Nations, from South Africa's rule was
''bound to lead to an escalation of violence and bring bloodshed and ruin to the
region.''

Mr. Waldheim also warned that delay in freeing South-West Africa,

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Kurt Waldheim

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 13, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Marine Faces a Molestation Trial After Court-Martial for Desertion

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 127 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, N.C., Sept. 12


Marine Pfc. Robert Garwood will be tried on a civilian charge of molesting a
small child after his military court-martial is concluded, District Attorney
William H.  Andrews said today.

Garwood's court-martial at nearby Camp Lejeune is scheduled to resume next week
after a two-week recess called because of the illness of the chief defense
attorney.

The 34-year-old Indiana native has been charged by the Marine Corps with
desertion and collaboration with the enemy during his nearly 14 years in
Vietnam. Mr. Garwood returned to the United States last year.

Mr. Andrews said an indictment would be sought for Mr. Garwood on a charge filed
Sept. 5 by the Onslow County sheriff's department accusing Mr. Garwood of
molesting a 7-year-old girl in August.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 382 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 1980 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

'SEACAUCUS SEVEN'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 1; PT2; Column 2; Cultural Desk; Pg. 64

LENGTH: 679 words


''The Return of the Secaucus Seven'' was shown in this year's New Directors/ New
Films series at the Museum of Modern Art. The following review was written by
Vincent Canby and was published in The New York Times on April 11. The film
opens today at the 57th Street Playhouse, between the Avenue of the Americas and
Seventh Avenue.

In the late 60's, Jeff, Frances, Mike, J.T., Irene, Katie and Maura were in one
way and another, finishing their educations and burning on behalf of good
causes, of which there were plenty to go around, including the fight to end the
war in Vietnam and the newly declared war on poverty.

It was a time when one ''smoked'' dope, demonstrated, ''rapped,'' ''crashed''
whereover one was and moved from one love affair to the next with no hard
feelings. The goals were worthwhile even when they were undershot.

There was, for example, the time the seven friends took off by private car from
New York for Washington to march on the Pentagon. They got as far as Secaucus,
N.J., where they were arrested on a phony charge and spent a night more comic
than grim in the local cooler, thus missing completely the big show in the
capital.

Now, 10 years later, the members of the Secaucus Seven come together for a
weekend reunion in New England. Mike and Kate, who are teachers in Boston, are
the hosts. J.T., who still dreams of becoming a folk-music star, arrives with
his guitar, hitchhiking. Irene, who once had an affair with J.T., brings her new
lover, Chipp, and Maura, having left Jeff, is also alone.

John Sayles's ''The Return of the Secaucus Seven'' is about as sweet and
engaging a movie as anyone could make about unexceptional lives growing stale as
we watch them.

Mr. Sayles, who wrote, directed and edited the film, is best known as a novelist
(''The Pride of the Bimbos'' and ''Union Dues''), but he has also put in time as
a screenwriter for Roger Corman (''Piranha,'' among others). ''The Return of the
Secaucus Seven'' is a far cry from the kind of sensational movies Mr. Corman
produces.It's not exactly understated, but it is so full of commonplaces that
one longs for a tiny bit of sensation or even a small discovery, perhaps of a
pregnancy.

I suspect it's easier to deal with these sorts of characters in written fiction,
where the voice of the author becomes a participant in the proceedings, than in
a straightforward film where we pay too much attention to the looks of the
actors and to what they say and how they say it. The characters here talk with a
facetiousness that in real life often passes for wit. It seems accurate enough,
but it also makes them seem less important and interesting than I think they are
meant to be.

The performers are all good, but noteworthy are Maggi Renzi as Kate, a capable
young woman for whom the reunion triggers some unexpected panics; Gordon Clapp
as Chipp, Irene's preppy lover, and Mark Arnott as Jeff, a former Vista
volunteer who now works with drug addicts and gives every indication of wanting
to try the hard stuff himself, though he doesn't.

The movie covers much of the same territory as ''Small Circle of Friends,'' but
without the sentiment of the Harvard Yard romance. ''The Return of the Secaucus
Seven'' is an honest, fully realized movie. My reservations have to do with the
dimness of the characters and their lives. Fiction - including film fiction -
demands much more than mere authenticity.

The Cast

THE RETURN OF THE SECAUCUS SEVEN, written, directed and edited by John Sayles;
photography, Austin de Besche; music, K. Mason Daring; produced by William
Aydelott and Jeffrey Nelson; a Salsipuedes Productions Inc. production; released
by Libra Films. At the 57th Street Playhouse, between the Avenue of the Americas
and Seventh Avenue. Running time: 110 minutes. This film is not rated.

Jeff . . . . . Mark Arnott
Chip . . . . . Gordon Clapp
Frances . . . . . Maggie Cousineau
J.T. . . . . . Adam Lefevre
Mike . . . . . Bruce MacDonald
Irene . . . . . Jean Passanante
Katie . . . . . Maggie Renzi
Ron . . . . . David Strathairn
Maura . . . . . Karen Trott


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of John Sayles

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 63, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 823 words


KANSAS CITY PAPER MARKING 100 YEARS

KANSAS CITY, Mo., Sept. 13 (AP) - The Kansas City Evening Star was greeted by
its competitors with a mixture of amusement and forbearance when the first issue
of four pages appeared Sept. 18, 1880.

Typical of the reaction was the verse written a few days later by Eugene Field,
an editor of the morning Times, one of the three established newspapers:
Twinkle, twinkle, little Star, Bright and gossipy you are; We can daily hear you
speak For a paltry dime a week.

The Star's founder, William Rockhill Nelson, wrote in the inaugural issue that
the paper would ''spare no labor or expense to take and keep a place in the
front rank of afternoon journalism.''

Next Thursday the newspaper will celebrate its 100th anniversary and the
occasion will be marked tomorrow with an issue of more than 500 pages. The
centennial Sunday issue will weigh five pounds and explore the newspaper's past
in book-length detail.

Crusaded for Parks

Nelson's newspaper represented a personal brand of journalism. He crusaded in
its pages for his favorite causes: paved streets, parks and lower utility rates.
He demanded loyalty from his reporters, paid them poorly and never gave a byline
on a story.

The early Star included a heavy dose of local news. Headlines were tiny. An
''exchange desk'' rewrote news and features from other newspapers.

By 1886 The Star's circulation had grown from its initial 3,000 copies to
25,000. It had absorbed its afternoon competitor, The Mail, and 15 years later
acquired the morning Times and became a member of The Associated Press.

When he died in 1915, Nelson left a strong, well-established newspaper. But he
also left a legacy of bitterness among his employees, many of whom had expected
that the paper would be left to them.

Hemingway in the Newsroom

The will instead called for the newspaper to be sold to the highest bidder upon
the deaths of his wife and only daughter. Until Nelson's daughter died in 1926,
the newspaper was run in trust for the family. During that time it started WDAF,
the fifth commercial radio station in the country, and published its first
halftone photograph and comic strip.

It was also in those years that a young man named Ernest Hemingway worked
briefly at The Star before leaving to serve in Italy in World War I.

The Star's first stylebook instructed writers: ''Use short sentences. Use short
first paragraphs. Use vigorous English. Be positive, not negative.'' Later
Hemingway said that his experience at The Star had influenced his writing style.

In 1926, 38 Star employees bought the newspaper for $11 million.  The paper
continued its crusading style and its accomplishments grew. In 1931, A.B.
Macdonald won a Pulitzer Prize for solving a Texas murder case that had baffled
the police. Over the years, the paper has won four Pulitzer Prizes, as well as a
special Pulitzer award.

Won National Recognition

The newspaper was not without its idiosyncrasies. One editor, George Longan,
hated snakes. He banned the word from The Star's columns and once dismissed a
reporter when he saw a snake tattooed on the man's arm. But Mr. Longan also was
part of a period when The Star became known as ''a writer's newspaper'' and won
national recognition.

In 1942 the morning Journal folded, leaving the Kansas City newspaper field to
the afternoon Star and its morning sister, The Times. The Star prospered. It
acquired the city's first television station in 1949, bought a paper company and
won its special Pulitzer for coverage of a 1951 flood.

But by its own account, the newspaper ''suddenly stagnated'' in the 1950's. The
Star lost an antitrust suit, stemming from the paper's policy of requiring
advertisers to buy space in both the morning Times and the afternoon Star.

The Star fought back. In the 1960's its correspondents chronicled the black
revolution in the South, the Vietnam War and the dealings of the criminal
underworld.

Sold to Conglomerate

Financial problems beset the newspaper, however. A continuing struggle to find
capital to pay for improvements ended in 1977 when the company was sold for $125
million to Capital Cities Communications Inc., a New York-based conglomerate.

Since then, the newsroom budget has grown, and The Times and Star under James
Hale, the publisher, and Michael Davies, the editor, have competed in covering
the news. Current circulation is 273,758 for The Star, 314,007 for The Times and
406,467 for The Sunday Star.

''What I would like to see happen is for these newspapers to become recognized
as the best in the country by the professional peers and by the people we
serve,'' Mr. Davies said in the centennial edition.  ''I think we have a
tradition of excellence and we have to recapture some of the past and build on
that when we move into the future.''

''We are dedicated to excellence and profitability and not necessarily in that
order,'' Mr. Hale. added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Adrianne Allgeier, Artist, Married to William O. Brewer

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 71, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 161 words


Adrianne Marie Allgeier, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Frederick C.  Allgeier of West
Orange, N.J., was married there yesterday to William Ord Brewer, son of Mrs.
Edwin J. Dikeman of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Munn Brewer. The Rev.
Boniface Treanor performed the ceremony in St. Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.

The bride, a freelance artist, graduated cum laude from St.  Lawrence
University, attended the Art Students League and received a B.F.A. degree from
the Parsons School of Design. Her father is a corporate vice president of the
Suburban Propane Gas Corporation, Morristown, N.J.

Mr. Brewer, also a St. Lawrence graduate, received an M.B.A. from the University
of San Francisco and is assistant to the director of insurance of
Moore-McCormack Lines. He served as an Army lieutenant in Vietnam. His father
was a lawyer and for many years Justice of the Town of Mamaroneck, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Bruns Grayson Jr. to Wed Perrin Moorhead

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 76, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 215 words


Perrin Galpin Moorhead, counsel for Time-Life Films in New York, and Bruns
Holland Grayson Jr., an associate with McKinsey & Company, management
consultants in New York, plan to be married Oct. 18.

Announcement of their engagement has been made by Representative and Mrs.
William S. Moorhead of Pittsburgh, Washington and The Plains, Va., parents of
the future bride. Her fiance is the son of Mr. and Mrs. Grayson of Alameda,
Calif.

Miss Moorhead is a graduate of the Madeira School, Radcliffe College and the
University of Virginia School of Law, class of '76.  She made her debut in 1968
at a dance given by her parents at their Washington home, was presented at the
Washington Debutante Ball and was a member of the New York Junior Assemblies.
Her father, a Democrat, is in his 11th term in Congress. Her mother is a writer.

Mr. Grayson, who served as an Army captain in Vietnam, graduated from Harvard
College, University College of Oxford University, which he attended as a Rhodes
Scholar, and in June from the University of Virginia School of Law. He is a
member of the Council on Foreign Relations. His father is in the car-rental
business. His mother runs an answering service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPOTLIGHT;
THE I.C.C.'S LION-TAMER

BYLINE: By SANDRA S. FRIEDLAND

SECTION: Section 3; Page 9, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Biblical Darius threw Daniel to the lions.  Darius W. Gaskins, the
40-year-old economist and chairman of the Interstate Commerce Commission, has
been accused of driving the nation's truckers into the den of competition where,
stripped of protective regulations, they face destruction.

With characteristic humor, Mr. Gaskins - the seventh Darius on his family tree
-points out that Daniel not only survived his night with the lions, but that he
prospered thereafter.

While Mr. Gaskins possesses what some call ''zealous faith'' in competition as
the best market regulator, he consistently relies on rigorous debate, not
parables, to make a point. By all accounts, he enjoys remarkable success in
persuading others to accept his economic views. In the last three years, he has
influenced the course of airline deregulation at the Civil Aeronautics Board,
crude-oil pricing decontrol at the Department of Energy and trucking
deregulation at the I.C.C.

''In all my jobs, my philosophy has been that it's time to rationalize our
economic regulations, to cut back in those areas where less regulation is
better,'' Mr. Gaskins said recently, seated with his low-cut boots propped on a
coffee table in his spacious I.C.C. office.

''People no longer operate under the mythology that the Government can make
things better,'' he continued, citing the Vietnam War and the failure of
Government programs in the 1960's as factors that changed public sentiment.
''There has long been an academic thrust toward deregulation, but what finally
moved people to act was a gut reaction that it made sense.''

Since his appointment to the I.C.C. a year ago, Mr. Gaskins has systematically
analyzed trucking and railroad regulations. In testimony before Congressional
committees and in candid speeches to trucking, railroad and shipper groups, he
has pushed for sweeping reform in the surface transportation industries,
including wider discretionary rate-setting zones, reduced antitrust immunities
and eased requirements for adding or dropping routes.

Those objectives are largely embodied in the Motor Carrier Act of 1980, signed
by President Carter in July, and Mr. Gaskins's supporters believe that his
efforts improved the legislation.

Chances that railroad deregulation will also be signed into law this year were
greatly enhanced last week when the House passed its version of a deregulation
bill approved by the Senate last spring.  ''In many ways the House version
mirrors the commission's intentions. It puts into statute what we have been
trying to do administratively,'' Mr. Gaskins said.

Whether from Congress or the I.C.C., railroad rule changes could mean higher
shipping costs for coal-burning utilities and a corresponding rise in
electricity rates, experts say. Mr. Gaskins offers two typically laissez-faire
solutions: allow coal slurry pipelines to compete with railroads, and encourage
utilities to ''capture reasonable coal rates'' through long-term contract
negotiations.

Associates note that Mr. Gaskins has frequently offered free-market solutions to
complex problems since coming to Washington in 1973. He left a teaching post at
the University of California at Berkeley for a job with the Interior Department,
where he coordinated the leasing of the outer continental shelf for oil and gas
exploration.

In 1976, he became director of the Bureau of Economics at the Federal Trade
Commission, and participated in major rule changes in the eyeglass and mortuary
industries. The next year, he was hired by Alfred E. Kahn, then chairman of the
C.A.B. and now chairman of the Council on Wage and Price Stability, to head the
board's newly created Office of Economic Analysis. Mr. Gaskins urged Mr. Kahn to
grant air-fare reductions at a faster pace.

''Darius had a great deal of influence on Fred Kahn,'' recalled Elizabeth
Bailey, a C.A.B. member. ''In the beginning, Fred had instincts that you could
be a perfect regulator; Darius had more free-market instinct. Darius converted
Fred to the position that it's very hard to regulate perfectly; that imperfect
competition wins out over imperfect regulation.''

Mr. Gaskins credits his subsequent appointments to his colorful boss at the
C.A.B. ''If Kahn hadn't been the person he was, we wouldn't have achieved the
changes we did,'' he said. ''Given that we were in a wave of deregulation, the
Administration was looking for performers, and I got some visibility at the
C.A.B.''

Following the airline deregulation, Mr. Gaskins went to the Energy Department in
1978. Convinced that regulation of oil prices was crippling the country, he was
determined to build an economic framework for an energy program. His work as
deputy assistant secretary for policy analysis helped to bring about the
decontrol of crude-oil pricing, which he considers his hardest job and most
significant contribution.

''The National Energy Plan was in a precarious position when Darius came,'' said
Steve McGregor, deputy assistant secretary for oil and gas policy at the Energy
Department. ''The staff was merely firefighting. No analysis was being done.
Darius brought immense intellectual depth and leadership. He imposed order on
the system here.''

The American Trucking Association says that it stands by its original opposition
to Mr. Gaskins's appointment to the I.C.C. ''How can someone who doesn't believe
in regulation be an effective regulator?'' a spokesman asked.

Friends and foes agree that Mr. Gaskins defies bureaucratic stereotypes. A West
Point graduate, he earned a master's degree in astronautical engineering and a
doctorate in economics at the University of Michigan. He places his own calls
and has little patience for procedural etiquette.

His willingness to delegate responsibility helps him to preserve evenings and
weekends for his wife Stephanie, and their five children, aged 1 to 17.

Mr. Gaskins won't speculate on where he might go from the I.C.C., though he says
he's too much of an activist to return to academia.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Sandra S. Friedland is a freelance writer based in Scotch Plains, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gaskins

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS IN SUMMARY;
by Margot Slade and Tom Ferrell;
The F.C.C. Moves To Make a Bigger Television Dial

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1335 words


Diversity in programming is the great good thing several recent decisions of the
Federal Communications Commission aim to achieve. To that end, the commission
voted earlier this year to require owners of both a cable station and a
broadcast station in the same area to sell one or the other, and dropped the 25
''clear channel'' AM radio stations to make room on the dial for 125 smaller new
ones. Last week, the seven commissioners voted unanimously for a new policy that
could create thousands of community television stations nationwide.

The ruling would create a new class of low-power (under 1,000 watts) stations on
the UHF - ultra high frequency - band. Some could be on the air by next summer.
The commission said it would give preference in allocating stations to nonprofit
operators and members of minority groups.

Low-power UHF stations offer such operators entry into the television business
for not very much money, considering. Rene Anselmo, president of U.S. Spanish
Television Network, estimates that none of his small stations cost more than
$120,000 to start, compared to several millions for a conventional VHF (channels
2 to 13) station. He says low-power signals can be received from 10 to 50 miles
away; under current F.C.C. rules, stations on the same channel can be no closer
to each other than 170 miles.

Homosexual Wins Air Force Case

The armed forces have long held that homosexuals in uniform damage discipline
and morale, and have discharged homosexuals as they found them - 1,624 last
year. Air Force thinking in the matter has not changed, but its policy may have
to. Last week, a Federal judge in Washington ordered the service to reinstate
Leonard P. Matlovich, a former sergeant dismissed in 1975 after he declared his
homosexuality. The reason for the ruling was the Air Force's inability to define
the ''unusual circumstances'' allowed by regulations, under which homosexuals
can be permitted to remain on duty.

The Air Force is appealing District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell's decision and
seeking to delay reinstatement until the appeal is decided. An Air Force
spokesman said it has no immediate plans to revise the regulation.

During the five-year legal battle, the Air Force has been asked to define those
circumstances under which homosexuals may remain in the service and why Mr.
Matlovich, a Vietnam war veteran who received the Bronze Star, does not qualify.
The Air Force (the only service with an exception clause) first said that since
no one has claimed an exception, it was not clear who would qualify, but that
Mr. Matlovich did not. Air Force Secretary Hans Mark then said the service
''does not recognize exceptions to the policy of discharging confirmed,
practicing homosexuals.'' He later said that statement is ''incorrect.''

Meanwhile, the Navy's case against eight female sailors charged with homosexual
behavior was headed toward settlement. A Navy board recommended two for
discharge, two for acquittal and dismissed charges against the remaining four.

Cyanamid Upheld On Lead Issue

Implicit in the Government's case against the American Cyanamid Corporation and
its policy of excluding fertile women from jobs the company considers hazardous
are issues basic to health and safety on the job. They include the right of
women to hold certain jobs; the evidence that some people are more susceptible
than others to toxic substances in the workplace; the debate over whether the
workplace or the worker should be changed to protect the most susceptible among
us.

Last week, however, Cyanamid won its case not on these issues but on
technicalities. Two administrative law judges threw out or reduced the
Government's citations against the company in a case involving five women
employees who said they had had themselves sterilized in order to keep jobs in a
lead pigments department.

The Occupational Safety and Health Administration charged in October that
Cyanamid had ''adopted and implemented a policy which required women employees
to be sterilized in order to be eligible to work in those areas of the plant
where they would be exposed to certain toxic substances.'' Judge William Brennan
said the agency had cited the company for the sterilizations, not for the policy
that led to them, and that the time limit for making that charge had run out.
Judge Cecil Cutler upheld Cyanamid's argument that it had engineered out of the
workplace as much lead contaminant as it could afford to.

The agency is appealing the judgments to the three-man Occupational Safety and
Health Review Commission. Further, it announced last week that it has cited the
Bunker Hill Company, a lead smelting operation in Kellogg, Idaho, for its
exclusion policy, which resembles Cyanamid's.

Some Helpful Hints To Catholic Bishops

Every two or three years since the Second Vatican Council (1962-1965) Roman
Catholic bishops from all over the world have gathered in Rome to meet in synod
to assist the Pope in governing the church. The next such synod, to open on
Sept. 26, is to concern itself with the Christian family. Last week the church
released a ''working paper,'' produced by Vatican staff and intended, as its
preface says, ''to provide the discussion of the Bishop Delegates with
guidelines.''

To the extent the bishops will be guided, it will be in traditional directions.
The working paper points out that in the last 10 years 33 of what it calls the
''free world'' nations have abandoned stringent laws against abortion; it
contemplates the difficulties raised for Catholic families living in pluralistic
societies; it notes that things are made even harder by a ''multiplicity and
plurality'' of opinions within the church, arising from ''dissension from the
teachings of the Magisterium, especially in the domain of sexual morality.''

The dissension is certainly real. In a 1978 study conducted by the Gallup
Organization, 69 percent of Catholics said they thought divorced Catholics
should be permitted to remarry in the church, and 73 percent favored birth
control. The working paper urges pastoral work to explain the church's doctrine
and says, perhaps optimistically, that the church's position on birth control
''is becoming ever more clear and, the better it is investigated, the more it
wins over minds.''

Deer Become Their Own Worst Enemy

Last week it was reported that New York State was experiencing a deer population
explosion threatening crops and fruit trees upstate and even ornamental shrubs
in Westchester County. Stuart Free, chief of the state's Environmental
Conservation Department's Division of Wildlife, estimated that the state had
forage to support perhaps 350,000 to 400,000 deer, but that the actual
population is more like 500,000.

In part, environmental officials say, the deer boom is attributable to a couple
of consecutive mild winters, in which deer find easy forage, and the absence of
natural predators. Woodcutting in the Northeast is on the rise, and what deer
like best to eat - low scrubby browse - naturally takes over after trees are
removed.

New York plans to issue additional hunting licenses and expects that more than
100,000 deer will be ''harvested'' in the fall. But farmers and fruitgrowers
upstate tend to put their faith in fences. A slanted electric fence only four
feet high but impossible for deer to jump has been developed at the Cary
Arboretum in Millbrook, N. Y., and works all year.

(More Ideas & Trends, page 22.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Margot Slade and Tom Ferrell

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MALIGNING BLACK VETERANS;
by Lee Sloan

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 844 words


Each summer from 1964 to 1968, large-scale ghetto rioting swept the nation's
cities. Those were days that gave rise to revolutionary and apocalyptic visions
of American race relations. Some people argued that black Vietnam veterans,
trained and skilled in guerrillawarfare tactics, would resort to violence if
their sacrifice and service to the nation went unrecognized and unrewarded. In
the summer of 1980, new riots rekindled fears of potential violence from former
black warriors.

After the rioting in Miami last May, law-enforcement officials there suggested
that they had been confronted by guerrillas who were black veterans and who
could be organized nationwide.

Despite the problems and the legitimate grievances of black Vietnam veterans,
there is virtually no evidence of their involvement in political violence.

Data collected in the Northeast by the Vietnam era research project indicate
that relative to white veterans, blacks returned home with more problems and
their problems were more persistent.  Especially those who served in Vietnam
were convinced that they had ''paid their dues'' and had every right to demand
racial justice.  These heightened expectations contributed to adjustment
problems when blacks returned from the military to the segregated, economically
depressed, and socially disorganized settings of their home communities, only to
discover limited opportunities to transfer their military skills.

The economic problems have been especially marked. In 1977, at the time of our
interviews, 28 per cent of the black veterans in the study population (those who
served in Vietnam or elsewhere) were unemployed; unemployment for white veterans
was only 3 percent.  Among those who were employed at the time, white veterans
earned approximately $81 more per week than did black veterans. Persistent
economic problems generate stress that contributes to other problems, including
drugs and drinking, alienation, psychopathology, and a lack of life direction.

It was facts such as these that led to predictions that black Vietnam veterans
would resort to violence, perhaps even revolution.  But the decade from 1969 was
actually characterized by the absence of ghetto rioting. It appears that black
Vietnam veterans were not involved in ghetto rioting for the same reasons that
other blacks were not involved. It had become evident that white Americans were
committed to whatever repressive violence was necessary to control black
protest. The most militant black organizations had been suppressed or destroyed.
And by 1968 it had become increasingly evident that the major victims of ghetto
rioting were blacks themselves.

All publicly available evidence for the assertion that black veterans are urban
guerrillas is circumstantial and exceedingly flimsy. It is furthermore a
sensationalist charge that diverts attention from both the underlying social and
economic conditions that made Miami riot-prone and the precipitating incident
itself.  Despite the house-of-cards character of the evidence, officials in
Miami have recommended that others ''familiarize'' themselves with black
veterans' organizations ''so they will know what to expect.''

It is imperative that the civil and political rights of black Vietnam-era
veterans not be violated out of fear. Unwarranted and illegal surveillance of
black veterans' organizations possibly could produce a self-fulfilling prophecy
of the charge that black veterans have organized as urban guerrillas across the
nation.

Despite their problems, the great majority of black Vietnam veterans are
reasonably well-adjusted and productive members of society. Black and white
veterans who are activists are involved in the same interest-group politics.
Black veterans' organizations are involved in nothing more revolutionary than
seeking veterans' benefits, obtaining upgraded discharges, seeking Government
action on the Agent Orange issue, assisting their fellow veterans in prison,
etc.

It would be extraordinarily risky to predict whether or not black Vietnam
veterans will come to be involved in organized violence as hypothesized. What is
known is that despair, anger, rage and estrangement can be found among these
former black servicemen. All black Americans are legitimately concerned with the
recent resurgence of activities by the Ku Klux Klan, the American Nazi Party,
and other racist organizations.

It should be evident that if black veterans eventually do resort to organized
political violence, it will be because we have failed to remedy the social,
economic and political problems tied to white racism.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Lee Sloan is associate director of the Vietnam era research project at the
Center for Policy Research, in New York City.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A VISION OF STYLE;
by Francesca Stanfill

SECTION: Section 6; Page 69, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1326 words


f the people in her world, few are as colorful, as imperious, or as hard to
capture as Diana Vreeland herself. Many have tried. Take her face (that of ''an
authoritative crane,'' according to Cecil Beaton), or her gait (likened to a
camel's by one writer, to a ballerina's by another). Even her accent, with its
indeterminate quality, has been a matter of some dispute; like her way of seeing
things and her contribution to fashion, it, too, is original.

Nor is it easy to categorize Mrs. Vreeland's long career. Because she worked at
Harper's Bazaar from 1936 to 1963 and headed Vogue from 1963 to 1971, it is
tempting to call her a fashion editor - but only in the narrowest sense. She not
only chronicled fashion, she influenced it, transforming what she saw through
the use of daring photography and originating the deft, inimitable descriptions
that became her signature. (The late Coco Chanel ''had the expression of a baby
bull dressed like a Prussian sailor.'') Mrs. Vreeland is not only an arbiter of
fashion, but a keen observer of society and how the two are interrelated.

Since 1973, when she became special consultant to The Cos-tume Institute of the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, Mrs. Vreeland's impact on fashion has, if anything,
increased. In matters of style, she has come to be regarded as something of an
oracle, and her annual exhibitions attract a vast public. (They have in-
cluded ''Fashions of the Hapsburg Era,'' ''Diaghilev: Costumes and Designs of
the Ballets Russes,'' ''American Women of Style'' and the ''Glory of Russian
Costume.'')

Now, in a new book, ''Allure,'' Mrs. Vreeland gives us a look at the photographs
that have helped shape her vision and her concept of style. ''These are all the
pictures that have intrigued her the most,'' says Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis,
who edited the Doubleday book. ''They go from the most beautiful pictures of
vintage quality to a paparazzi shot she tore out of a newspaper.'' The result is
a cross between a startling magazine and an eccentric scrapbook - photographs
that range from the ethereal to the bizarre. There are Cecil Beaton photographs
of haughty beauties, for instance, as well as eerie studies of plastic surgery.

They are accompanied by a text best described as Vreelandesque -
impressionistic, elliptical, sometimes cutting, often irreverent: ''As you know,
a well-kept invalid lasts forever.'' There are impressions of the titans (Garbo,
Bernhardt, Nijinsky) and the epigrams on fashion for which she is famous: Blue
jeans are ''the most beautiful things since the gondola.''

Throughout, hers is an idiosyncratic vision. ''I'm looking for something else,''
she says. ''I'm looking for the suggestion of something I've never seen.''
-FRANCESCA STANFILL
SPREAD 2:
ame in all its forms is celebrated by Diana Vreeland. Some of her favorite
subjects - and her impressions of them in ''Allure'' - are presented here.
''Do you think people grow in the lens? I do. It's something distinctly
sexual.''
''Josephine Baker was the quintessence of the French music hall, a total
Parisienne -though, as you know, she was a laundress's daughter from St.
Louis.''
'' 'What,' you might ask, 'is de Gaulle doing here?' It's simple: To me, he was
France. He had the most beautiful diction -trained, I have no doubt, by the
Comedie Fran,caise - and a totally French face.''
SPREAD 3:
reat performers populate the pages of ''Allure,'' among them, soprano Maria
Callas, here with her husband, Giovanni Meneghini, and Elsa Maxwell.
''So Maria Callas came in (to lunch) -We sat down at the table. Then,
extraordinary performer I have ever
the greatest actress in the world. Her manners were beautiful: She was very
sustained emotionally.  suddenly, the veil dropped. She was as common as mud.
Yet, on stage, she was the most seen. She didn't have a gauche thing about her.
She was unique.  That's a word I use sparingly.''
SPREAD 4:
eauty, vanity and narcissism - the essence and boundaries of each - are explored
in the pages of ''Allure.''
''I adore artifice, but I also adore perfection. For the same reasons, I approve
of plastic surgery. Now it's as normal as taking aspirin.  Whereas, only 15
years ago, Elliott Erwitt did some pictures (for Vogue) of an eye-lift
operation. That was a scene. The pictures were shown to various members of the
staff. One left immediately, others were gagging and carrying on. It was
unbelievable!''
''Elegance is innate. It has nothing to do with being well-dressed.  Elegance is
refusal.''
''I adore Turbeville's girls. These worn-out girls at $1,000 a day - they kill
me! We don't know who they are, or where they are, or why they are, or why they
are so beautiful. The girls keep looking in the mirror, which is all right by
me. I loathe narcissism, but I approve of vanity.''
''The Poiret mannequins I put in the divine category. Look at the size of those
girls - they're like Percherons entering the ring!''
SPREAD 5:
ew qualities are more elusive than style, whether spontaneous or studied.
''This is what I've always found so fascinating about paparazzi pictures. They
catch something unintended, on the wing. They get that thing.''
''De Meyer got something beyond fashion, beyond photography - something so
strange, so sensual, so draggy. His best pictures take you out of space and
time. Yet they live today as something luxurious and wonderful.''
CAPTIONS SPREAD 1: Diana Vreeland, in her photograph-filled office at Vogue in
the 1960's. Credit: James Karales/Look
SPREAD 2: Raquel Welch, entertaining troops in Vietnam in 1966. Miss Welch is
only one of the sex symbols who appear in ''Allure''; others include Marilyn
Monroe and Brigitte Bardot. Credit: Anonymous/A.P.
The exotic entertainer Josephine Baker (shown here in the 1920's) was included
in the show ''American Women of Style.''
Credit:
George Hoyningen-Huene
A victorious Charles de Gaulle, in France in 1945.
Credit:
Zalewski/Rapho
SPREAD 3, Callas photo credit:
Anonymous/Europeo
SPREAD 4: Photographs of plastic surgery, such as this one of an eye lift, were
too shocking to appear in Vogue in the 1960's. Credit: Elliott Erwitt/Magnum
The Vicomtesse Jacqueline de Ribes, caught by Richard
Avedon in 1959. Her ''almond-eyed Renaissance beauty conquered New York'' that
winter.
Credit:
Richard Avedon
Sonia Rykiel dresses, depicted in the somnambulistic style popular in 1977.
Credit:
Deborah Turbeville
A sumptuous dress by Poiret, shown with a Brancusi sculpture in the 1920's.
Credit:
Man Ray
SPREAD 5; The elusive Greta Garbo, caught off-guard by a paparazzi in 1960. The
photo shows what Diana Vreeland admires in the paparazzi technique: ''It's the
revelation of character.'' Credit: Anonymous/Gamma
A 1926 photograph by the Baron Adolf de Meyer of a woman in a white taffeta that
is almost contemporary in its style. Vreeland ''used to stare at his pictures
for hours.''
Credit:
Baron Adolf de Meyer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 11 photos

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE GREAT CLASS-REUNION BAZAAR with Rosemarie Saccardo Decoste at 1979 reunion

SECTION: Section 6; Page 88, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4112 words


Twenty-four years ago, Paul Theroux entered high school as millions of young
Americans will be doing this month. A successful novelist and travel writer who
contributes frequently to The New York Times, he returned to Medford High in
Massachusetts last October for a class reunion, an event that turned out to be a
journey of rediscovery.
By Paul Theroux

When a childhood friend calls me now, it all comes back. I see a freckly boy or
a potbellied girl in the disk of the telephone receiver - the cowlick, the
bubble-gum breath, the squint in the smeared glasses. Last October, on the night
before my high-school reunion - Medford High's class of '59 - the telephone
rang. It was Geoffrey Howe -or, more properly, ''Humphrey.'' He had changed his
name to that of a comic-book character he liked and resembled, Humphrey
Pennyworth. At the age of 7, we had both been in Miss Purcell's class at the
Washington School and had sung ''John Peel'' to the parents. We had remained
close friends until the high-school graduation, and were still friends, though I
had not seen much of him over the past 20 years. But he sounded unchanged -
fat-faced, funny, wheezing with mockery. He would go to the reunion, he
said, if I went. That was very Medford High, the timid adolescent dare: ''I
will, if you will.''

I said it was my sole reason for being in Massachusetts this October night, away
from work, family and my London household. I did not tell him that I had spent
the afternoon reading our yearbook, ''The Blue and White,'' and rediscovering
what a poor student I had been - not in the National Honor Society, not even in
the Slide-Rule Club; no awards, no sports. What had I done? Humphrey had been on
the football team the Medford Mustangs.

''Guess who won't be there?'' Humphrey said, and quickly added, ''Gagliardi.
Guess why?'' ''No idea.'' ''He's dead. Killed in the slammer, by another
prisoner. The amazing thing is that
about a year or two before he died, he killed someone in the slammer. Guess who?
Albert DeSalvo!''

''The name rings a bell.'' Was he at Medford High, too?  ''You were probably in
Ubangiland - you usually are. Listen, Albert DeSalvo was the Boston Strangler.''
So a Medford boy, a murderer from the class of '59, had killed the Boston
Strangler. And I remembered Gag - a sallow-faced Italian who, even at the age of
14, had a vicious scar over his eye. He was a merciless bully at the Milton
Fuller Roberts Junior High, affecting the tough style of 1955: low-slung pegged
pants, suede ''spade'' shoes, shirt collar up, a flick knife in his pocket. He
sneaked smokes in the boys' john, exhaling the smoke through the ventilator, so
no one would know. He was halitotic from meatballs and nicotine.  Once - we were
both in the seventh grade - I walked past the gym and saw Gagliardi beating up
another boy and hitting him so hard the boy was being stuffed into an open
locker. Gagliardi turned from the boy's bloody nose and smiled at me.
''Theroux,'' he said. ''You don't see nothing, right?''

I said no, and walked away. I could have reported him to the principal, George
F. Weston, who was known to everyone as ''Poopy.'' Poopy had written a book,
''Boston Ways: High, By and Folk'' (''Copiously Illustrated''). He was an
intelligent and learned Yankee and had made a study of the Chinese community in
downtown Boston.  What was a sensitive soul like this doing at such a foul
school as Roberts? He would have suspended Gag for fighting and, nipped in the
bud, Gag's homicidal tendencies might have been curbed. I didn't report Gag, and
I have never told this story before. But then, Gagliardi is dead.

Humphrey said, ''I'll see you at the reunion. But if you think I'm wearing a
suit, forget it. I haven't owned one for 15 years. By the way, I'm not married.
I've got a good mind to pick up a huge blond bimbo in the Combat Zone and take
her.''

The reunion was held at the Hilton Inn - a preposterously oversized motel on
that part of Route 128 which is thick with topless bars, country-and-western
lounges, massage parlors and discount stores -in Lynnfield, the suburb's suburb.
Humphrey was at the reception table, sticking a name label (Hump) on his lapel.
There was no blonde with him, but even so he looked fairly spectacular, in a
fawn suede jacket and black silk shirt with a chrome chain around his neck. By
way of greeting he said, ''You pineapple, I saw you on television!''

This was pure affection. We had grown up together, built huts in our backyards
out of old lumber, gone coasting in the snow down Water Hill and, one summer,
constructed a large raft on which we had poled down the Assabet River in Hudson,
Mass. Humphrey had the largest collection of comic books I had ever seen (''Yogi
Berra reads nothing but comic books,'' he once said). I swapped him my ''Classic
Comics'' (''Lorna Doone,'' ''Moby Dick'') for his horror comics - ''Tales from
the Crypt,'' they were called, about ghouls and cannibalism in towns much like
Medford.

Humphrey said, ''Look, there's Goose!'' and went to hug him.  Oscar (Goose)
Goings was black. He wore a powder-blue jumpsuit and carried a sheaf of papers.
Throughout high school, Goose had said, ''I'm going to be a leatherneck when I
get out of here,'' and for 20 years, whenever I heard the word ''leatherneck,''
I thought of Goose. But Goose took me aside and said that in the end he had
decided against the Marines. ''I've been writing poetry,'' he said. ''Let me
know what you think of this one.'' He pushed a folded sheet of paper into my
pocket.

The room was jammed. Humphrey and Goose squirmed toward the bar and left me
buying coupons for drinks. Fishing for my money, I pulled out Goose's poem.
''What's wrong with being black?'' it said. ''I'll tell you -nothing!'' There
was more, but in the crush of people I could not read further. There had been
574 in the class of '59; there were close to 300 people in the room, mostly
graduates, a scattering of spouses - the non-Medford spouses were the stunned,
disbelieving ones wearing rigid smiles. With my coupons in my hand, I headed for
the bar. A woman I knew as Jeanne Ventresco said to me, ''Buy me a drink, you
freak,'' and ''Why are you talking funny like that?'' And here was Chris Cunha.
He had just flown in from Hawaii, where he was in the service. He said he was
retiring. Retir-ing? At the age of 38? He said, ''I've done 20 years.''

A man I shall call Richard Twanky was retiring, too. He was in Army Intelligence
and had, he said, been on missions throughout Southeast Asia. ''Tank,'' we
called him in high school, but the name was far more apt now: he must have
weighed close to 300 pounds. He was retiring to start a detective agency. My
memory of Twanky was an early one. After school - this was the Swan School: we
were 10 years old - we used to cut through the railway yard near Riverside
Avenue and hop the trains while they shunted. Twanky asked me if I had seen John

Brodie. I hadn't - not for 20 years.  ''Remember the toads?'' he said.  Brodie,
Twanky and I spent the fifth and sixth grades catching toads along the railway
line, where they lived in the ditches. We lugged them away in buckets to carry
out obscure dissections. Twanky said Brodie had become a teacher.

A familiar figure appeared. He crunched my hand and said, ''Your father always
told me I'd make a good cop.'' This was Paul (Augie) Agostino, the wild man of
Fulton Heights. True to my father's prediction, he had become a policeman, but
he had retired early, with a disability.

''Stick any frogs lately?'' he said.  I said no, but remembered. It was Augie
who had showed me how to spear a frog with a sharpened stick. We did it after
dark on summer nights at Wright's Pond, on the feeble pretext of earning a merit
badge. We were Boy Scouts.

Augie was elbowed aside by a man unmistakably Pete Thompson, as cherubic in
adulthood as he had been in childhood. But his innocent look was misleading: He
was a crack shot and owned an arsenal of guns.

''You still got that old Mossberg repeater?'' ''I sold it,'' I said.  Thompson
was now speaking to another classmate. ''We had these .22's. We used to go to
Paul's house and shoot out of his bedroom window. Squirrels, pigeons, anything
that moved - bam! bam!''

Besides Thompson and Twanky, there were Trotta, Terranova, Tartachny, Trebino.
Why were they more vivid to me now than the others? Because they had been in my
homeroom, at the end of the alphabet.

There is a bad dream which everyone suffers. It takes place in a large,
overbright room filled with people going, ''Quack! Quack!'' You know every
person in the room, and it seems incredible, because there are so many, big and
small. Your whole populous past has assembled for a long night to torment you. I
often get these dreams in distant places. I had them in Africa and Singapore,
the Medford dreams in the tropical early morning.

The years fall away. The smallest figure in the corner has a name; a person's
back, another's ears, buck teeth, crew cut - it is all familiar. Face after face
appears, most of them laughing and perspiring and poking fun. You wonder: What's
the occasion? They know you better than anyone, and though you have only been
subtly scrutinized, you wake up feeling naked, because you have been judged. You
have been reminded of what you are.

We like to think we have secrets. Childhood and early youth are full of them.
Time passes, and the secrets are lost to us. But the high-school reunion
disinters the past and rehashes it, like that dream: Decades are made into a few
hours. If it were not so brief it would be a nightmare. But it happens so
quickly it is painless, and yet a shock, for no one changes so much that he
becomes unrecognizable to his childhood friends. What shocked me there at the
Hilton Inn, among the class of '59, was the fact that I had kept my secrets so
well they had become practically undiscoverable to me, and if I had not gone to
the reunion I would never have known how I had made my childhood and high-school
days into a fiction.

It was not only the guns, the frog-sticking, or Humphrey's raft.  Here was
Patrick Shea reminding me of the time we made a canvas canoe, pushed it over a
high steel fence at Spot Pond and paddled like mad to an island in the center.
This was illegal: It was a reservoir -drinking water! There were mounted police
patrolling the bridle paths, but we escaped getting caught, and even urinated
contemptuously into the reservoir before we made off with our canoe.  Was this a
youthful lark? No, not so youthful. I was about 16 and should have known better.
My older brothers said I ought to take up basketball.

For 20 years, until the reunion, these high-school days had receded and become
distorted in a haze that made retrospection bearable. I saw myself as
bespectacled and bookish, a bit of a shut-in, boning up for the Science Fair. As
the years passed, I concocted a version of high school which was an intellectual
preparation for becoming a writer. The version continued to elude me: I could
never quite pin down how it had happened. I had done very little writing in high
school, apart from the required essays about ''Julius Caesar'' and my
''project'' on Piltdown man (the Piltdown hoax went on hoaxing Medford, long
after it was exposed in academic circles). I did not edit the school magazine
(the boy who did took up television production), and contributed only cartoons
to the yearbook. And - weirdest revelation of all - I never threw a ball or
swung a bat. In 12 years of school, I never joined a single team, wore an
athlete's uniform, or competed in a sport. Even now, sports bore me stiff, with
their bogus drama, their ill will and their shouts. I have never sat through an
entire baseball game.

Medford custom paired the cheerleader with the athlete in romance: They fell in
love, they married. At the reunion, I could see that these marriages worked,
apparently. Paul King had married Judy Wallace, Joe Raffin had married Pat
Gawlinski, Sonny Rossi had married Maureen Hurford, Wes Foote had married Linda
Rice. The hockey player Dom DeVincenzo had married Jean Bordonaro. The
quarterback Angelo Marotta had married Louise Carpenito. Every wife a
cheerleader! Every husband a jock! The girls had been trained from a very early
age to root for boys. I searched the yearbook in vain for pictures of girls'
sports teams -20 years later, their absence seemed the cruelest anomaly. But at
Medford High, girls cheered, boys played - and I had done neither. The only
thing worse than not being a jock was agreeing to be a water boy. Well, at least
I had escaped that.

Your intellectual upbringing - the pompous but kindly meant phrase has been used
in questions put to me by people interested in how I became a writer. For 20
years, I tried to account for my choice of this profession. I mentioned books I
had read in high school. But the books I read in high school had not made me a
writer (and if they had, they would have made me a bad writer). I read S.J.
Perelman and J.D. Salinger for laughs, John O'Hara for sex, and pored much more
seriously over the L.L. Bean catalogue, which advertised tents, hand warmers and
snowshoes. So: what intellectual upbringing? Television, radio, comic books,
camping manuals and The American Rifleman? I didn't play baseball and wasn't
interested in electronics. That ought to have left me with plenty of time for
the library but, in fact, I chose guns, bombs and fires.

At least three men at this high-school reunion reminded me of how we had made
bombs. The bombs were simple and powerful - powdered zinc and sulfur sealed in a
tube - but the detonators required ingenuity, a number of different wires of
varying thicknesses and a transformer adapted from a set of model trains. The
bombs were buried in my backyard: Each one blew three cubic feet of Medford
sky-high. It was very satisfying, thrilling even, and I still have scars on my
right hand from one - it was my last one - which went off prematurely. Some fool
had left the juice on.

What else was there? Yes, Richie Collins said, once we skinned a tomcat and
boiled the corpse, hoping to reassemble the bones. But the stink of the stewing
cat was so godawful we abandoned the project.

Other people's memories were fresher than mine. I prowled the ballroom
button-holing my old pals, and I was told how we had gone swimming bollocky - it
was the Medford word for skinny-dipping - at Pickerel Rock, set grass fires at
the Sheepfold, and fished through the ice at Wright's Pond. In those days, my
heroes were sharpshooters and pool sharks, and I had a sneaking admiration for
Willie Sutton, ''the man with a thousand faces,'' who was a crook.

School was a tedious punishment. It seemed slow and pointless and inescapable.
The subjects were surprisingly easy, the discipline hard and humorless. I was
amazed then - I am amazed now - that I did not do well. Perhaps I was afraid of
the enemies that kind of excellence would have made me. Good, conscientious
students were somewhat despised by us. They were collaborators, future
Rotarians; they weren't interested in beating the system.

''There's Vic Garo,'' Humphrey said at the reunion. He sounded sourly
triumphant. ''He never missed a day of school. They mentioned it at graduation.
Remember? He still looks like a pineapple.''

Everyone in the room was 38 years old. The effect was odd and improbable; we
were like obscure cultists, or members of a secret society. Some of the men had
gone gray, a few were totally bald.  Physically, the men had changed most. A
girl of 17 or 18 has reached her full growth, so these women were roughly the
same size as they had been in high school, and many were still pretty, even
glamorous.  Nearly all the men were bigger than they had been when I had last
seen them, in June 1959. They were full-faced, bearded, mustached, lined -
older-looking than the women - and taller. Some were enormously fat; no woman
was. Each conversation was penetrated by unspoken self-scrutiny, the nagging
thought: Do I look like you?

The few hundred who were missing, someone said, must have stayed away because
they thought they were physically repulsive: men and women who could not bear to
disappoint their old friends who remembered them as handsome and agile. There is
a kind of distress that changes people, too, more than time or bad food does - a
slight agony, a hint of despair, the abrasion of grief; no one here looked
desperate. And there is snobbery. Six members of the class of '59 had gone to
Harvard; only one turned up at the reunion. He said to me, ''I didn't expect to
see you here,'' and he spoke to me in a faintly conspiratorial way, as if we did
not belong in this mob. His impertinence was in talking about the present. It
was bad form. We were here to toast the past and to celebrate the fact that we
were still alive.

Many I had met at the age of 7, in the first grade. Not only Humphrey and
Twanky, but Tom Drohan, who remembered beating me in a spelling bee at the
Washington School, and Linda Rice, my first girlfriend. What a land of lost
content, but there was a new contentment now, and at last I could say to the
girl I had taken to the prom, ''Do you know how badly I wanted to go to bed with
you?''

Twenty years ago we had all been innocent - or most of us. Kissing was themost
that any of us had done. I did not sleep with a girl until I was 19, and when I
mentioned this at the reunion it turned out that this was the age when most of
the others had begun. Sex, unlike most other sins, was inconvenient for the
urban high-school student in the 50's: You needed a car, you needed money, you
needed a place to go, and most of all you needed a willing partner. She does it!
we used to whisper, but we regarded such girls as priestesses, and we were
implausible and timid. For that generation, sex was a harrowing bargain,
implying penalties and vows. It was not shameful, but it was horribly serious.
Most of us went without and suffered, and now feel an envious admiration for the
young, who have been spared all this longing. The great difference on this
reunion night was a new look of experience on the faces of these old friends.
The look of experience is slightly weary, a wince that is both sheepish and
knowing, and it is practically indistinguishable from a look of disappointment.

We were now, in the best sense, shameless. We could not kid anyone, but also -
now - sex between us was as unthinkable as incest. We knew each other too well
to be able to play the sexual game with any spirit of conviction. We had grown
up in postwar dreariness and repression, expecting a cataclysm. The cataclysm
came: After high school, everything happened - Vietnam, ban the bomb, drugs,
race riots, casual sex, Black Panthers, the John Birch Society, draft-card
burning, Nixon, political assassinations and junk food. No wonder we looked
weary. In 12 years of school, the only world event that impressed me was
Sputnik: Nothing else mattered. It had been a busy two decades since, but now
things were much as before - indeed, the rock-and-roll we had listened to in
1959 was back in vogue: Buddy Holly, Elvis, Chuck Berry, Little Richard and Bo
Diddley.

There was a banquet, but that was no more than a hectic interval of yammering
and face-searching; and then prizes - Cunha and I got bottles of wine for having
traveled so far. Someone - no one was quite sure of his name -got a bottle for
having fathered eight children. Walter Buckley said it ought to have been a
bottle of Geritol.

The class members we had spotted as future Rotarians had become Rotarians. Most,
it seemed, had been on course from the start: Paul Chalmers, the class
president, was a businessman in Seattle; Marotta had been the Mayor of Medford;
Paul Donato was Deputy Mayor. Paul Kaloostian, a bagger in his father's grocery
store, now owned a string of supermarkets. (''Ever go to Armenia?'' he asked me.
''If you do, let me know what it's like.'') Position had come naturally to most:
The saloon, the Dunkin' Donuts franchise, the Toyota dealership - they had been
preordained. Jean MacSweeney, one of the literate among us (lovely handwriting,
a good speller), said she owned ''a bunch of newspapers.'' Pete Thompson, whose
father was a truck driver, now ran a fleet of trucks, and Pat Shea, my fishing
friend and fellow canoe builder, owned a bait shop. Many had become teachers. It
was perhaps the last high-school generation that went willy-nilly into
high-school teaching: It was respectable, it was a familiar routine, and the
jobs were still available.

What about our own teachers? Few people mentioned them, because this was not a
night for churlishness (the mood of a high-school reunion is hilarious or
nostalgic; it is not stuffy, it is seldom sour -it is too late to settle old
scores). Our school had been run in an authoritarian way: no back talk, no sass,
no dungarees. The teachers were peevishly elderly - at least they seemed that
way to us -and they kept discipline but imparted little wisdom. They were too
busy for books. They were certainly underpaid, and some moonlighted on other
jobs. I thought of them in Dickensian terms. My Mr. Gradgrind worked at the race
track, but we regarded this as stylish. Mr. Bounderby sometimes acted in Boston
plays -he was Hickey in ''The Iceman Cometh'' - but by the time we graduated he
was a failed actor and had taken to drink. Mr. Squeers (who swore to us that
Sacco and Vanzetti were guilty) carried a hip flask. There was a teacher who had
a wooden leg, and I recall that at the end of the afternoon he used to lean back
in his swivel chair and rest it on his desk: I can see the yellow polished wood,
and the bolts on his calf.  Miss M'Choakumchild, the guidance counselor,
shrieked at me once (I was 17), ''You'll never go to college - you'll never get
in! You're not going anywhere!'' And another teacher said to me sorrowfully,
''Why do you run around with Berkowitz - why do you always pick up the lame and
the halt?'' These teachers had lived in another age; the two qualities they
valued in education were silence and order. They were willfully uninspiring.

None of us at the reunion had had a poor high-school education, but for all of
us it had been mediocre - nonintellectual rather than anti-intellectual. It had
been decent, social, sporty, strict, but that bookworm image I'd had of myself
had been inaccurate. Meeting these people, all of whom were pushing 40, reminded
me of all those idly spent years - no goals scored, no girls slept with, no
books read, nothing achieved but a prize at the Science Fair - the toadhunting
and frog-sticking had paid off in a small way. Who had I been all those years
ago? The answer was easy, and at last I could find it bearable: I had been a
punk.

I think I am an optimistic person, but that night, going home to my house on the
Cape, I had a hollow feeling. Things had not seemed so black since high school.
What is going to happen to me? I used to think. I had wanted to write without
knowing why. I did not have the courage to say I was going to be a writer. A
doctor, a teacher, a forest ranger - it did not seem to matter what I said,
because it would never happen. I knew only one thing for sure. It was this:
Nothing will happen to me in Medford - worse, I will fail here. High school was
proof of that. Was my brain teeming with schemes and fantasies? I think it was.
I had a riotous imagination, but even that worried me into secrecy, for I
certainly had not used it. Going home now was like going home from high school,
and it provoked the same reflection: We are all riding into the dark, alone.

An October mist hung over the Cape. It was late. We had stayed up drinking and
talking until 3 A.M. Now I passed a watching raccoon at the roadside. Twenty
years ago I would have wanted to put a bullet between his bright yellow eyes.
Dead leaves lay thick on the road; there was no other car here to scatter them.
I was lonelier than I had been for years. But that was how I had felt in high
school - impatient and a bit lost and mournfully horny. In high school, I was
still ungrown, with my homemade bombs and my gun and a horror of adulthood. The
reunion was a celebration of youth and the violent innocence that had been in
me. I had been right to be fearful in 1959, for I had not known - how could I? -
that my education was about to begin. I had good friends, but I was nagged by
the thought that the world was elsewhere. I left Medford the first chance I had,
and Medford became part of the dark beyond as I converted my memories into
fiction. Writing allowed me to stay away, but I

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paul Theroux and high school classmates photo
of Paul Theroux

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REALITY IS A MAGNET IN WILMINGTON,N.C.

SECTION: Section 10; Page 1, Column 4; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2530 words


-------------------------------------------------------------------- STEVEN V.
ROBERTS is a reporter in the Washington bureau of The New York Times.

By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

Some years ago a group of public-spirited citizens rescued the battleship North
Carolina from the scrap heap in Bayonne, N.J., and raised enough money to give
it a permanent berth as a tourist attraction in Wilmington, N.C. We were
clambering over this enormous floating arsenal one day when my 11-year-old son,
Lee, paused for a moment beside a massive gun turret. ''This is not a replica of
a ship,'' he said with considerable awe. ''It was actually used.''

Lee's comment summed up my feelings about Wilmington, an old port town of 60,000
people on the Cape Fear River in the extreme southeast corner of the Tarheel
state. In these days of re-creations and simulations, when so many children
equate the works of Walt Disney with actual history, it is a good feeling to
walk the streets of a town where real events took place, a town that was
actually used for living and fighting and dying.

Other Southern cities are much better known as tourist destinations -Charleston,
Savannah, New Orleans. But Wilmington is different from its glittering, drawling
sisters. It was never a center of high society or high finance, just a
provincial trading town with few airs or pretensions. And much of that workaday
heritage has been preserved in the old downtown area: the former Cotton
Exchange, now a complex of shops and restaurants; rambling antebellum houses
with wide porches and creaking rockers, a wharf where old tugboats and coastal
steamers bob gently in graceful retirement.

Just across the river looms the battleship, and within half an hour's drive the
traveler can visit historic plantations, Civil War forts, an abandoned
Revolutionary War village and a marine research center. When the history hangs a
bit heavily, the area also offers a wide variety of beaches, fishing piers, golf
courses and tennis courts.

Fall is a particularly good time to visit, since the absence of summer heat and
summer crowds makes walking tours that much more pleasant. In addition, the
swimming is good through October, while tennis and golf - there are 11 courses
in a 30-mile radius - are available year-round. Fall fishing is also productive,
with king mackerel a local favorite during the cooler months.

Wilmington makes a good stopover on any trip between Northern cities and
Southern sun, lying only an hour's drive east of Interstate 95. It also makes a
day's outing for visitors to Myrtle Beach, S.C., or any of the North Carolina
beaches south of Cape Hatteras.

We started our tour one day at the Cotton Exchange, a massive pile of bricks
facing the waterfront, which once served as warehouse and business office for
the thriving concern of Alexander Sprunt & Co., cotton merchants. The exchange
has been converted into a three-story arcade, linked by a network of sometimes
confusing stairs, but elevators are available. Scattered throughout the complex
are dozens of small merchants selling just about anything but raw cotton, from
clothes and toys to baskets, pottery, silk flowers and original artwork. Like
the Cannery in San Francisco or the Flour Mill in Washington, the Exchange
demonstrates how old buildings can be preserved as economically productive
units, not just as museums.

A sign near the entrance says that the Wilmington area was first settled in
1664, with the first permanent denizens taking up residence in 1732. The
settlement was called New Carthage, New Liverpool and Newton before Wilmington,
the name of a British nobleman, finally stuck. The Sprunt company, the sign
adds, was once one of the world's largest cotton exporters, and the courtyards
are decorated with cotton bales and other relics of that once flourishing trade.
We were mainly interested in window-shopping and seeing the building, but our
9-year-old daughter, Rebecca, bought a set of dolls for her dollhouse at the
Cotton Pickin' Toy Shop. The $9 price, she said, was a real bargain.

After lunch at Cortley's, a sandwich shop on the ground floor of the Exchange,
we decided to take the historic-buildings tour. Each of five buildings on the
tour is staffed by guides, who take visitors through in small groups. Between
buildings visitors go at their own pace, and while it is possible to drive a
car, walking gives a better taste of the town; no distance is more than three or
four blocks. The fee is $1.50 for each of the buildings or $5 for all five.

The tour begins six blocks from the Cotton Exchange at Thalian Hall, a finely
restored theater that is really a wing of City Hall.  As we sat in the front row
- with a baroque fantasy of plaster rosettes and curliques decorating every
available surface - the guide told us that Thalian Hall was the third oldest
theater in continuous use in the country. The Thalian Society organized plays
there as early as 1788, and the current building opened in 1858. Artists such as
Lillian Russell, Marian Anderson and John Philip Sousa have appeared there along
with generations of community players. Then came an introductory film narrated
by David Brinkley, a native son of Wilmington, and on our way out, we climbed up
to see the second balcony, where the original benches are still preserved. They
were used, we were told, as models for the reconstruction of Ford's Theater in
Washington, the site of Lincoln's assassination.

The three-block walk to the next tour stop took us past the Temple of Israel, a
Moorish-style synagogue with stained-glass windows founded in 1875, the oldest
in the state. Around the corner, in the graveyard of an Episcopal church, we
noticed the headstone of one Thomas Godfrey, the author of ''The Prince of
Parthia,'' said to be the first play written by an American to be produced in
the Colonies.

Another short stroll and we were at the Burgwin-Wright House, built in 1771 by a
wealthy Tory sympathizer named John Burgwin. For most of its life this elegant
mansion, with Greek Revival columns and broad verandas, served as a townhouse
for wealthy planters. But for 18 days in 1781, it was the headquarters of Lord
Cornwallis, the British general, who marched from there to the fateful battle at
Yorktown.

Colonial houses often contain some delightful devices we no longer use, and we
laughed when the guide explained the use of fire screens, small plaques attached
to poles, which shielded women's faces from the heat of the fire. In those days,
she said, women used wax as makeup, and their faces would start to melt if not
sufficiently protected. One chair had truncated arms - to accommmodate a woman's
hoop skirt; another was particularly low - so a man could take off his boots
more easily. A French-made quilt depicting a romantic view of Colonial life
showed tobacco growing on a tree.

The house was built on the foundation of an old jail, and a trap door led down
to the original dungeon. Unfortunately, the cell was not on the tour, but the
old kitchen - housed in a separate building - was. After the guide gave a short
demonstration of how to churn butter, my wife, Cokie, remarked, ''It was a
rotten time to be a woman, I'll tell you.''

Back on the street, I began to notice the tiny touches that give a city a
special air of style and grace: a black wrought-iron bracket set against a clear
blue sky, a gate post topped with a plaster pineapple, a traditional symbol of
hospitality; cane-seated rockers and handcrafted shutters, crepe myrtle in full
pink blossom, a chimney, a gate, a street lamp.

Time was short and we skipped the other three houses on the tour: the Zebulon
Latimer House, the 19th-century residence of a wealthy merchant built in the
Italian Revival style; the St. John's Art Gallery, erected in 1804 as a Masonic
Lodge, and the Governor Dudley Mansion, home of the state's first popularly
elected governor.  Instead, we walked to Chandler's Wharf - or Warf, as it is
spelled there - an old dockside area five blocks from the Burgwin-Wright House.
The wharf has been renovated to incorporate a small museum along with a few
shops and restaurants.

At the museum we learned that Wilmington was once the world's leading exporter
of tar, pitch and other naval stores, appropriate products for the main port of
the Tarheel state. Another exhibit displayed a bill for services rendered by the
port and included this item: ''dead passengers.'' I guess sea journeys were a
bit rougher in those days.

Outside on the river, Chandler's Wharf charges a $2 entrance fee and provides
berths for half a dozen old ships; like the rest of the city, they are built for
work, not leisure, and most of them can be boarded for a closer look. The John
Taxis, for instance, is said to be one of the oldest tugboats in existence, and
a well-weathered skipjack represents an even rarer breed: these craft still work
under sail, dredging oysters in Chesapeake Bay. The biggest member of the ghost
fleet is the Harry W. Adams, a knockabout schooner built to ferry freight along
the Atlantic coast or fish the Newfoundland banks. A recorded message on board
describes what the crew ate and where it slept.

On an earlier trip we visited the North Carolina ($2 for adults, $1 for
children), docked just across the Cape Fear River from Chandler's Wharf,
accessible by driving 10 minutes across a nearby bridge. We were all overwhelmed
by its gargantuan proportions, and as Becca gazed at a huge bronze propeller she
said, ''That really scares you; it's so powerful.''

We were allowed into the turrets of the huge 16-inch guns, and I was surprised
when a recorded message said that the shells had been aimed by computers; I did
not know that computers played a role in World War II. And yet the monstrous
guns were basically breechloading rifles that worked about the same way as Civil
War weapons.

One of my favorite parts of the ship was the galley, with rolling pins the size
of baseball bats and flour mixers that looked as if they had fallen off cement
trucks. On the wall a recipe for pound cake called for 30 pounds of flour.
Yield: 800 portions. A normal shopping list for the North Carolina, which served
eight million meals during World War II, included 8,400 dozen eggs.

The best room was the post office. A photo on the wall showed crew members
lining up for mail call, and behind the patchy mustaches and fresh tattoos I
could see the faces of very young men - boys, really - off to fight a war in the
belly of this great whale they called a battleship. On the wall was a letter
from a girl to a crewman dated Aug. 27, 1943. It began, ''Dear Bill, I'm sorry
if I have slipped up on my writing ...'' It described a weekend trip to a lake
in Maine, a bicycle ride, a swim, a summer's day. Unfinished thoughts crowded
in: Did Bill survive the war? Did he marry the girl? Do their kids ride bikes
around lakes in Maine?

The tour again gave me, a child of the Vietnam era, a sense that World War II
had been a heroic war, a good war, even a romantic war.  A recruiting poster in
one corridor urged, ''Don't read American history. Make it.'' And in the
wireless room, the wall was papered with a few of the telegrams that had been
received during the war.  One read: ''Getting married tonight. Will leave 24
Dec. Request 5 days extension. R.E. Phillips.'' Where have you gone, R.E.
Phillips?

In the afternoon we took U.S. 421 south from Wilmington along the river toward
the ocean. Wilmington had been the last port open to the Confederacy during the
Civil War, largely because the Cape Fear River provided excellent cover for
ships running the Union blockade, and the entrance was guarded by a massive
series of earthwork fortifications called Fort Fisher. About 10 miles south of
the city we visited a small museum ($1.50 entrance fee) devoted to the story of
the blockade runners and the eventual fall of Fort Fisher after the most
intensive naval bombardment in the history of warfare up to that time.

What struck me most is that the blockade runners were depicted as heroes, not as
gray-clad bigots - their usual role in Northern schools. I realized how much of
our history has been written from the biased viewpoint of the Civil War victors,
and when the narration of the museum's slide show ended with a reference to
''the Southern cause,'' Cokie laughed. ''It's been a long time since I heard
that,'' said my wife, the descendant of a Confederate officer who surrendered
six weeks after Lee's surrender at Appomattox Court House.

Five miles farther south we came to the remains of Fort Fisher, where a few
fortifications and a visitor center mark the spot where the last supply line of
the Confederacy was choked off on Jan. 15, 1865. Not much is left, but it is a
pretty walk along the man-made embankment that once defended the river.

Nearby, the State of North Carolina has built a marine museum and resources
center, and the aquarium offers a fascinating collection of sea creatures. The
octopus, slithering and sliding around its pool, attracted a fan club all its
own. We also heard a lecture about beach erosion, which introduced a new term to
my vocabulary: New Jerseyization. Apparently this is used by marine engineers to
refer to efforts to halt erosion, such as seawalls and jetties, which only make
matters worse.

Even two days is not enough to see everything in the Wilmington area. On a
previous trip we visited Brunswick, the remains of an early 18th-century town on
the opposite shore of the Cape Fear River from Fort Fisher. I particularly liked
the nature trail at Brunswick, which runs through some interesting swamp. This
is one of the few natural habitats for the Venus flytrap, a plant that eats
insects.

Near Brunswick, about half an hour's drive from Wilmington, stands Orton
Plantation and its vast formal gardens. The springtime azaleas are the stars of
the show, but the gardens are open all year.  Northeast of the city visitors can
also tour Airlie Gardens, known for camellias, oak-shaded avenues and the
ubiquitous azaleas.  Visitors are not allowed into the main house - for a good
reason.  Like the rest of Wilmington, Airlie is no replica; it is still used as
a private residence. Something is in bloom all year, and among the fall blossoms
are crepe myrtle and water lillies along with end-of-thesummer annuals.
Camellias arrive by January, and wisteria and azaleas are in bloom by March.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MIDEAST CONFLICT EXPECTED TO DOMINATE ASSEMBLY SESSION

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 933 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 14


The continuing crisis in the Middle East is expected to dominate debate at the
35th annual meeting of the General Assembly that opens here Tuesday.  Almost all
the 154 nations that will be represented are expected to criticize, in tones
from shrill to restrained, what they regard as Israel's aggressive behavior and
stubborn refusal to allay the grievances of Palestinian Arabs. Western Europe
has now joined Asia, Africa, Latin America and the Soviet bloc in repeatedly
condemning Israeli settlements in territories seized during the 1967 war,
Israeli assaults on bases of the Palestine Liberation Organization in southern
Lebanon and Israel's formalizing its annexation of the Arab sector of Jerusalem.


Talk of Expelling the Israelis

There is widespread recognition, however, that Israel is far more likely to be
influenced by the United States, its principal military and economic backer,
than by any words said here. Diplomats also believe that there is no prospect of
any change in Washington's policy until after the Presidential election on Nov.
4.

Some Arab nations have talked of expelling Israel from the Assembly. Syria, the
leader of the anti-Israeli Arab group, has already charged that Israel's
''continued defiance'' of United Nations resolutions makes it ineligible to sit
in the chamber.

But in private, Arab diplomats say that talk of expulsion is an empty threat.
Reaction in the United States would be so strong, they believe, that the world
body itself could be paralyzed by some form of American boycott. Moreover, many
Arab countries believe that President Carter, if he is re-elected, or even
Ronald Reagan, if he is elected President, would be less subject to domestic
pressure and might urge Israel to adopt a more conciliatory line toward Arab
claims. Forcing Israel from the Assembly, these diplomats believe, would doom
any possible change in the American stance.

Nov. 15 Will Be Crucial Date

Envoys in all camps believe that the oratorical onslaught against Israel will
begin in earnest around Nov. 15, the date set at an emergency Assembly session
in July for Israel to abandon its settlements. The Security Council has chosen
the same date for Secretary General Kurt Waldheim to report on the effects of
another resolution insisting that Israel repeal its new law formalizing its
annexation of East Jerusalem and making the ''united'' city its capital.

Another perennial United Nations target, South Africa, is also scheduled for the
usual criticism of its racial policies and its failure to fix a date for a
United Nations-sponsored election in South-West Africa. Black African nations
are particularly angry over what they regard as South Africa's deliberate
attempts to delay a vote that would make South-West Africa the independent
nation of Namibia. South Africa insists that it is not stalling and that it
accepts the vote in principle. But it says it wants assurances that the United
Nations will not throw the election to the guerrillas of the South-West Africa
People's Organization.

Debate Likely Over Cambodia

Some of the liveliest debates are expected to deal with charges of aggression by
Communist states. An early debate is likely over who shall represent Cambodia at
the United Nations. China, the United States, an alliance of non-Communist
countries in Southeast Asia and others will continue to back the ousted Pol Pot
regime despite its record of atrocities. The Pol Pot group is supported on the
ground that its successor, led by Heng Samrin, was installed by Vietnam when
that country invaded Cambodia last year.

A Southeast Asian delegate predicts that the seat will be awarded to the Pol Pot
regime, but only for one more year. The fact that Mr.  Heng Samrin's Government
rules most of the country will persuade an increasing number of states to accept
an accomplished fact, it is believed.

The Assembly is expected to call again for the withdrawal of Vietnam's troops.
It is also scheduled to condemn the Soviet Union's military intervention in
Afghanistan. Both resolutions would irritate Moscow and demonstrate that it
cannot count on unwavering support from the third world. But apart from the
embarrassment, the Soviet Union is not likely to suffer much pain.

The Russians and their allies appear headed for another defeat over a vacant
Latin American seat on the Security Council. Cuba, chairman of the nations
professing themselves nonaligned, has announced it will fight Costa Rica for the
post. However, Havana is given little chance of winning the required two-thirds
vote.

154 Futile Ballots Fought in 1979

Last year, Cuba fought Colombia in 154 futile ballots before both yielded to
Mexico for the seat. Cuba is thought to have lost votes this year because of its
arbitrary conduct as leader of the nonaligned group. Among other tactics, Havana
has prevented the group from taking a position on Soviet conduct in Afghanistan.

Perhaps the most important work at the Assembly will take place in offices and
hotel suites outside the United Nations complex, where foreign ministers and
government chiefs will meet separately and privately. Secretary of State Edmund
S. Muskie has arranged meetings with more than 20 foreign ministers; among
others, he will see Andrei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union to discuss the
reduction of nuclear weapons in Europe. The Foreign Ministers of Thailand and
Vietnam are also scheduled to meet over their differences in Cambodia.

The Assembly will expand to l54 members when St. Vincent and the Grenadines,
islands in the Caribbean, are admitted to the world body.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodia Announces Plan To Hold General Election

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 68 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 14


Cambodia will hold a general election next year, the Phnom Penh press agency SPK
reported.  Yesterday's announcement by the agency was reported today without
comment by Hanoi radio. The Vietnam News Agency said the decision to hold the
election early in 1981 was made by the ruling National United Front for the
Salvation of Kampuchea and the People's Revolutionary Council. It gave no
further details.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

McGOVERN IN NEW BATTLE - FOR SURVIVAL

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: HURON, S.D., Sept. 12


He ran for President once. The television crews came around, then, and the
police escorts and the cheering crowds.

Then he lost. The scent of power vanished as fast as it had come.  And now,
eight years later, he was back home, walking the streets and shaking the hands
and making the small talk, practically alone, a figure out of history trying to
win one more chunk of the future.

Senator George McGovern is running hard for re-election, very hard. By his own
description, he is the ''juiciest target'' of the wellfinanced and
well-organized conservative attacks aimed at liberal Democratic senators around
the country. And party officials in Washington say he is probably the most
vulnerable of all the Democrats up for re-election this year, an unrepentant
liberal in a relentlessly conservative state, a man who has never had an easy
election in 24 years of public life.

Moreover, his opponent, Representative James Abdnor, is a fourterm Congressman
with a solidly conservative voting record, few legislative accomplishments and
virtually no enemies. ''Abdnor's a nice guy,'' said Roger Kasa, managing editor
of The Huron Daily Plainsman. ''And a lot of people here have the impression
that there are not many nice guys left in politics.''

Prospects Appear to Brighten

But in recent days, things have been looking up for South Dakota's senior
Senator. Even Republicans concede that the conservative assaults, including
charges that he is antifamily, have started to backfire. And Mr. McGovern has
been campaigning steadily, pounding home his message that this small, rural
state needs a man with his influence and savvy to protect them in Washington.

If the election was held today, even the McGovern forces agree that they would
probably lose. But they are increasingly confident that when Election Day comes,
their hero will sneak in once again.  ''McGovern's been an effective Senator,
and people recognize that,'' said Mr. Kasa, the editor. ''He may be liberal, but
he's a South Dakotan.''

This recent upturn in Mr. McGovern's fortunes comes after a long, steady diet of
bad news. The Republican Senatorial Campaign Committee placed the Senator at the
top of its list of candidates whose defeat it is seeking, and several
independent committees, led by the National Conservative Political Action
Committee, based in Virginia, have flooded the state with anti-McGovern
propaganda.

The charges vary, ranging from accusations that the Senator is prowelfare and
pro-abortion to allegations that he is against a strong military, but the
message never changes: George McGovern is out of step with his people. As Lieut.
Gov. Lowell Hansen, a Republican, summed up the campaign, ''McGovern is a great
Senator, but he represents the people of Massachusetts, not South Dakota.''

Kept on the Defensive

''I think it was really effective,'' said Mr. McGovern, as he took a break from
his campaign at his local headquarters, an ancient and long-shuttered hospital.
''They created so much suspicion and resentment that I was constantly thrown on
the defensive.''

But the charges also made him indignant, and now he is fighting back. For one
thing, he tells audiences, it is hard to label him the ''antifamily'' candidate,
when he is the father of five children, and the grandfather of four, while his
opponent is a lifelong bachelor.

''They come in with such self-righteous arrogance,'' he said.  ''These people
who are putting out the right-to-life issue; they act like God has revealed
himself to them and to them alone.''

Mr. McGovern, the son of a Methodist minister, was reared in Mitchell, only 30
miles of corn-growing prairie from here, and was nurtured on a populist
tradition, in which many Protestant churches preached the ''social gospel'' of
progressive ideals. And He is particularly resentful of the conservative
evangelical preachers who have also joined the campaign against him.

''The right wing is at war with the whole Judeo-Christian ethic,'' he said, ''in
the sense that they're against feeding the hungry, against health care for the
afflicted, against housing for the needy.''

The Senator's critics often accuse him of having lost touch with South Dakota.
But he can still go into a meeting at the local power company and greet many of
the officials by name and talk about the old days. ''He's just George to a lot
of people,'' said Everett Hoyt, a lawyer for the power company.

Mr. McGovern argues that he was sent to Washington to use his judgment, and if
he had always listened to his constituents, he would never have led the
opposition to the Vietnam War. But the war is history now, along with the vision
of the White House that shimmered just beyond the Senator's grasp. Now he is
''just George,'' trying to beat the odds one more time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Sen. George McGovern

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 974 words


By John Leonard
THE AMERICAN ESTABLISHMENT. By Leonard and Mark Silk. 351 pages.  Basic. $13.95.

LEONARD SILK, economic-affairs columnist for The New York Times, and his son
Mark, a teaching fellow in history at Harvard University, don't enjoy themselves
quite as much as they might have in their breezy account of such ''secular
churches'' as Harvard, The New York Times, the Foundations of Ford and
Rockefeller, the Institution of Brookings, the Institute and Endowment and Hall
of Carnegie, the Council on Foreign Relations, the Trilateral Commission, Henry
L. Stimson and David Rockefeller and Franklin Thomas. It is as if the Silks
haven't decided how seriously we ought to take the American Establishment,
although they agree that it exists.

Their book, then, falls somewhere between Richard Rovere's 1961 Esquire essay,
which giggled at the Establishment, and C. Wright Mills's 1956 polemic ''The
Power Elite,'' which gagged on it. The Silks are inclined to walk around the
Establishment and poke it with a stick; as a result, flocks of multicolored
anecdotes rise into the air on flapping wings, and, occasionally, a bee stings.

'Class of Moralists'

What is the Establishment? It is not, in this country, ecclesiastical, although
it had its origins in Protestantism and, in particular, Unitarianism at Harvard.
But it is ''a new class of moralists'' whose function since the 1800's has been
''not to preach or exhort, but to investigate reality, to seek insight, and to
elucidate the good.'' Unlike the establishments of Europe, the American version
brings together intellectuals ''under the benevolent governance of business
rather than that of the State.'' Indeed, its aspiration is to play ''a mediating
and guiding role between the contending forces of democracy and capitalism.''

Big business, in fact, is the bias and the sinew of this book. The pages come
alive when the Silks are talking about an Andrew Carnegie, who put his money
where his mouth was; or a John D. Rockefeller, who didn't know what to do with
his money, or a Robert S. Brookings, who made a fortune in woodenware and
cordage, sang in the St. Louis Choral Society, decamped for a year in Berlin to
study philosophy and the violin and abandoned gentleman farming for the
education of Washington bureaucrats.

These men in the end wanted to do good, and did some. They wanted to quiet the
unruly populists, and succeeded. The capitalism with which they were acquainted
was corporate, which perhaps explains the resentment of them - of Wall Street
and the big banks - by smalland medium-size businessmen west of the Hudson and
south of Chicago. That resentment, as the Silks point out, expressed itself in
the Presidential nomination of Barry Goldwater. Wall Street had an easier time
getting its message across to the universities, from which it borrowed experts
and for which it endowed chairs and built buildings, than to the bumptious
Babbitts. What do you mean, Keynes?  And what's wrong with isolationism?

So the bankers invited the professors to lunch, probably at the Century Club.
The Establishment learned, rather slowly, that it had to be inclusive, which
meant an occasional Jew, preferably German, a sprinkling of blacks and
eventually a woman. The Silks are wonderful on this accommodation process, those
nasty quotas at Harvard, the attitude of Henry Ford toward persons of the female
persuasion and so on. They are equally good on the revolving door between the
Establishment and government. Jimmy Carter an ''outsider,'' on achieving the
Presidency gave jobs in his administration to 40 percent of the Trilateral
Commission, in spite of the fact that Hamilton Jordan assured us that ''if,
after the inauguration, you find Cy Vance as Secretary of State and Zbigniew
Brzezinski as head of national security, then I would say we have failed.''

An establishment, any establishment, must also accommodate itself to the
passions and prejudices of mere citizens. Thus, in the late 60's and early 70's,
the Establishment turned against the war in Vietnam and the Ford Foundation was
encouraging community control of the schools in black neighborhoods. According
to the Silks, after this sinister tilt, the Establishment has now righted
itself. It may be able to accommodate Ronald Reagan. Harmony is all.

Children of the Zeitgeist

I am sorry that the Silks, arbitrarily, chose not to consider this same
Establishment as it fiddles with culture as well as politics. A look at the
boards of directors of museums and theater groups and the National Endowment for
the Arts would turn up the same names, wearing the same three-piece suits. And I
wonder whether, given the many shifts in emphasis and ideology, we can count on
a consistent Establishment at all. Perhaps the Establishmentarians, like the
rest of us, are children of the Zeitgeist. Without coherence, can there be a
Mafia?

Meanwhile, the book has been fun. The Silks in their chapter on Harvard refer to
the controversy about Memorial Church in 1968. The church, dedicated to the
Harvard war dead, refused to allow a Jewish marriage. The Harvard Crimson ran an
outraged editorial, accompanied by a letter from a director of the Rockefeller
Foundation who was equally outraged. The writer of the editorial would become
the son-inlaw of the Rockefeller director, and is the same person who is writing
this book review. Do you see how it works?  a Mafia?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Leonard Silk

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GARWOOD LAWYER DISCLOSES DEFENSE WILL BE BASED ON PLEA OF INSANITY

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 368 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Sept. 15


Pfc. Robert R. Garwood of the Marine Corps will plead not guilty by reason of
insanity at his courtmartial later this month on charges of desertion and
collaboration with the enemy, his civilian attorney, Vaughan Taylor, said today.

Mr. Taylor said when Private Garwood was an infant he was dropped on his head in
an accident that led to mental illness.  Mr. Taylor said the defense would prove
that Private Garwood's actions during his 14 years in Vietnam had resulted from
a mental disease that was rooted in his childhood and set off by the pressures
on him while he was a prisoner of war. The attorney said when Private Garwood
was a child he was abandoned by his mother and reared by his grandmother.

Mr. Taylor announced plans for the defense as he presented a list of proposed
defense witnesses to Col. R.E. Switzer, the military judge.

Reason for Delay of Trial

Private Garwood's court-martial has been delayed until at least next Monday
because of an eye problem affliciting the chief defense lawyer, John C. Lowe.

''As a result of a mental disease, Private Garwood lacked substantial capacity
to recognize the criminality of his conduct and lacked substantial capacity to
conform his conduct to the precepts of law,'' Mr. Taylor said.

But Mr. Taylor stressed that, while using insanity as a defense, Private Garwood
was not admitting to any of the acts of which he is accused - such as informing
on and standing guard over American P.O.W.'s.

''We are not contending that Private Garwood was insane and turned himself over
to the Vietnamese,'' Mr. Taylor said. ''We maintain, and will always maintain,
that Private Garwood was captured while on an authorized mission.'' Mr. Taylor
said that Private Garwood had gone into ''fits and tirades'' on an airplane
returning him from Vietnam last year when he was told that both his mother and
grandmother had died while he was in Communist hands.

The defense has requested as a witness Francois Z. Ruffinen, a Red Cross
official who acted as an intermediary for Private Garwood's release. Private
Garwood's lawyers contend that Mr. Ruffinen, who is in Switzerland, could
testify that Private Garwood actually was a prisoner in North Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert Garwood

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 16, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS FO THE TIMES;
Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 903 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
AMAZONS. An Intimate Memoir by the First Woman Ever to Play in the Na- tional
Hockey League. By Cleo Bird- well. 390 pages. Holt, Rinehart & Win- ston.
$12.95.

NOT being much of a hockey fan, I thought for a couple of pages that Cleo
Birdwell's ''Amazons: An Intimate Memoir by the First Woman Ever to Play in the
National Hockey League'' was the real thing.  After all, why not? A woman has
played professional football - albeit for only one play - and another has
scrimmaged with major-league male basketball players. And there's Cleo Birdwell
in a New York Rangers uniform on the back advertisement of ''Amazons,'' looking
big and rawboned and every bit as tough as Anders Hedberg.

But the light began to dawn on me in the first few pages, when James Kinross,
president of Madison Square Garden, says to the author: ''Tell you the truth,
Birdwell, I hate hockey. You don't have a black or Hispanic element. It doesn't
reflect the urban reality.  Who wants to see two white guys hit each other? The
violence has no bite to it. It's not relevant. It doesn't reflect the streets,
and I come from the streets.'' Besides, I know that the Rangers don't have and
never had a general manager named Sanders Meade (Yale, class of '67), who is
rendered impotent by the mention of Watergate, Vietnam and Iran. Or an announcer
named Merle Halverson, who suffers from ''a swimming-pool-shaped kidney.'' Or a
coach with the name of Jean-Paul Larousse, who is periodically overcome by the
need to speak long hours of French to Cleo, even though she doesn't understand a
word of the language. Even I know that.

Agent and Lover

So, what is ''Amazons,'' if it isn't an actual memoir? It's a novel, obviously -
a novel about Cleo's first year with the Rangers.  ''Everyone said I made a
blazing entry into the N.H.L. They wrote about my honey blonde hair flying in
the breeze, my silver-skate blades flashing, my plucky work in the corners, my
style, my stamina, my milky blue eyes'' and ''the nightmare bruises on my downy
white thighs.''

It's about Cleo's agent, Floss Penrose, who lives to play strip Monopoly with a
tennis pro named Archie Brewster. (''If you've never had an affair that was
neurotically grounded in some basic way, you just haven't lived, Cleo. It is
better than incest. There is something primeval about the whole thing. It is
like an ancient biblical crime.'') And it's about Cleo's lover, particularly
Shaver Stevens, a former hockey star who suffers from a mysterious disease
called ''Jumping Frenchmen,'' which compels him to keep checking the soles of
his shoes and to do deep knee-bends.

Now I realize that none of the foregoing sounds particularly funny just lying
there in naked summary. Nor does the fact that Shaver consults a doctor named
Sidney Glass, who specializes in going on television talk shows and telling
audiences, ''We don't really know what disease is.'' Nor does the development in
which the Saudi Arabians take over the corporation that owns the Rangers and
reach a compromise whereby Cleo must wear a veil when she plays. (''In the team
colors, or strictly black?'' asks Cleo when she's told the news. ''Is my veil
washed with the other players' uniforms or is it sent out to a Moslem laundry?
Do I have a home veil and a road veil? How do I communicate with my teammates in
the heat of battle? Muffled shouts? Eye blinks?'')

But even if it doesn't sound funny, it is. Cleo Birdwell has a way with the
incongruous - which doesn't come as a surprise once you've learned that her name
is the nom de plume for Don DeLillo, the novelist (''End Zone,'' ''Ratner's
Star'' and ''Players''). She has this talent for grabbing cliches by the throat
and strangling them until they cough up meaning. She turns meaning inside out
and exposes its nonsense. The funniest and most poignant scene in the book is
the one in which she sexually stirs a sportswriter named Murray Jay Siskind by
describing the Christmas ritual in her home town of Badger, Ohio, though the
scene in which her father warns her about the dirty language she will hear in
locker rooms takes a very close second. I can't describe them.

Like a Japanese Subway

Does ''Amazons'' add up to anything more than a wonderfully funny string of
gags? As Cleo writes: ''Things kept happening. It was hard for me to find a
shape for them. It is still hard. Events and people keep crowding the page. It
is like a two-dimensional Japanese subway. I didn't think major thematic
material would be this hard to turn up.''

I'm not sure she ever does turn it up, unless you count her satire of big-time
sports as major thematic material, or her eventual reduction of her lover to the
status of a sleeping Prince Charming.  (To cure Shaver Stevens of his Jumping
Frenchmen, Dr. Glass puts him to sleep for five weeks in a container called a
Kramer cube. Cleo isn't sure she wants him to wake up. He looks so
''haunting.'') But then I'm not sure if it matters. With all that's going on in
''Amazons,'' we really don't miss it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EL SALVADOR GUERRILLAS ATTACK U.S. EMBASSY WITH ROCKET GRENADES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 291 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Sept. 16


Terrorists fired three antitank rocket grenades at the United States Embassy
today, causing some damage but apparently no injuries, security forces reported.

They said the grenades were probably fired from a building about 50 yards away
from the fenced embassy compound. ''Something put a hole in one of our upper
stories but as far as we can tell nobody was hurt,'' said an embassy spokesman
reached by telephone.

Another embassy employee said the damage was on the third floor, which houses
the office of Ambassador Robert E. White, but Mr. White was not in the embassy
at the time. There was ''a terrific noise,'' she added.

Many embassy employees were away from the building because the attack occurred
during the lunch period.

Security Measures Strengthened

The embassy building is in a strongly fenced compound that covers an entire
block, and is heavily guarded. Security measures were strengthened during the
civil war in Nicaragua last year.

Recent photographs show members of left-wing guerrilla groups here armed with
the same type of Soviet-made and Chinese-made antitank rocket grenades used
against United States forces during the Vietnam War.

Left-wing extremists in this Central American country are trying to replace the
centrist military-civilian junta with a Marxist government. Washington has
expressed firm support of the junta of three civilians and two army officers
installed last October after the conservative regime of President Carlos
Humberto Romero was ousted in a coup.

Human rights organizations say at least 6,000 people have been slain in El
Salvador's political violence this year, with many of the killings attributed to
right-wing extremists who accuse the junta of being soft on Communism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GARWOOD'S COURT-MARTIAL DELAYED AS DEFENSE WITNESS LIST IS LIMITED

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Sept. 16


Pfc. Robert Garwood has gained back most of the weight he lost in the jungles of
South Vietnam, and his gait is steadier than it used to be. But 16 months after
he was charged with desertion and collaboration with the Vietcong, the
34-year-old marine's eyes are still hooded and vague, and they can see no end
yet to the court-martial that could sentence him to spend the rest of his life
in Fort Leavenworth Federal Prison.

The often-postponed court-martial was set back for at least another two weeks
here today by Col. R.E. Switzer, the military judge at his trial, to allow
Private Garwood's defense attorney time to recover from an illness and to ask
the Government of Vietnam one last time about reports that more American
ex-soldiers are still here. A sixman military jury has already been empaneled.

Over the last six months, Private Garwood has had several scrapes with civilian
law, hired a new lawyer and gotten into a fight over money with the one he
dismissed. He is an object of scorn from the marines on this huge amphibious
force training base, but has won friends among some families of American
soldiers still unaccounted for in Vietnam by encouraging their hopes that their
husbands and brothers may still be alive.

Death Penalty Ruled Out

About the only good news Private Garwood has heard is that the death penalty has
been ruled out if he is found guilty. The commanding officer of the base where a
court-martial is held is authorized to recommend charges and possible penalties
after the military equivalent of an indictment is handed up, and in this case
Maj. Gen. David Barker said that the death penalty could not be invoked.

The soldier, who grew up in Adams, Ind., is only the second American serviceman
to be charged with misconduct as a prisoner of war in Vietnam. The first was
another marine, John Sweeney, who was acquitted after only a week of trial when
it was disclosed that he had been all but abandoned in the jungle by his platoon
leader. The charges against Private Garwood are much more serious.

When he returned to the United States from Hanoi in March 1979, emaciated and
unsteady on his feet, he had spent 14 years behind enemy lines. He was charged
with desertion in time of war, soliciting American soldiers to lay down their
arms, collaboration with the enemy and mistreating other American prisoners of
war.

Subpoena of Prisoners Refused

His attorneys have said that Private Garwood will plead insanity in the
court-martial that was to begin tomorrow by virtue of the mental stress and
physical abuse he allegedly suffered in a Vietcong jungle prison camp for
several years, before he was joined by other American captives. But Colonel
Switzer today refused a defense motion to subpoena several other former American
political and military prisoners, including Richard I. Queen, the State
Department official who was held hostage in Iran and released.

Instead, the defense will be allowed to call only a few character witnesses and
a handful of psychologists and psychiatrists who examined Private Garwood on his
return, a limitation that will greatly narrow a defense that would otherwise
have included testimony on the allegedly mind-altering effects of imprisonment
in World War II and the Korean War and in Iran and South America.

Private Garwood's problems have been compounded by a two-count civilian charge,
brought two weeks ago, that he tried to force a sex act upon a 7-year-old girl
last August while visiting friends off base. Last February, he was charged with
drunken driving and drew a suspended sentence.

A hearing on the sex charge is scheduled for Sept. 29, the same day Colonel
Switzer has ordered the court-martial reconvened.

Others Still in Vietnam?

Whether any more former American servicemen are still in Vietnam is considered
crucial to the trial because their reasons for staying behind, whether by force
or voluntarily, would illuminate either the defense's contention that Mr.
Garwood was detained against his will, or, as the prosecution maintains, that
Mr. Garwood stayed in Hanoi willingly until he changed his mind last year.

The Vietnamese Government announced in 1973 that all living American servicemen
had been returned to the United States following the American pullout from
Vietnam. Since then, however, Vietnamese refugees fleeing the Communists have
brought back reports of seeing several Americans still living in Vietnam.

Private Garwood's $146,000 in back pay from the Marine Corps, accumulated in his
years in Vietnam and currently impounded by the Marine Corps, is also the center
of a dispute. Dermot Foley, a New York lawyer who first represented Private
Garwood but who was dismissed last spring, has argued that he is owed a quarter
or a third of it, perhaps $40,000, in fees and expenses.

First Attorney Criticized

Mr. Foley was criticized by Private Garwood's current lawyer, John Lowe of
Virginia, who charged that Mr. Foley damaged his client's stature by reportedly
signing him to several deals to exploit his experiences behind enemy lines in a
book or a movie before the adjudication of the charges.

The question of Mr. Foley's fees, as well as of any stake he may have secured
for himself in future deals involving Private Garwood's reminiscences, is being
argued privately between the two sides off the stage from the court-martial.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JOHN WHAT? JOHN HOW? JOHN WHY?

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Voters who are tempted to take a plunge for John B.  Anderson in November should
think hard about what an Anderson Presidency might actually mean. Queasiness
about the alternatives is not reason enough to vote for him.

Although Mr. Anderson wrapped himself in the mantle of the Liberal Party of New
York last week, supporters of Senator Edward M. Kennedy and others on the left
have little to cheer about in this candidate, beyond some very recent campaign
promises.

The John Anderson who not so long ago took the floor of the House of
Representatives to defend Richard M. Nixon's impoundment of Congressional
appropriation funds and Gerald R. Ford's vetoes of recession-aid bills said
earlier this year that his economic thinking continues to be ''quite consistent
with mainline Republican economic philosophy.'' He still opposes not only Mr.
Kennedy's national healthinsurance plan but also the far milder Carter version.
His objection to

President Carter's decontrol of oil and natural gas prices was that it didn't
happen sooner. His platform calls for sizeable tax breaks for business.

His views on foreign policy and defense spending have mellowed since 1973, the
year he finally stopped supporting the Vietnam War.  On issues such as women's
rights and campaign-financing reform, the Illinois Congressman's positions have
become more outspoken - though not substantively different - from Mr. Carter's.
But Mr. Anderson's undistinguished record on consumer issues actually grew worse
as the 1970's progressed, and he has almost always voted against pro-labor
bills, as recently as two years ago. It is also only two years since he voted in
favor of the Kemp-Roth 30 percent tax cut, which he now calls ''economic pie in
the sky.''

Only a little over one year ago, Mr. Anderson voted to continue funding for the
controversial Clinch River breeder reactor in Tennessee, which is considered
even more dangerous than the lightwater reactors he now questions. For more than
a decade, he served on the Joint Atomic Energy Committee where he grew to be one
of the most messianic supporters of nuclear power in the House.

These changes and many other parts of the record fog any clear perceptions of
the policies an Anderson Administration would pursue, notwithstanding his
recently released weighty platform. No one knows which of his new positions Mr.
Anderson has sincerely grown into now that he is free of his party and his
conservative Congressional district, and which he has felt obliged to espouse in
order to satisfy the demands of his new, more-liberal constituency. It's
obvious, though, that for all the attention paid to John Anderson's heightened
sense of principle, his greatest commitment is to the principle of flexibility.

Unfortunately, flexibility can quickly crumble into vascillation under the
stresses of the Presidency, as Mr. Carter has demonstrated. A more-useful
Presidential characteristic is coalition-creation, which requires, if not a
party, at least access to a reservoir of groups that hold compatible positions
on a broad range of issues. But Mr. Anderson would not be able to tap that
reservoir. The nature of his independent challenge and the ambiguity of his
record might well force him to build a new constituency on every new issue - a
daunting task.

Congressional leaders, realists all, are not inclined to think about the
prospect of an Anderson Presidency. But when pressed, many voice serious doubts
about its feasibility. ''How the hell would he work here?'' asks Representative
Richard Bolling, Democrat of Missouri, chairman of the House Rules Committee and
an expert on the workings of Congress. ''Who would be his majority and minority
leaders?''

A case can be made that a little confusion might be what's needed to prod a
sluggish Congress into constructive action. But that assumes Mr. Anderson has
the personal ability (as distinct from party backing) to go beyond the initial
flush of victory to the nittygritty business of knocking heads together.
According to his colleagues, Mr. Anderson, while intelligent and eloquent, is
not wellequipped to do that. He is frequently likened to Mr. Carter:
selfrighteous, impervious, disdainful of the back-slapping mentality. The net
effect might well be a kind of highhandedness with the mechanics of
Congressional relations.

More concretely, whatever bipartisan coalitions Mr. Anderson successfully forges
would be particularly shaky because they would be seen as only temporary. He has
repeatedly stressed that voters need simply ''take a leave of absence'' from
their parties, implying that everyone should go back to being Democrats and
Republicans once John Anderson leaves the scene.

''My purpose is not to weaken the two-party system,'' Mr. Anderson said when
announcing his independent bid. ''Rather it is to strengthen that system in the
future.'' But does he really believe that the effect of his election would be to
strengthen what he helped dismember?

Signing on with John Anderson requires a trust amid uncertainty greater even
than that which elected Jimmy Carter in 1976. Before assuming Mr. Anderson would
be the most progressive and competent of the candidates if he could just win,
voters -liberal or otherwise - need to couple that trust with more scrutiny.

Jonathan Alter wrote the profile of John B. Anderson contained in ''Selecting a
President: A Citizen Guide to the 1980 Election,'' a report sponsored by Ralph
Nader.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SCIENCE UNIT'S LEADER PROPOSES GLOBAL STUDY OF EXPOSURE TO DIOXIN

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 361 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 16


A prominent scientist called today for a worldwide study of people exposed to
dioxin in industrial accidents to help determine whether thousands of veterans
faced health risks from their exposure to Agent Orange in Vietnam.

Dr. Philip Handler, president of the National Academy of Sciences, said that
''an immediate and comprehensive evaluation on a worldwide basis of the
substantial number of industrial workers exposed to TCDD over the past several
decades'' would be one of the most promising ways of deciding whether exposure
carries long-term risk.

Some 30,000 veterans who served in Vietnam have expressed fears that they may
contract ailments in the future or complained of illnesses they attribute to
contact with the herbicide Agent Orange, which contained dioxin, also known as
TCDD, or 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Twelve million gallons of the
herbicide were sprayed from planes to reveal Communist troops' jungle hiding
places in the Vietnam War.

Most Toxic Man-Made Substance

Dioxin is considered the most toxic man-made chemical substance.  But scientists
have been unable to establish definitively whether exposure causes cancers,
cardiovascular diseases, nervous and emotional disorders or birth defects, as
some veterans' groups assert.

Testifying before a House Veterans' Affairs subcommittee, Dr.  Handler, a
biochemist, proposed that the World Health Organization establish a registry of
all workers exposed to dioxin in order to evaluate the risk of diseases, which
often do not appear until decades later.

So far, Veterans Administration officials have been willing to attribute only
one condition, chloracne, a skin disorder, to exposure to Agent Orange.

But the Veterans Administration has created a registry of veterans who have
raised questions about Agent Orange and their own health.  Guy McMichael 3d,
general counsel of the Veterans Administration, testified that the number of
entries has grown to 30,000 from 12,000 a year ago.

Mr. McMichael said a study, mandated by Congress, comparing the health of
thousands of Vietnam veterans with that of men who did notserve there will not
be started until late 1981.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
The Candidates' Debating Points

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 932 words


THE first Presidential debate on television next Sunday between Ronald Reagan
and John B. Anderson - with President Carter's chair, in all probability, left
empty on the stage - will focus on domestic issues, especially the economy and
the effect of national defense spending on the budget.

Mr. Anderson, the challenger, can be expected to attack Mr. Reagan for fiscal
irresponsibility because of his continued support of big tax cuts and rapidly
climbing defense expenditures. But Mr. Reagan, thanks to the moderating
influence in recent weeks of his more cautiously conservative economic advisers,
headed by former Treasury Secretary George P. Shultz, will be in a better
position to defend himself as being as fiscally prudent as either Mr. Anderson
or Mr.  Carter.

However, Mr. Reagan will still try to portray himself as more determined than
either of his opponents to restore dynamism to the American economy, rising
take-home pay to blue collar workers, jobs to the unemployed and a more powerful
defense posture for the nation. Whether he attracts any official union support
or not - and he almost certainly will not from union leaders - Mr. Reagan is
making a strong pitch for rank-and-file labor votes, as well as for the support
of the unorganized.

Against Mr. Reagan's potent appeal, Mr. Anderson will seek to demonstrate that
Mr. Reagan's economic and defense policies would exacerbate inflation and serve
the interests of the rich, not the poor or the middle class. In his ''Agenda for
America,'' Mr.  Anderson has said he would work for a more equitable system of
taxation and would ''resist tax cuts, such as the Reagan-Kemp-Roth proposal,
that give a bonanza to the rich, crumbs to the middle class, and nothing at all
to the poor.'' Mr. Anderson charges that the Republican platform ''talks about
liberating individuals from big government, but it would only liberate those
least in need of assistance from their responsibilities to the nation.''

In the face of persistent inflation and economic stagnation, Mr.  Anderson
insists that tax cutting must be focused on spurring saving, investment and the
growth of productivity. He opposes both largescale spending increases and
''passive'' tax cuts that would exacerbate looming budget deficits and mean
increased Government borrowing and higher interest costs. Such policies, Mr.
Anderson contends, ''would further retard the recovery of the interestsensitive
parts of the economy, including autos, housing and the capital goods
industries.''

In arguing for ''a very cautious and selective approach'' to fiscal and monetary
policy, Mr. Anderson's reasoning closely parallels the position of some top
business executives, as evidenced by last week's economy policy statement of the
Committee for Economic Development, which declared: ''We believe that sustained
adherence to firm restraint in fiscal and monetary policies is essential to
effectively reduce the underlying inflation rate. In particular, it is vital to
avoid excessive restimulation of the economy or other kinds of antirecessionary
actions that could again cause inflation to accelerate.''

Mr. Anderson is thus trying to attract support not only from liberal Democrats
but from moderate Republicans, including members of the business establishment,
who are anxious about Mr. Reagan's heavy populist and right-wing support. Former
President Gerald R.  Ford, a leading exponent of the more moderate Republican
conservatism, tried unsuccessfully to persuade Mr. Reagan to drop his commitment
to the Kemp-Roth 30 percent tax cut on personal income.  Mr. Anderson will
continue to champion this line, condemning Kemp-Roth as inflationary,
consumption-oriented and an across-the-board rather than a selective tax cut.

Mr. Anderson will focus on ''comprehensive reform of the capital cost recovery
system'' to stimulate business investment in new plant and equipment. He will
also urge measures to ''reverse the decline'' in United States research and
development. And he wants to combine tax policies to spur investment and
innovation with tax measures to curb wage and price inflation.

Going beyond Mr. Carter's call for an Economic Revitalization Board, Mr.
Anderson has said he would call labor and management leaders together to agree
on ''fair and realistic'' wage and price guidelines and to determine ''an
appropriate means of encouraging compliance with those standards through
tax-based incentives.''

On defense spending, Mr. Anderson has taken a more cautious line than either Mr.
Reagan or Mr. Carter. He has said that ''we must spend what we need for defense,
but we must apply the most exacting standards of efficiency and accountability
to the way we spend defense dollars.''

Mr. Anderson is against any formula increase in total ''real''(that is,
subtracting for inflation) defense outlays, such as Mr. Carter's rate of
increase of 3 percent a year or Mr. Reagan's proposed increase of more than 5
percent a year. ''What matters,'' says Mr. Anderson, ''is what we buy with our
defense dollars, not how much we incrementally change our budget. We must
discard simplicities which hold that spending more money will itself provide a
solution to our security problems.''

Mr. Anderson's arguments may have an impact in changing American public opinion
and, ultimately, Congressional thinking on economics and defense expenditures.
If so, Mr. Anderson, the ''spoiler,'' might, in the economic area, play a role
similar to that performed by Eugene McCarthy on Vietnam in 1968 - a role that
many believe cost Hubert Humphrey the White House.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 18, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STRONG SALES FOR PUBLISHER OF BIBLE3> (page D7)

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 848 words

DATELINE: NASHVILLE, Sept. 17


From the construction site of its new $4 million corporate office and operations
center rising here to the successful test marketing of its latest version of the
King James Bible, Thomas Nelson Publishers appears to be in the midst of a boom.

Buoyed by the resurgence of religious evangelism, as well as the industry's
countercyclical nature, Nelson Publishers, the world's leading Bible publishing
house, is enjoying steadily increasing sales and profits. And its newest
projects have won wide approval from publishing analysts.

Sam Moore, the 49-year-old chairman and president of the company, attributes its
financial performance to product demand.  ''Bibles continue to sell well because
Christianity is growing and people don't understand the movement,'' Mr. Moore
said in a recent interview. He said he watched the evangelical movement grow
from the ''new morality'' of the post-Vietnam War period to the born-again
movement. He said there is also an emerging group of ''young Christians,'' of
which he counts himself a member, who are buying increasing amounts of religious
material.

''There are 55 million people in America who classify themselves as born-again
Christians,'' he said. ''These people have needs and demands. One of those is
the need for Bibles and religious books. We are supplying that market.''

Some Wall Street analysts, however, credited Mr. Moore's management ability and
marketing skills for the company's strong showing in recent years, and others
cited the countercyclical nature of the industry. A five-year analysis of Thomas
Nelson operations by one brokerage house here described the business as
''recession proof'' because ''sales typically increase during periods of
unemployment and economic uncertainty.''

'Electric Church' Market

Analysts cited Mr. Moore's ability to develop new markets as one of his
strengths. Most notably they mentioned his ability to tie into what some call
''the electric church'' - the 128 million television viewers who watch
evangelists such as Oral Roberts and Jerry Falwell every Sunday. Organizations
such as World Vision International, Hour of Power and the PTL Club are rapidly
gaining followers and Mr. Moore notes that his company ''is right in the middle
of it.''

Nelson sells books to these groups, publishes related periodicals and provides a
mailing service for their use. The Nelson name is mentioned on the programs and
is included on much of the printed material, giving the company valuable
advertising exposure.

''Any fool can print a Bible, but it takes a genius to sell them,'' said one
broker here, who has watched Mr. Moore's operations since he organized a Bible
sales company in Nashville 23 years ago and started selling Bibles on credit. In
1969 Mr. Moore bought the failing American division of Nelson, then a
British-owned company, and turned it around.

Nelson's compounded growth rate since 1975 has been 27 percent in sales and 17
percent in earnings per share. Nelson's first-quarter earnings rose 44 percent,
to $165,000, while sales climbed 35.5 percent, to $9.1 million, compared with
year-ago figures. For the fiscal year ending March 31, the company reported
earnings of $1.4 million on sales of $35.8 million, compared with profits of
$1.1 million on $26.3 million in revenues for the year earlier. The Bible
accounts for 80 percent of sales, company officials said.

Project Called Sales Coup

Last year Nelson released the New Testament of its updated King James version of
the Bible as a ''market test'' of the new work, which is expected to be
available in early 1982. That project is being cited by analysts as a sales coup
for the rapidly growing company.

Nelson, which publishing analysts said is only one of two publicly held Biblical
publishing houses in this country, employed a virtual army of religious scholars
and church leaders from across the country to develop the new version, which
translates hard-to-understand words into more comprehensible language.

Mr. Moore said he thinks the new King James Bible will be successful because,
''with all these translations, the Christian community would like to go to one
translation they can really believe.''

Bibles appear to be the No. 1 selling items among members of the Christian
Booksellers Association, according to John Bass, vice president of the trade
organization, which counts among its members religious bookstores,
denominational publishing houses and commercial publishers.

Mr. Bass said that member book stores reported that Bible sale volume has risen
9 percent this year in small stores and as much as 23 percent in larger
religious stores. He estimated that Bible sales will top $160 million this year
and projected total revenues of $720 million in the United States this year from
sales of Bibles, Bible study guides, gospel sheet music, recordings - and even
robes. That's up from $644 million in 1978.

''In this time of turmoil in the country and economic uncertainty people are
re-establishing their priorities,'' he said. ''They are trying to get answers to
their problems.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sam Moore table of Nelson Publishers
revenue,income,earnings

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDES ASSEMBLE RECORD OF DOCUMENTS RELATING TO IRAN TIES

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 304 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


State Department officials disclosed tonight that the Administration has
compiled a vast record of documents dealing with several decades of United
States-Iranian relations.

But a department spokesman was quick to assert that ''this is not the Pentagon
Papers.'' That study, made public 10 years ago, was an analysis of how the
United States became involved in Vietnam. It led to major controversy when it
was made public, including Government attempts to prevent newspapers from
publishing it.

In the current case, officials said, a small group went through the files to
pull out records and documents so that the bureaucracy would know what it was
talking about when commenting on such subjects as the demands of Iranian
militants for an American apology.

The militants have insisted that the United States apologize for what they say
have been American interventions in Iranian affairs.  The United States has
refused, most recently today, when President Carter cited national ''honor and
integrity'' in saying that Washington would not apologize to obtain the release
of the hostages.

'Not a History or an Analysis'

John H. Trattner, the State Department spokesman, said that the Iranian
compilation was ''not a history or an analysis of U.S.relations with Iran,'' and
continued:

''There is no study as such, only a collection of documents and factual
summaries on past U.S. relations with Iran.''

Other officials said that such collections were routine. At the time of the
controversy over the Soviet combat brigade in Cuba a year ago, they said, a
similar compilation was undertaken.

Mr. Trattner said that the department, in collecting the Iranian documents,
''did not focus on U.S. misdeeds and no conclusions or judgments were derived.

''Essentially it is an inventory and nothing more,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE INFLUENCE OF CHURCH LEADERS IN POLITICS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 874 words


Last Sunday, three days after Humberto Cardinal Medeiros of Boston warned Roman
Catholics in his archdiocese against voting for candidates who favored legal
abortion, a group of 100 members of a nearby suburban parish showed up for mass
wearing buttons in support of James M. Shannon, one of those candidates in the
primary election at whom the Archbishop's attack was directed. Mr. Shannon won
on Tuesday, as did another pro-abortion candidate, Barney Frank, and Archbishop
Medeiros's appeal seemed to have failed because many Catholics ignored his
warning or rebelled against it. It was one of an increasing number of
illustrations that nowadays a church authority can only speak to Catholics, not
for them.

This point was clear in the Congressional campaigns, for example, as Senator
Edward M. Kennedy and Representative Robert F. Drinan, both Catholics, supported
Mr. Frank. Representative Drinan is a Catholic priest who was asked to leave
politics by the Vatican.

While it is generally conceded that Archbishop Medeiros had a right to declare
his views, the wisdom of the move seems dubious in retrospect. Massachusetts
Catholics are relatively sophisticated on politics and the evidence suggests
that the strategy backfired.  Parishioners tend to listen politely to their
leaders but only sometimes take their advice.

Evangelical Christians, Too

A similar point can be made in the case of evangelical Christian leaders, mostly
Protestant, in their efforts to elect candidates whose moral positions on such
issues as school prayer and abortion are consistent with those of the
evangelicals. They are making their case in print, on television and at rallies,
but their impact is apparently not so great as some of the activists might hope.

Within the major religious groups, there are increasing tensions over what a
''Christian'' outlook ought to be. The Catholic parishioners wearing Shannon
buttons signified their own protest against the Archbishop and betoken a wider
divergence in the church over the tendency to reduce the choice of candidates to
single issues such as abortion.

At the same time, evangelicals, who number at least 30 million, are deeply
divided between the two major candidates for the Presidency despite strong
backing for Mr. Reagan among the leaders of such political action groups as
Moral Majority, a Virginia-based group headed by the Rev. Jerry Falwell.

Both Catholics and Protestant evangelicals have felt the effects of growing
pluralism. As survey after survey has indicated, Catholics in large numbers
disagree with their church over such principles as artificial birth control,
premarital sex and abortion. A ''pastoral'' approach by priests, which
recognizes this mixture of views and attempts to show compassion for dissenters,
is coming to replace the sterner, more magisterial approach characteristic of
the past.

Decisions on One Issue

The strategy of measuring a candidate's worth by his stand on one particular
issue, usually abortion, has become common among both Catholic and Protestant
political activists, but the method has elicited strong criticism among many
Christians of both groups.

''The very first misgiving arises over the expression 'the Christian vote,' ''
said an editorial in the current issue of the Jesuit periodical America. ''This
seems to suggest that on political issues there is only one way a believing
Christian should vote. But on most issues before the electorate it is possible
for informed Christians, equally sensitive to the moral imperatives of the
Gospel, to come to different conclusions about the practical merits of a
particular program, the relative merits of different constellations of programs
and the overall records of individual candidates.''

The editorial continued: ''Permissive abortion, recognition of Taiwan, prayer in
public schools, homosexual rights, the equal rights amendment and a balanced
budget are issues that should be argued on their own merits. Yet one
organization of evangelical Christians has issued a 'moral rating' of
Congressmen according to their conformity to an officially approved 'Christian'
way to vote on all of these issues.''

Debate Over Political Role

Similar complaints are being heard among evangelicals who are skeptical about
the high-pressure tactics among several preachers in the cause of promoting
certain principles and, indirectly, the candidates who espouse them.

At Wheaton College in Wheaton, Ill., a leading evangelical institution, many
students are mulling over the attempts to engage them in political causes, and
their conclusions differ sharply. In one recent conversation in the school's
dining hall, for example, some believed Mr. Falwell's campaign was wrong and
others argued in favor of if so long as evangelicals were free to make final
decisions themselves.

Other Christians see an irony in some of the gloating that has followed
Archbishop Medeiros's apparent defeat and the resentment toward much of the
evangelical New Right wave. They contend that the news media approved of liberal
church involvement in politics, measuring candidates on such issues as civil
rights and the Vietnam war, but refuse to tolerate similar action in behalf of
conservative causes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CONSPIRACYTRIAL BEGINS FOR 2 EX-OFFICIAL OF F.B.I. ACCUSED IN BREAK-INS

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


The chief prosecutor at the trial of two former officials of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, in a dramatic opening statement today, evoked the sights and
sounds, the bombs and riots of the early 1970's but said they provided no excuse
for the defendants to disregard the Constitution by authorizing Federal agents
to break into private homes to locate fugitive terrorists.

John W. Nields Jr., the prosecutor, told the jury of eight women and four men
that the Government would not defend the conduct of the Weathermen fugitives for
whom the bureau was searching in 1972 and 1973. But, he said, ''it doesn't
matter one whit what one thinks of the goals and purposes and politics of the
Weathermen,'' whom he characterized as revolutionaries ''violently opposed to
the war in Vietnam.''

What matters, he said, are the Constitution and its Bill of Rights, especially
the Fourth Amendment, which guarantees the right of the people to be secure in
their homes from ''unreasonable searches and seizures.''

Brian P. Gettings, a lawyer for one of the defendants, W. Mark Felt, former
acting associate director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, acknowledged
that there had been at least nine warrantless searches, also known as
''surreptitious entries'' and ''black-bag jobs.'' But he insisted that the
searches were ''reasonable,'' given the temper of the times and given the fact
that the law governing ''search and seizure'' was extremely unclear.  Moreover,
Mr. Gettings said, Mr. Felt genuinely believed the Weathermen to be
''collaborators and agents of foreign hostile powers.''

Trial Delayed for 29 Months

Mr. Nields said that Mr. Felt and the second defendant, Edward S.  Miller, chief
of intelligence for the bureau at the time, ''knew full well'' that they were
violating the Constitution when they authorized the break-ins.

Today's opening statements marked the start of a trial delayed for 29 months by
skirmishing over the defendants' access to classified documents said to show,
among other things, the foreign connections of the Weather Underground
Organization.

Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller were indicted in April 1978 on one count of conspiring
to violate the constitutional rights of citizens.  The two took occasional notes
today, but for the most part sat impassively, as far away from the jury as
possible, for the opening arguments. Both have said that in approving break-ins,
they relied on the authority of L. Patrick Gray 3d, at the time acting director
of the bureau, who was indicted with them. Mr. Gray is to be tried separately,
but no date has been set for his trial.

Testimony Is Said to 'Shriek'

Mr. Nields told the jury that testimony in the Felt-Miller case ''will literally
shriek at you,'' and he added: ''You will hear the sounds of Weatherman bombs
ringing in your ears. We ask you also to listen for the sound of the
Constitution of the United States. It doesn't make quite as much noise as the
Weatherman bombs. It doesn't shriek at you. It doesn't even whisper.  It just
sits there silent as it's done for 200 years, through war and depressions,
through good times and bad. The Bill of Rights represents the deepest and
highest aspirations of the American people.''

Mr. Gettings told the jurors he hoped they would not ''bow down to the Bill of
Rights and say the Bill of Rights overcomes everything.'' Mr. Felt was just a
''bystander,'' according to his attorney. The break-ins occurred ''on his
watch'' and Mr. Felt knew about them, Mr. Gettings said, but Mr. Felt did not
stop them because he believed that they were ''the right thing to do for the
national security of the United States,'' his attorney said.

Mr. Miller's attorney, Thomas A. Kennelly, exercised his right to defer giving
an opening statement until the Government had finished presenting its case.

Four Interruptions by Judge

Judge William B. Bryant, chief judge of the Federal District Court here,
interrupted Mr. Gettings four times and told him to summarize the evidence
instead of interpreting the law.

Mr. Gettings called the trial an opportunity for the Justice Department and the
jury to ''second-guess'' the defendants. ''This indictment,'' he said, ''is
changing the rules, not in the middle of the game, but after the game has been
played. The evidence will clearly show you that what's involved in this case,
what is or isn't a crime, depends on who's the Attorney General. That's the way
they do it in Russia. I hope that's not the way we do it here.''

Mr. Nields, the shaggy-haired, 37-year-old prosecutor, said that the F.B.I.
agents who entered houses and apartments in New York and New Jersey were dressed
in old clothes or disguised as telephone repairmen. They picked locks or got
keys by paying cash to the landlords, he said.

Then, he said, they searched every room in the home, methodically looking
through desks, closets, clothing and private papers for clues to the whereabouts
of the Weathermen. With a camera that could be concealed in an attache case, the
agents photographed diaries, love letters, address books and other documents, he
said.

Whose Homes Were Entered

Mr. Nields said that the agents secretly entered the homes of ''citizens who had
committed no crimes and who were suspected, in many cases, of doing nothing
wrong.'' However, Mr. Gettings said that the citizens were the ''above-ground
support for the Weather Underground,'' not just friends and relatives.

In 1966, according to Mr. Nields, J. Edgar Hoover, then director of the Federal
bureau, ordered a halt to the ''black-bag jobs,'' which had been conducted ''on
a fairly regular basis.''

In fact, Mr. Gettings said, the practice continued after 1966 with the knowledge
of Attorneys General and Presidents including Richard M. Nixon. After discussing
the technique with the nation's highest intelligence officials in 1970, Mr.
Gettings said, Mr. Nixon authorized the director of the F.B.I. to use
''surreptitious entries'' in important internal security cases, saying not
merely, ''You may do it,'' but, ''Do it!''

Mr. Gettings, a former United States Attorney in Alexandria, Va., said that the
break-ins were not merely a law-enforcement operation but part of the bureau's
intelligence-gathering function, designed to prevent damage to the national
security. The Weathermen, he said, were linked to 52 bombings and would be
characterized by one director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation as ''the
greatest international terrorists that have ever been known to the United
States.''

By September 1972, when Mr. Miller authorized the use of ''blackbag jobs'' in
the Weatherman investigation, Mr. Nields said, the Weathermen had set off bombs
in several Federal buildings, they were taunting the F.B.I. and the bureau was
''virtually at war'' with them. But, he said, ''those searches were conducted
without warrants, without sanction of the law,'' with no protection except for
secrecy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of Edward Miller, W. Mark Felt

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
A MOSCOW COLD LINE

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


The United States and the Soviet Union will be talking to each other directly
again next week in New York City, in the persons of Secretary of State Edmund
Muskie and Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko. There is fortunately at least one
new subject on the agenda so that this second high-level encounter since the
invasion of Afghanistan needn't be just another aggravating exchange of
recriminations.

That subject will be how to start up negotiations on limiting missiles in
Europe. The Russians will have completed their deployment of SS-20's late this
year or early next, and the U.S. won't start putting new Pershing II's and
cruise missiles into Western Europe until 1983. The argument over what will
constitute a balance is extremely complicated and no one expects agreement soon
or easily, but at least the effort will be resumed.

Talks on virtually everything else have been stalled since the beginning of the
year, largely as part of Washington's decision to show Moscow that the price of
invasion is much higher than the military engagement itself. But if the purpose
of policy is to influence Soviet behavior, it isn't enough just to say what we
don't like.

A Washington-Moscow hot line was installed a generation ago precisely because
both sides realized that the worse the crisis in their relations, the greater
the need for explanation to head off even more trouble.

There hasn't been that sort of emergency in the current period of tensions, but
the idea of continuing exchanges in bad times as well as good remains just as
valid. A kind of cold line needs to be kept open to head off hot-line urgency.

And that requires an American, and allied, policy on what we want to tell the
Russians and what we expect of them. Since January, the message has been simply,
''You can't take over more countries with impunity. Get out and don't do it
again.''

It is now evident, however, that the Soviets have gotten themselves into an
Afghan quagmire. They have burned a number of political bridges and there isn't
an easy way out. Hatreds, hostilities and fears have been heated to the point
that there seems no more chance of establishing some kind of Afghan coalition in
the near future than there was of ending the Vietnam War with a coalition of
opponents in Saigon. It's Moscow's fault, but it is a fact which must be taken
into account.

The question, then, is whether the U.S. wants to leave things at that and let
East-West relations deteriorate more and more dangerously, or whether Washington
has something more to say that will hold out hope for future improvement if the
Soviets show more restraint.

National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski sees three possible roads ahead,
depending on Moscow's decisions. The first would be continuing Soviet expansion
into Afghanistan, attempts to take advantage of a disintegrating Iran, and
mounting strains with the U.S. That is moderately pessimistic, but the prospect
he considers likeliest.

The second, more pessimistic possibility is that the Russians will push harder
toward the Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean, provoking a brief but bloody local war
involving the U.S., and bringing back the worst of the cold war globally.

And the third possibility, which Mr. Brzezinski considers frankly optimistic at
this point, is that Moscow will realize its Afghan adventure has been
counterproductive, reverse its policy and permit creation of a neutral Afghan
buffer state, perhaps on the model of Finland.

The crucial decisions lie with Moscow, but what is lacking on the U.S. side is a
definition of realistic Soviet behavior that would be acceptable as a sign that
the road back to detente can be unblocked.  That wouldn't even be going so far
as to offer a new carrot to match the stick the U.S. is brandishing to warn the
Soviets off the first and second roads.

But it would be saying that Washington really wants to restore detente and
productive negotiations with Moscow, including SALT, the European missiles and
other arms control agreements, and that Moscow still has something to gain by
cutting its losses. This has not been at all self-evident in the climate of
emotional confrontation this year. Effective deterrence has to be political as
well as military, and that means providing an incentive as well as a threat.

There is considerable evidence that the Soviets really were surprised at the
American reaction to the invasion of Afghanistan, not because they thought the
U.S. too weak or too confused to act but because they thought there was tacit
American acceptance of their own security calculations in the area. They were
wrong, but we still haven't made clear the restraints we expect of them in
future. Just saying ''we don't trust the Russians'' is a way of saying there is
no way for them to try to get on with us.

Mr. Muskie's conversations on opening Euro-missile talks is a good opportunity
to let Moscow know that deeper crisis with the U.S. isn't inevitable, that the
Russians still have a choice of mending relations. But to do that, America also
has to have a better idea of how it wants to live with the Soviet Union. We too
have a choice to make.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HISTORY AS RUDDER;
by Richard Shenkman

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 806 words

DATELINE: HO


HO-KUS, N.J. -While in this century we have elevated two historians to the
Presidency (Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson), have made celebrities of
others who have become White House counselors (Arthur Schlesinger Jr.), and have
required millions of students to attend American history classes (to promote
citizenship), we have consistently conducted public debates on contemporary
problems in a vacuum. We spend millions of dollars to discover a cancer cure and
try to resolve the great issues of war and peace without troubling to put them
in historical contexts.

Americans have not always disregarded history. During the Constitutional
Convention, the Founding Fathers repeatedly referred to historical experience
and urged that the wisdom of the past be obeyed. As John Dickinson of Delaware
remarked: ''Experience must be our only guide. Reason may mislead us.''

Today, politicians occasionally appeal to history but usually only to score
points. When they take history seriously they often grossly distort it, as when
they reduce complexities to oversimplified analogies and ''lessons'' that at
best contain half truths.

One such ''lesson'' was that appeasement leads to war. It is probably true that
unchecked aggression led to war in 1939 but it is a mistake to equate every
subsequent act of aggression in the world with Hitler's moves against the
Sudetenland. Yet that is what politicians did for 25 years when confronting
crises in places as different as Berlin, Korea and Vietnam.

Are all historical analogies false? Modern historians think they usually are.
They prefer to emphasize the uniqueness of historical situations. How then can
history help men conduct their affairs? By providing what the philosopher R.G.
Collingwood called ''human selfknowledge.''

An understanding of immigration history could have helped Americans better
comprehend recent news reports about Cuban refugees who wanted to return home.
Of the 20 million immigrants who came to the United States from 1820 to 1900,
about 5 million returned to their place of origin. Without this knowledge in
mind, the Cubans appear to be ingrates. With it, they seem to be much like all
previous immigrants.

Pundits say that John B. Anderson cannot possibly win in November simply because
he is a third-party candidate. But while it is true that no such candidate has
ever won before (though Teddy Roosevelt came close in 1912), history suggests
that Mr. Anderson's candidacy is different. Other third-party candidates have
traditionally represented aggrieved but small groups that the two major parties
have ignored in order to attract the great mass of moderate voters.  But Mr.
Anderson is trying to carve out a position at or near the center, which
invalidates analogies between him and other candidates such as Strom Thurmond
(1948) and George Wallace (1968). This does not make him a likely winner, but it
does make him a possible winner. Further, history suggests that in the unlikely
event that Mr.  Anderson is elected, he might find it impossible to govern
without a party behind him. He could find himself in the same position as John
Quincy Adams, who also ran a national unity campaign. Ignoring all signs of the
then-developing party system, Adams appointed men to office on the basis of
ability alone. They spent the next four years working against him. He
accomplished almost nothing during his Administration. Mr. Anderson ignores
Adams's record at his peril, and ours. Of course, the disintegration of the
party system could work to his advantage.

If issues are better perceived in a historical context, who should provide it?
Perhaps journalists can, by reporting historians' views on the news as they
report economists' views. For just as a story about inflation is more meaningful
when the economists' analyses are included, so a story about a contemporary
problem would be more illuminating if historians' interpretations were reported.

Inevitably historians would provide conflicting interpretations.  Economists and
other experts disagree, too. Conflicting interpretations are better than none at
all. Historical disagreements could enrich the public debate on issues and help
end the mindless trivialization of politics. Thomas Jefferson, 180 years ago,
said: ''Error of opinion may be tolerated where reason is left free to combat
it.'' But can truth emerge if history is not given its due?
Richard Shenkman, who wrote the book ''One-Night Stands With American History,''
is producing a television series relating history to current events.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

4 FILM SERIES PRESENT AN ALBUM OF HISTORY

BYLINE: By TOM BUCKLEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1372 words


THREE film series that range from the silver silence of Lillian Gish in ''Broken
Blossoms'' to the gritty and noisy world of presentday Britain and American
history as seen by Hollywood begin this weekend in New York. A fourth, devoted
to films made in Berlin by Greta Garbo, who turned 75 yesterday, continues.

''British Film Now'' runs tomorrow through next Thursday at the Paramount
Theater, Broadway at 61st Street. It is sponsored by the Film Society of Lincoln
Center and the British Film Institute. Nine films will be shown.

Miss Gish is being honored by the Museum of Modern Art at a retrospective that
opens tonight with ''The Scarlet Letter,'' which she made in 1926, and ''The
Night of the Hunter'' of 1955. Goethe House, 1014 Fifth Avenue, at 82d Street,
is showing three films that Miss Garbo made in Berlin in the mid-1920's. They
will be shown on successive Saturdays, starting tomorrow with ''The Story of
Gosta Berling.''

''Americana - Four Centuries of America on Film'' at the Regency Theater will
offer 69 films in a 12-week program that starts Sunday with Elia Kazan's
''America, America.''
'British Film Now'

Richard Roud, director of the Film Society of Lincoln Center, which will present
the New York Film Festival starting next Friday, said the works of the generally
young film makers that will be shown in the ''British Film Now'' festival
preferred to deal with the real life of ordinary people rather than upper-class
and historical themes.

''They also are trying to save a dying industry,'' Mr. Roud said.  ''Almost the
only films that have been made in Britain in recent years have been American
productions or Lord Grade's spectacles with the inevitable 'international'
cast.''

With one exception, Mr. Roud noted, the films were made for less than $500,000
each, a tiny sum by today's standards, and have generally been shown on the
university and art-house circuits in Britain. The exception is Nicolas Roeg's
''Bad Timing - a Sensual Obsession,'' which will be shown Sunday. Set in Vienna,
it stars Art Garfunkel as a psychoanalyst and Theresa Russell as his married
inamorata. Denholm Elliot and Harvey Keitel are also cast in the film, which
will be shown at 5 and 8 P.M. on Sunday.

The festival's opening attraction at 8 o'clock tomorrow and at 2 on Sunday will
be Kenneth Loach's ''The Gamekeeper,'' which was made for ATV, the independent
television network. Unlike literature's most famous gamekeeper, Mellors, in D.H.
Lawrence's ''Lady Chatterley's Lover,'' Mr. Loach's hero is a family man, whose
concern for a rich man's property separates him from his neighbors.

Among the other films to be shown are Derek Jarman's updated version of
Shakespeare's ''The Tempest,'' in which Prospero's cave becomes a crumbling
English manor house (Monday at 9 and Wednesday at 6:15); Richard Wooley's
''Brothers and Sisters,'' which deals with the murder of a prostitute (Wednesday
at 9 and Thursday at 3), and Michael Leigh's ''Bleak Moments,'' about a single
woman caring for her mentally retarded sister and fearing spinsterhood (Tuesday
at noon and Thursday at 6:15).

Rounding out the series are ''Long Shot,'' Maurice Hatton's film about a con man
that features appearances by Wim Wenders, Susannah York and Alan Bennett (Monday
at 3 and Tuesday at 9:30); ''Bloody Kids,'' a television movie about alienated
youth by Stephen Frears (Tuesday at 3 and Thursday at 9; for more on Mr. Frears
see the Critic's Notebook on page C3); ''Moon Over the Alley,'' Chuck Despins's
portrait of Portobello Road, with songs by Galt MacDermot (Monday at 6:15 and
Thursday at noon), and ''The Bill Douglas Trilogy'' - three films about growing
up in a poor Scottish mining town (Tuesday at 6:15 and Wednesday at 2:30). All
tickets are $3.
Lillian Gish Tribute

Miss Gish, just back from her annual month's holiday at Bad Gastein in the
Austrian Alps, will be present for tonight's showings at the Museum of Modern
Art.

Considering that she was not a toddler in 1912 when she made the first of her
more than 100 films, many of them landmarks in the history of motion pictures,
she remains amazingly youthful and vibrant.

Miss Gish recalled the other day that in the moral climate of the period she had
to persuade many church and women's groups to withdraw their opposition to the
filming of ''The Scarlet Letter,'' the 1926 film that will open the
retrospective at 6 tonight and be shown again Sunday at 8:30.

''When I did that, Louis B. Mayer told me to go ahead,'' she said.  ''I
supervised the writing of the script and the casting. Victor Seastrom, the
director, and Lars Hanson, who plays the Reverend Dimmesdale, were both Swedish.
I chose them because I thought Sweden was closer temperamentally to that period
in our history than we were ourselves.''

Also on view this weekend are ''The Night of the Hunter'' tonight at 8:30 and
Sunday at 6; ''An Unseen Enemy,'' ''The Musketeers of Pig Alley,'' ''The Lady
and the Mouse'' and ''The Mothering Heart,'' four shorter films, to be shown
tomorrow at 6 and Monday at 8:30, and ''The Cobweb,'' tomorrow at 8:30 and
Monday at 6 P.M.

The festival, which runs through Oct. 7, will later present five classic
features that Miss Gish made with D.W. Griffith from 1918 through 1922 -''Broken
Blossoms'' (next Friday and Sept. 28), ''Hearts of the World'' (Tuesday and
Wednesday), ''Orphans of the Storm'' (Sept. 27 and 29), ''True Heart Susie''
(Sept. 30 and Oct. 6) and ''Way Down East'' (Oct. 3 and 4).

'' 'Broken Blossoms' was made in 18 days and $91,000 for Adolph Zukor,'' Miss
Gish recalled. ''He sold it to Griffith for $250,000.  Zukor thought he had made
a smart deal, but the picture made millions.''

Tickets are available on request on the day of each screening at the information
booth in the museum's main lobby. Screening tickets are free on payment of the
museum admission of $2.50 for adults, 75 cents for children and the elderly, and
$1.50 for students.
Greta Garbo in Berlin

The Goethe House tribute to Miss Garbo began Tuesday with a showing of ''The
Joyless Street,'' which she made in 1925 under the direction of the legendary
G.W. Pabst. In tomorrow night's attraction, ''The Story of Gosta Berling,'' Miss
Garbo, in her first starring role, plays a countess who lures another unlucky
clergyman to moral destruction. It was made in 1924 under the direction of her
mentor, Mauritz Stiller, with whom she went to Hollywood. It was Stiller who
staged a memorable meeting at the Adlon Hotel in Berlin to introduce Miss Garbo
to Louis B. Mayer. Stiller directed the meeting as though it were a movie,
choosing the right table and seat and lighting to show Miss Garbo's beauty to
best advantage.

The other films are Stiller's ''The Temptress'' (1926), in which Miss Garbo
plays a femme fatale, next Saturday, and ''Love,'' a 1927 adaptation of ''Anna
Karenina,'' directed by Edmund Goulding, who also made his way to Hollywood.
''Love,'' which will be shown Oct.  4, also stars John Gilbert.

The Goethe House series of silent films is accompanied by an exhibition of rare
photographs, stills and memorabilia from Miss Garbo's Berlin years. Screenings
are at 1 and 3. Admission is $1.  Tickets - two to a person - are available
after 12:15 P.M. for the same day only.
America on Film

The showing of Elia Kazan's ''America, America'' is said to be the first in New
York in 10 years. The 1963 film, which was written, produced and directed by Mr.
Kazan from his book, is an intensely personal work, tracing the odyssey of his
Greek uncle from the terrors of Anatolia in Turkey to Ellis Island. The film's
largely unknown but strong cast includes Stathis Giallelis, Frank Wolff, Elena
Karam, Estelle Hemsley and Lou Antonio.

The ''Americana'' series at the Regency is being presented to coincide with the
Presidential campaign. The programs range from ''The Plymouth Adventure,'' the
Spencer Tracy film set in the time of the Pilgrim Fathers (next Tuesday and
Wednesday), to ''Coming Home,'' set in the closing days of the Vietnam War (Dec.
9 and 10), and from James Cagney as George M. Cohan in ''Yankee Doodle Dandy''
(Nov.  27-29) to Louis Calhern as Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes in ''The
Magnificent Yankee'' (Nov. 11 and 12).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lillian Gish photo of Greta Garbo photo of
Stathis

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 19, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING:NEW SPOTLIGHT ON VIETNAM

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 825 words


SEVERAL new works on the Vietnam War are coming out and others are in the works,
constituting a new wave of books on the American involvement in the conflict.
The first round of books on America's longest war - more than 10 years, dating
from the first casualty - was largely made up of combat accounts that, like the
television coverage, described the shooting but not the meaning. Then the real
story began to emerge in a second round of books, such as David Halberstam's
''The Making of a Quagmire'' and the counterculture revelations of Michael
Herr's ''Dispatches.''

This latest round includes revisionist interpretations by neoconservatives in
the historical ranks, such as ''America in Vietnam,'' by Guenter Lewy. But
clearly not in this category is ''Why Vietnam? Prelude to America's Albatross,''
by Archimedes L.A. Patti.  to be published this month by the University of
California Press.

Colonel Patti, who headed the Indochina mission of the Office of Strategic
Services and met Ho Chi Minh in April 1945, describes the cooperation between
Vietnamese and Americans in World War II. Before Ho Chi Minh and his fledgling
government had reached Hanoi and while the Japanese were still in control of
Southeast Asia, Colonel Patti led a small team of O.S.S. agents into Hanoi to
demand that the Japanese surrender and to rescue several hundred Allied
prisoners.  The book includes the first account of the dramatic events of those
early months of America's involvement on a cooperative level in Indochina.

The author says that only after American troops were finally withdrawn from
Vietnam was it possible for him to reveal how the United States, through what he
describes as a series of miscalculations and ill-advised actions, slid into the
quagmire.

''In the light of recent experience,'' he says, ''it is all too obvious that
America's interests can be served by withdrawing from brinkmanship and by
reassessing its role in world affairs. Without resorting to isolationism, the
United States would do well to concentrate its efforts on using its national
resources for domestic consumption and trading only with other nations on the
basis of reciprocity, exclusive of incentives for strategic advantages. The
United States should strive to achieve essential military parity with, but not
superiority over, the Soviet Union. This is the lesson we should have learned
from our past mistakes.''

From the Boston Publishing Company, a new independent house, a series of books
is now being prepared called ''The Vietnam Experience.'' The series will be
written under the supervision of Robert Lee Wolff, Coolidge Professor of History
at Harvard. David C.  Chandler, director of the Center for Southeast Asian
Studies at Monash University, Australia, will assist Professor Wolff. The
publisher is Robert J. George, who was a pilot stationed in Da Nang, but Paul M.
Dreyfus, managing editor of the series. ''We will attempt to put aside old
grudges and preconceptions and look back at Vietnam to interpret what really
happened,'' Mr. Dreyfus says. ''I don't think that our readers will be
interested in our personal interpretations.''

The first volume, ''Setting the Stage,'' is due in the spring. The prospectus
emphasizes photographs, like some of the well-documented Time-Life books. The
series will cover the ground war in the south, the air war, Cambodia and Laos,
and the home front.

The positions of the major Presidential candidates are analyzed in a report by
Ralph Nader, ''Selecting a President: A Citizen Guide to the 1980 Election.''
The trade-paperback book, due at the end of this month, will be distributed by
Farrar, Straus & Giroux. The material in the book, prepared under the aegis of
the well-known consumer and constitutional advocate, was assembled by the
Citizen Research Group. It includes profiles of President Carter, Ronald Reagan
and Representative John B. Anderson, and drawings by Gary Trudeau and Philigene,
a political cartoonist. The book does not come out for any one of the
candidates.

Eliot Wagner's new novel, ''My America,'' spans the country as seen through a
New Yorker's eyes. The book will be published next week by a new imprint, Kenan
Press, a division of Simon & Schuster.

''The story starts,'' Mr. Wagner said the other day, ''on the Lower East Side,
moves to the Bronx, Central Park West and the Upper East Side - a sort of
journey across America's classes and vision of success. It's not an
old-fashioned chronicle, but rather a generational story, with some of the
characters accepting and others rejecting industrial America.''

The novelist must be known to thousands of New Yorkers who attended City College
because of another hat that he wore. He managed the registrar's office at the
School of Education for 30 years.

Mr. Wagner, who retired in 1973, wrote two previous books, ''Grand Concourse''
and ''Better Occasions.'' His next one, he says, will be ''another Bronx
novel.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 20, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BUSH PREDICTS 20% INFLATION WITH CARTER

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 575 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, Sept. 19


George Bush asserted today that continuation of President Carter's economic and
social programs would lead to an inflation rate of 20 percent.

Addressing The Economic Club of Detroit, a group of some of the city's top
businessmen, the Republican Vice-Presidential candidate said that the Democratic
Party platform, which Mr. Carter supports, ''would mean quantum jumps in the
inflation rate, well above 20 percent, to a range where our financial systems
would be subject to massive pressures and disruptions.''

Mr. Bush also said that, according to estimates prepared by the Congressional
Budget Office and the Senate Budget Committee, new programs proposed by Mr.
Carter and the Democratic Party platform would result in a Federal budget
deficit of ''approximately $275 billion'' in the next four years.

Contrasts Reagan's Proposals

In contrast, Mr. Bush said, economic programs proposed by his Presidential
running mate, Ronald Reagan, would produce a balanced Federal budget by 1983 and
a cumulative surplus of $73 billion in the same four-year period.

This would be accomplished, he said, by cutting waste from the Federal
bureaucracy and creating new jobs in the private sector to relieve unemployment.

Mr. Bush said, however, that he and Mr. Reagan were opposed to mandatory quotas
or other inhibitions on automobile imports as a way to stimulate the nation's
hard-pressed automobile industry.

His remarks received a measured response from the audience of about 400. He was
warmly applauded, however, when he cited Government overregulation as the cause
of the current recession.

This was Mr. Bush's second day of campaigning in Michigan, where, as a contender
for the Republican Presidential nomination, he defeated Mr. Reagan by a ratio of
2 to 1 in the state's primary last May.

Yesterday Mr. Bush talked to Kiwanis and Rotary members in Flint, a handful of
blue-collar workers in Burton, and a black church congregation and students from
Western Michigan State University in Kalamazoo. At each stop, he played on the
same themes: the ills of overregulation, the need for tax relief and President
Carter's ''overpromising and under-delivery.''

After the address here. Mr. Bush traveled to Pennsylvania, where he was to
address the Pennsylvania Federation of Sportsmen's Clubs Inc. in Carlisle.

----

Mondale Jabs at Reagan

HOT SPRINGS, Ark., Sept. 19 (AP) -Vice President Mondale won a rousing reception
today at the Arkansas State Democratic convention with a series of razor-edged
jabs at Ronald Reagan.

''This has been the most peculiar month in politics,'' Mr. Mondale said. ''You
know, your inclination is to get tough and just cite the record of Mr. Reagan.
But we shouldn't do that. He's had a very difficult month and he deserves our
sympathy.''

He referred in particular to Mr. Reagan's suggestion that the United States
restore official relations with Taiwan and then his retreat from that idea.

After that controversy, the Vice President said, Mr. Reagan went to Chicago and
''announced a new plan to win the war in Vietnam.'' ''Then that didn't play as
well as they hoped,'' he went on, ''so he went to Houston and announced serious
doubts about evolution, picking up the hot potato William Jennings Bryan dropped
in 1925.''

Speaking in a state that has more elderly residents than most, Mr.  Mondale also
accused the Republican Presidential candidate of trying to destroy the Social
Security System.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of RonaldReagan photo of Jimmy Carter

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 20, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VETRAN ACQUITTED ON DRUG CASE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 268 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 19


A Federal District Court jury acquitted a Vietnam veteran of drug charges today,
accepting his argument that his war experiences forced him to seek thrills
outside the law.

Michael Tindall, 30 years old, of Highstown, N.J., a former helicopter pilot,
argued that his involvement in a hashish-smuggling ring stemmed from Vietnam
syndrome, also known as post-traumatic stress disorder.

The syndrome is recognized as an emotional illness by the American Psychiatric
Association and the Veterans Administration.  Psychiatrists say victims seek to
relive the danger and excitement of combat experiences.

Defense Used in Other Trials

The syndrome has been used successfully by defendants in trials in California
and Pennsylvania, but today's verdict was the first acquittal in connection with
a nonviolent, premeditated crime.

''This is a great weight off my shoulders,'' Mr. Tindall said. He had been
charged with smuggling three tons of hashish from Morocco to Gloucester, Mass.

Last week, a Cleveland psychologist, John P. Wilson, testified that Mr. Tindall
had taken part in a plot to smuggle the hashish because of a need to relive the
excitement he felt in combat.

Impact on Other Veterans

Mr. Tindall said the verdict would bring peace of mind to ''thousands and
thousands of veterans who are going through their 9-to-5 jobs and trying to look
like Mr. Average American.''

He added: ''When they go home, they think: 'I'm faking this, there's something
wrong with me. Is it me or is it something somebody didn't do for me?' ''

The prosecuting attorneys declined to comment on the verdict.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NATION'S MILITARY ANXIETY GROWS AS RUSSIANS GAIN OF HOLLOMAN BASE, NEW MEXICO

BYLINE: By Bernard Weinraub, Special to The New York Times; The folling article
is based on reporting by Richard Halloran and Bernard Weinraub and was written
by Mr. Weinraub.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3518 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20


A debate over the nation's military readiness, fueled by the Presidential
campaign, has stirred major questions about the ability of the armed forces to
deter a nuclear or conventional challenge by the Soviet Union.

The debate over military capabilities goes back to the beginning of the nuclear
age and was nurtured by the Cuban missile crisis and the Vietnam War. But the
issue has abruptly sharpened since the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and
the failure of the rescue mission in Iran.

A growing number of officials in Congress and at the Pentagon are expressing
anxiety about the nation's ability to defend itself and honor defense
commitments abroad with a problem-ridden volunteer force of two million people.
They are increasingly distressed by Soviet-backed moves in the Middle East and
Africa, and by the Russian military machine, which now outspends and outbuilds
the United States year after year to buy guns, planes, tanks, ships and nuclear
missiles.

Shifting World Relationships

Some Congressmen and military specialists contend that the Pentagon is
overstating its case and that the United States military remains superior to the
Soviet Union. And to some Pentagon planners, the question of military
superiority is outdated and misleading, obscuring the question of what military
forces the United States needs to protect its global interests at a time when
shifting relationships in Asia, Eastern Europe and the Middle East make it
likely that neither side will have a clear-cut advantage.

An investigation of the nation's military by The New York Times has found a
deeply troubled defense establishment. In a series of articles dealing with key
aspects of the military, The Times will examine the problems, their causes and
steps being taken to solve them.

In the military today, pilots, skilled technicians and weapons specialists are
in short supply in virtually all the services. Planes are grounded for lack of
maintenance and shortages of spare parts.  Ships, ranging from destroyers and
frigates to aircraft carriers, are often deemed unprepared for a crisis because
of the lack of skilled technicians. A shortage of .45-caliber ammunition in the
Army means that trainees no longer get to familiarize themselves with submachine
guns.

Replacement Shortages

A military emergency, at the moment, would find American combat units rapidly
running out of replacement troops and equipment, with less than 40 percent of
the doctors required after 90 days of combat, with aging and inefficient
industrial plants unable to produce streams of tanks and spare parts as they did
in World War II, with transport ships and cargo planes unable to deliver
quickly, and sustain, a large deployment of troops and hardware.

Beyond this, the nation is faced for the first time with the vulnerability of
America's missile and bomber force. Defense Secretary Harold Brown, who is
seeking a controversial $34 billion mobile missile force, said recently that if
present trends in the nuclear balance continued, the United States could find
itself vulnerable to Soviet nuclear blackmail by the mid-1980's.

Mr. Brown and ranking military officials speak with nervous optimism about the
nation's defenses. ''It is very important that we not underrate our strategic
capability, either in our own planning or in what we say,'' Mr. Brown has said.
''If we keep saying we're much weaker than the Russians strategically, they may
begin to believe it. And since I am convinced that it is not so, I think that's
the worst thing that can happen.''

Mr. Brown, in a recent interview, said that American forces ''are not as capable
as I want them to be, but they are formidable, in terms of strategic forces,
even to deter a nuclear attack on the United States or its allies or its vital
interests.'' He added: ''They would deter anybody who is not crazy.''

Assessment by Brown

On the strategic ''triad'' of bombers, land-based missiles and missile
submarines, Mr. Brown said: ''It is clear that the United States has to do more,
has to do new things, has to modernize its forces to make sure that the triad as
a whole retains its invulnerability.''

He said that in nonnuclear air power ''we remain ahead'' and at sea ''our fleet
still is, clearly, the world's best.'' On the ground, Mr. Brown said that all of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's forces were nearly equal to those of
the Soviet-bloc Warsaw Pact and said: ''There is no way that we are going to
fight a war in Europe alone against the Soviet Union, no way that we are going
to fight in East Asia alone against the Soviet Union.''

In technology, Mr. Brown asserted, America's lead ''rests on a scientific
ability and technological ability and an industrial base that is spread across
the U.S. economy.'' The Russians, he said, are often able to match the United
States on a given item, but ''they still don't have the broad capability in
their industries that are provided to us by our computer and data processing
capabilities.''

Retired Admiral Skeptical

Rear Adm. Gene R. LaRocque, a retired naval officer, has an overall view that
differs from Mr. Brown's. The admiral is currently director of the Center for
Defense Information, a group that opposes excessive expenditures for the armed
forces.

He has asserted that ''the United States and its allies are superior to the
Soviet Union in all elements of national power, including most important
military factors.'' He said in an interview: ''We are facing a period of general
decline of the use of military force in international affairs. Military forces
simply don't make it easy to get your way in the world anymore.''

In nuclear forces, Admiral LaRocque contended, the United States outguns the
Soviet Union with 10,000 nuclear warheads to 6,000 in Moscow's arsenal. ''On a
day-to-day basis,'' he said, ''we keep off the Soviet coast some 3,000 nuclear
weapons constantly targeted against the Soviet Union, whereas the Soviets keep
off our coast 200 nuclear weapons targeted on New York, San Francisco and other
parts of our country.''

The retired officer appeared to agree in large part with Secretary Brown that
the United States is ahead of the Soviet Union in tactical air and naval forces
and offsets the Soviet Union's larger numbers on the ground with allies plus the
Chinese threat to the long Soviet border.

A Pentagon Analogy

Gen. David Jones, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, recently compared the
United States and the Soviet Union to two ships in a ''strategic bathtub.'' Both
had floated atop the tub, in positions of ''rough parity,'' since 1977. ''In the
next couple of years we'll hit the bottom of the bathtub,'' he predicted.

Perhaps the representative Pentagon view was expressed recently by Gen. Lew
Allen Jr., a scientist who is the Air Force Chief of Staff.''The Soviets have a
momentum in every area from strategic nuclear, to projection forces, to naval
forces, which is very troubling and requires our utmost efforts if we are to
maintain a reasonable total equivalence with them,'' the four-star general told
a Congressional panel.

With the buildup in Soviet missiles over the past 15 years, it is generally
acknowledged that the United States has lost the clear superiority it once
possessed in strategic strength. Whether the Soviet Union is acquiring a
threatening superiority is a matter of debate, but it seems likely, say military
analysts, that both sides are moving into a new strategic relationship in which
neither will have a definite edge.

In conventional forces, the numerical comparisons become even more difficult
since the military plans and needs of the two sides are different. For example,
the United States counts on allies, particularly in Europe, to offset the
numerical superiority of the Soviet Union in ground forces. The Soviet Union, in
turn, must depend upon potentially unreliable allies in Eastern Europe and
contend with large Chinese forces on its eastern flank as well.

At this point, three questions are at the core of the debate over the nation's
readiness: Does the United States have the armed strength to meet the Soviet
challenge, especially in the Persian Gulf oil region? Is the nation capable of
honoring its defense commitments to more than 40 nations, especially at a time
when Moscow has sent proxy forces of Cubans to fight in support of Marxist
regimes in Angola, Ethiopia and South Yemen? And, perhaps most significant,
could the United States successfully deter a Soviet nuclear strike against
increasingly vulnerable Minuteman missiles?

Focus on Conventional Force

The Carter Administration, which came into office vowing to cut the military
budget $5 billion to $7 billion and instead increased military outlays from $108
billion in 1977 to $141.5 billion last year, has taken a series of steps to
bolster the nation's nuclear and conventional forces. Its current $157.5 billion
military budget includes a total of $12 billion for major programs to modernize
the nation's long-range nuclear weapons. Nuclear-armed cruise missiles, which
fly at tree-top altitudes to avoid detection, are scheduled for deployment on
B-52 bombers in about two years.

In addition, the budget provides for long-range transport planes for the new
200,000-troop Rapid Deployment Force. The potential need for such a force has
been illustrated by Soviet moves in Afghanistan and the Iranian takeover of the
American Embassy in Teheran. There are also plans to buy seven more special
ships in which military equipment for the amphibious force can be stored in
various parts of the world, to supplement the seven ships already on station.

These plans by the Carter Administration to buoy military spending - Ronald
Reagan, the Republican Presidential nominee, terms them, essentially, too little
and too late - are shadowed by the rapid growth of Soviet military outlays. It
is this dramatic Soviet buildup, in which Moscow's military spending from 1970
to 1979 far exceeded the United States total, that intensifies the readiness
problems facing the American military.

Less than 20 years ago the United States had a 4-to-1 lead over the Soviet Union
in intercontinental ballistic missiles, more than 10 times as many
submarine-launched ballistic missiles and about seven times as many long-range
bombers.

Missile Stock Compared

Today, the Soviet Union is ahead, 1,398 to 1,054 in intercontinental ballistic
missile launchers and 950 to 656 in submarine-launched ballistic missiles. The
United States lead in long-range bombers has been narrowed to 348 to 156.

Soviet conventional strength is awesome as well, at least numerically. With 3.6
million troops, the Soviet military is nearly twice the size of the United
States military. The Russian tank force has grown 35 percent and artillery
forces 40 percent in the last decade. Twenty new warships are delivered to the
Soviet Navy every year, while last year 12 were delivered in the United States.

PU FIRST AND LAST ADD

''A decade ago we would have relied on the shadow cast by our strategic nuclear
superiority to deter adventure that could lead to direct confrontation,'' said
Senator Henry M. Jackson, Democrat of Washington, a longtime critic of
accommodation with the Soviet Union. ''Today that strategic advantage is gone,
and soon it will lie with the Soviets.

''We are in a dangerous position of military disadvantage across almost the
entire spectrum of military power,'' he added. ''And our wounds are largely
self-inflicted, the product of a decade of wishful thinking and inadequate
action.

''For fear of crying wolf, we have behaved like sheep.''

Debate in Political Arena

Not since the ''missile gap'' of 1960 has military policy been as much of a
campaign issue in a peacetime election as this year. It is an issue in which
arms policy serves as a metaphor for leadership.

Mr. Reagan terms Mr. Carter weak and vacillating in dealing with Soviet advances
and seeks a ''margin of safety'' against the Soviet Union. Mr. Reagan defines
this as ''whatever it takes to be strong enough that no other nation will dare
violate the peace.'' The Republican challenger, who says that the United States
must regain its dominance and renew ''our resolve to preserve world peace and
freedom,'' has urged more spending on the military but has so far avoided
specific proposals.

Mr. Carter has charged that Mr. Reagan's approach is based on a ''make-believe
world'' and will lead to confrontation and an ''uncontrollable, unaffordable and
unwinnable arms race.'' Mr. Carter has boasted of having ''reversed the
Republican decline in defense,'' although as a Presidential candidate in 1976 he
promised cuts in the military budget.

The major independent candidate, John B. Anderson, has sought to strike a
balance between his opponents. ''We cannot enter the international arena of the
1980's either poorly armed or fearful to do whatever is necessary to meet our
commitments,'' the Anderson platform says. However, it adds: ''We must never
forget that arms by themselves are not sufficient to guarantee our security.''

The intensity of the military issue in the current election was underlined by
Mr. Brown's confirmation of news reports about a new aircraft called Stealth,
which is said to be virtually invisible to enemy radar. Mr. Reagan and other
Republicans said that word of the secret aircraft was deliberately planted by
the Administration to answer campaign criticisms of Mr. Carter's military
policies, including cancellation of the B-1 bomber. Mr. Brown denied the charge.


Worries by the Public

Perhaps more significant, it is evident that the Soviet buildup, coupled with
the nation's readiness problems, now worries a majority of Americans. A recent
New York Times/CBS News Poll found that 63 percent of those interviewed believed
that the United States had lost ground against the Soviet Union in terms of
military strength, while 24 percent believed that United States military
capabilities had remained about the same compared to the Soviet Union.

''The fact that the Soviets have built up their strategic forces to this degree
has come through as a shock wave,'' said Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan,
Democrat of New York.

He recalled that during the Senate hearings in June on the strategic arms
limitation treaty with the Soviet Union, his colleagues were ''stunned'' at the
Soviet advances. ''People sat down to find out why this is a good treaty, and
they found that the Soviets had been building missiles and warheads far beyond
ours,'' said Senator Moynihan, a supporter of the treaty. ''People were almost
uncomprehending. There was a traumatized reaction. It was as if there was this
great time warp in which people denied the evidence.

''The danger is, of course, that you go from underreacting to overreacting,'' he
said.  At one level, Congressional and military officials express their deepest
concerns about the loss of the United States' nuclear edge over the Soviet
Union, and the vigorous Soviet bid to achieve superiority in the 1980's. The
Russians are currently building a force of powerful long-range nuclear missiles
that could potentially knock out more than 90 percent of America's Minuteman
missiles in a nuclear attack within the next year.

Equipment Wearing Out

Moreover, military scientists have told Congress that Moscow, over the next 10
years, could find, with the help of satellites, ways to detect and destroy the
Navy's 41 missile-carrying submarines. These have traditionally been deemed
invulnerable to Soviet attack.

Intertwined with this Soviet nuclear threat, key parts of the American strategic
arsenal are wearing out. The B-52, for example, the mainstay of the Air Force's
nuclear bomber forces, is about 20 years old and afflicted with aging equipment
such as frequently faulty bombing and navigation computers.

Like other major weapons systems that are aging, the B-52 is also afflicted with
a spare parts problem. Because of the age of the plane, the stockpile of
mass-produced spare parts has been depleted.

At another level, however, military officials and commanders in the field are
plainly perplexed and worried about the problems confronting the volunteer
military, problems of too few men, too little equipment and too many skilled
people dropping out, especially in the Navy and Air Force, leaving serious gaps
in critical jobs.

The problems confronting the Army are underscored in a confidential report
showing that six of the service's 10 combat divisions in the United States were
rated ''not combat-ready'' last December. The report was evidence of what the
Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Edward C.  Meyer, termed the nation's ''hollow army,''
with shortages in personnel, training and weapons.

Drop in School Experience

The share of enlisted soldiers with college experience has dropped sharply, from
13.9 percent in 1964 to 3.2 percent last year. A total of 68 percent of the
enlistees in the first half of 1979 had high school diplomas, while the figure
is only 58 percent this year.

Recruiters persistently complain about the poor literacy and lowgrade skills of
enlistees, although some field officers say today's enlistees, over all, can be
trained just as effectively as the draftees of years past.

But what concerns military officials more than attracting highquality enlistees
is the difficulty of keeping them in the military.  At this point servicemen and
women, many with eight to 12 years of service who would ordinarily have stayed
in until becoming eligible for 20-year pensions, are leaving in significant
numbers.  Low pay and inflation, coupled with a proliferation of working wives
who refuse to move every few years, have drained the military of some of its
most skilled mid-level personnel.

The Navy is perhaps hardest hit by the shortage. The ranks of nuclear-qualified
petty officers with 10 to 13 years in the military have been sharply depleted.

The problem was highlighted last March when the skipper of the U.S.S. Canisteo,
a supply ship based at Norfolk, Va., informed his superiors that he did not have
enough qualified men in his engine rooms to start a scheduled voyage. Similar
problems exist in the Army, which is suffering major shortages of technicians
and weapons specialists.

Skilled Pilots Leaving

''Alarming numbers'' of pilots and navigators and skilled enlisted technicians
are leaving the Air Force, according to General Allen.  Currently, the Air Force
is keeping only 25 percent of its fully trained pilots, and the service now
lacks 2,100 pilots and 400 navigators. Most of the pilots go to work for
commercial airlines at salaries that could eventually reach more than $100,000 a
year. Air Force pilots earn $25,000 to $28,000.

These manpower problems are overshadowed, however, by what President Carter
acknowledges to be the limitation on the nation's ability to project its combat
power in the Persian Gulf region.

Although military officials agree that the United States is probably in a
reasonable position to thwart Soviet moves in regions where the danger does not
seem serious at the moment, in Europe and Korea, the nation's armed forces face
serious potential difficulties in the regions of current tension, specifically
the Persian Gulf.

With no bases in the immediate area and few facilities to airlift combat troops,
and with relatively few weapons stockpiled, as they are in Europe, the Pentagon
has instead shaped plans to increase the Navy's sealift capability.

For example, it is buying 12 specialized ''roll-on, roll-off'' vessels, to be
loaded with food, weapons and supplies, that would be deployed near troubled
areas. Beyond these and other new ships, the military is also planning to buy
120 to 180 new cargo planes, of a type called the C-X, that would be able to
carry tanks and, most important to its supporters, could land on short runways
in the Persian Gulf area. The the C-X program, expected to cost $6 billion to $9
billion, has already met Congressional opposition.

In the meantime, to meet a potential threat in the Persian Gulf, the Pentagon
has formed the Rapid Deployment Force, drawn from all the services and designed
to mobilize quickly in response to Soviet moves, especially in the third world.
At the moment, the force has come under some criticism because it cannot move
rapidly, nor in some cases are its divisions fully combat-ready. There are not
enough aircraft and ships to get troops to a crisis quickly. By the middle or
late 1980's, however, the United States military is expected to overcome its
transport deficiencies with new equipment and bases.

At present, President Carter concedes that the nation does not have ''enough
military strength and enough military presence'' in the Persian Gulf ''to defend
the region unilaterally.''

But some of his commanders say that the results of a test of strength in the
Persian Gulf would be uncertain, despite the numerous shortcomings facing the
American military. ''Neither side can be confident of the outcome,'' said
General Jones of Joint Chiefs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos and Graphs on Page 58Illustrations: photo of Eric Holmes graph
of public concern over defense spending photo

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Typhoon Damages Vietnam Area

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 45, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 45 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 20


A typhoon flooded nearly 10,000 acres of rice fields and destroyed homes,
schools and hospitals last Tuesday, the Vietnam news agency reported today. It
said the storm - the sixth tropical storm to hit Vietnam in two months - struck
Thanh Hoa Province south of Hanoi.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOUGLAS, IN LAST MEMOIRS, DEALS HARSHLY WITH HIS CRITICS

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 66, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 766 words


William O. Douglas, the former Associate Justice who died last Jan. 19 after
retiring from the United States Supreme Court on Nov. 12, 1975, spent his
retirement years revising his autobiography, ''The Court Years 1939-1975,''
which is to be published on Oct. 6.

The book is as rough-hewn an indictment of former Presidents and other
Washington officals, especially those who tried to impeach him or deride his
philosophy on the bench, as is likely to appear from the pen of a former Supreme
Court Justice. Justice Douglas, who was appointed to the bench by Franklin D.
Roosevelt, served for 36 years, longer than any other Supreme Court Justice in
the nation's history.

The greater part of the book was written by 1973; in subsequent years Justice
Douglas brought the manuscript up to date, working with his editor, Charlotte
Mayerson of Random House. His book contract, which is copyright by his estate,
reads that it is to be published ''at his discretion or upon his death at the
discretion of his designee.''

Cutting Edge of Controversy

The major part of the book covers many of the decisions in which Justice Douglas
was at the cutting edge: the treatment of nonconformists, the loyalty-security
program, the meaning of ''separate but equal'' treatment of minority students in
public schools and the influence of big business on the Government.

His personal life, as well as his liberal decisions on the bench, put him high
on the ''enemies list'' of conservatives. He obviously kept an unofficial list
of his own, however, and in these memoirs, which follow an earlier book on his
pre-Court years, ''Go East, Young Man,'' his criticisms of those who crossed him
are heard in full cry.

Justice Douglas offers these observations about those whom he considered
wrongdoers in office: Richard M. Nixon - ''He was an amoral man. Deceit,
simulations, telling lies marked the character of the man. He was bright, able
and wholly unethical. Nixon lived not for his 'friends' but for his 'enemies.'
Everyone who crossed his path, everyone who was a competitor, had to be
destroyed. That was the case of Jerry Voorhis and of Helen Douglas. It was true
of Pat Brown in the Governor's race in 1962. It was true of Ed Muskie in the
1972 campaign.''

Gerald R. Ford - ''We predicted that Gerald Ford would be Nixon's choice for
Vice President. It had to be Ford because of his mediocrity. Nixon picked a man
who represented the doldrums of conservatism, though Ford, unlike Spiro T.
Agnew, was an honest man.

''Ford and his associates were planning a Roman holiday in the summer of 1970,
with my impeachment the main event. First on their program was obscenity.
Second, they would use the Mafia. Ford had planned to bring underworld
characters to the stand in conjunction with my hoped-for appearance, and thus
create a public impression that organized crime was sitting on the Court.''

Lyndon B. Johnson - ''L.B.J., like Nixon after him, always spoke of peace and
emphasized how peaceful the intentions of Americans in Vietnam were. That, of
course, was fraudulent talk. Almost every day of the Johnson term brought an
escalation of the war effort. Many nations, at his instigation, worked on the
Vietnam peace problem, but little did they realize that he was making each of
them a patsy, since he had no intention of settling the war or coming to terms
with Hanoi.''

Justice Douglas also provides these assessments of the Chief Justices under whom
he served: Charles Evans Hughes - ''A great Chief Justice who was also a wise
man.'' Harlan Fiske Stone - ''A genial and affable man.'' Once, after Justice
Douglas had voted against him, he said, ''I can understand why my other brethren
have gone astray, but I cannot understand why you went with them.'' When Justice
Douglas said he had learned the law from him, the Chief Justice replied, ''By
God, you did not learn that from me!''

Fred Vinson - ''He had a gentle voice and manners but a resolution of steel. He
would filibuster for hours to have his way on a case.'' Earl Warren - ''He was
polite, considerate and friendly, but when he felt strongly on an issue -
obscenity or flag-burning - he held forth at length. I like to think that the
spirit of Earl Warren is abroad in this land, quickening the conscience of our
people.''

Warren E. Burger - ''He was extremely personable. He thought of the Court as a
symbol of authority which had best not be exercised. His concern was for law and
order.''

At Justice Douglas's request, according to his editor, an appendix was added to
the book: the Constitution of the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Douglas in chambers

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAMPS;
U.N. BEGINS FLAG ISSUE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 40, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1396 words


The United Nations is putting out this Friday the first installment of an issue
devoted to the flags of its member states, a series that will go on for 10 years
and perhaps longer if more nations become members.

To begin its Flag Series, the U.N. is issuing four different miniature sheets
bearing the flags of the 16 nations selected for the initial segment. Four of
the 16 stamps appear on each sheet, with each of the four stamps in a block of
four. Specifically, there are 16 stamps on a sheet, but each sheet depicts four
of the 16 flags in the issue.

All of the stamps in the first installment are in denominations of 15 cents, the
first-class letter rate in the United States at the present time. They are being
issued only at U.N. headquarters in New York. They are not, as is customary for
commemoratives, also being issued at the European headquarters of the
organization at Geneva, Switzerland, or at their offices in Vienna, Austria.

The World Federation of United Nations Associations, in keeping with its
tradition of accompanying new U.N. issues with cacheted materials and art work,
is this time providing not one but two cacheted covers,and not one but two works
of art, all the work of the noted artist Chaim Gross. The Flag issue has
attracted a newcomer to the field of cacheted covers - the U.N. Children's Fund.
It is initiating a program of serviced first-day covers, with the cachet a work
of art from the country whose flag is on the stamp.

The groupings of the four flags on each sheet are: Fiji, Luxembourg, Turkey and
Vietnam.  Bangladesh, Guinea, Mali and Suriname.  El Salvador, France, Venezuela
and Yugoslavia.  United Republic of Cameroon, Hungary, Madagascar and Rwanda.

The selection of the flags to be reproduced on the first installment was by
random drawing by U.N. Secretary General Kurt Waldheim in 1978. Fiji and
Cameroon were replacements for two of the original choices, Iran and Democratic
Yemen. These changes had nothing to do with the world situation, however. It was
just that there was a possibility that Iran would adopt a different flag and
that the two Yemens would reunite.

The flags on the stamps are identical to those flying outside the New York
headquarters of the U.N., except that they are in true proportions. The flags
flying in front of the U.N. building are slightly modified in proportion to
enhance visibility and accent details. The stamps were designed by Ole Hamann
prior to his retirement as chief of the U.N. Postal Administration, and executed
by Irving Konopiaty, an American artist with the UNPA's Graphic Design Unit.

The task of achieving dimensional accuracy and true color in the 16 isues was so
exacting that many months passed before the designs left the drawing board. The
stamps were produced by offset by Courvoisier of Switzerland. There are 7
million of each flag stamp.  The 112 million stamps, sent some months ago in 192
crates weighing 202 pounds each, were the largest single shipment the UNPA had
ever received.

The stamps bear the minimal text matter: the name of the country above the flag
and ''United Nations 15c'' below. The background behind the flag is a light
gray. Each stamp measures 39.2 millimeters horizontally and 28.6mm vertically,
perforation to perforation.

The margins around the sheets are white and the marginal inscription -the U.N.
flag and the text ''Flag Series'' - is in blue. Four marginal inscriptions
appear on each sheet, two at the top and two at the bottom, positioned over or
under the center area.

Purchasing procedures for the flag issue vary from those ordinarily in effect
for U.N. issues.  Any of the four full sheets may be purchased individually. But
collectors who wish to purchase a block of four of a particular flag stamp must
purchase the entire sheet - that is, all four blocks of four on the sheet to
acquire the particular block desired. Also, the center block of four different
flag stamps setenant may not be acquired separately. Collectors wishing the
setenant center block or individual corner inscription blocks must purchase
complete sheets.

Four sets of singles are available. Each set of singles includes the four
different flag stamps on an individual sheet. Any of the four sets of singles
may be purchased separately, but it is not possible to acquire a single stamp or
two or three singles.

The Flag Series stamps will not be included in the 1980 New York souvenir folder
and in folders of subsequent years, but will be included in a separate folder.

The 1980 souvenir folders, which will go on sale Nov. 21 simultaneously with the
last U.N. issue of the year, will grow to four. The folders contain one mint
single of the year's issues. The four folders, and their prices, are: New York
issues, $2.74; Geneva issues, $4.20; Vienna issues, $4.53; Flag Series, $2.60.

Mail orders should include return postage of 41 cents for one folder, 54 cents
for two or three, 67 cents for four, and 13 cents for each additional one.

For first-day cover collectors, in an exception for the Flag Series only, covers
canceled New York on Geneva cachets will be available by mail order. The single
and marginal inscription block first-day covers will be available in sets of
four. A set of four first-say covers will be composed of the four single stamps
or four marginal inscription block stamps from the individual sheets of four.
There will be four first-day cover combinations available, each in sets of four.

For orders and further information write to: U.N. Postal Administration, P.O.
Box 5900, Grand Central Station, New York, N.Y.  10163.

A collage of the flight of five birds, created from portions of the 16 flags, is
the work of art created for the traditional material with which the World
Federation of United Nations Associations accompanies U.N. issues. The artist is
Chaim Gross, a renowned venerable figure in art circles, who has contributed his
talents to a number of WFUNA items. The collage was made from U.N. postcards.

WFUNA's standard-size cacheted covers and signed lithograph are based on the
collage. A sketch by the artist preparatory to the collage is the basis of two
other WFUNA items - a reproduction of the pencil drawing and a jumbo size
envelope large enough to accommodate a whole sheet of flag stamps. These two
items will bear a handlettered identification of each flag done by Joan
Belserene, a freelance calligrapher whose work has also appeared on previous
WFUNA cachets.

Standard cacheted covers are 25 cents each, or five for $1 plus 30 cents for
mailing for up to nine covers, or 15 cents for every additional five. Jumbo
cacheted covers are 50 cents each, five for $2, plus $1 mailing for up to five;
45 cents for every five more.

Serviced standard first-day-of-issue covers are available in sets only. Covers
with a single flag stamp on each are $12.50; 16 covers with blocks of four of
each flag stamp are $25; four covers with setenant center blocks of four from
each sheet are $8.50. The mailing charge is 30 cents for up to five and 30 cents
for each additional five.

Serviced jumbo cacheted covers with all 16 flag stamps are $6.50; a jumbo with
four setenant center blocks is $8; four jumbos with a full sheet on each are
$20. The mailing charge is 85 cents for one, $1.15 for up to five, 60 cents for
each additional five.

The collage has been produced in a nine-color lithograph in a limited edition of
1,500, individually numbered and signed by Chaim Gross. The lithograph, 8 1/2 x
11 inches, is accompanied by documentation and background information and sells
for $50. A lithograph with a flag stamp and first-day cancellation is $51. The
reproduction of the pencil drawing is $5 plus a mailing charge of $1 for up to
five and 35 cents for each additional five.

Orders and requests for supplementary information should be addressed to WFUNA,
Room DC-360, United Nations, N.Y. 10017.  The U.N. Children's Fund is
undertaking for the complete run of the Flag Series an extensive
advance-subscription philatelic program with many elements. Brochures describing
the components of the program in detail are available from UNICEF Flag Stamp
Program, Box 4480, New York, N.Y. 10017.

UNICEF is providing subscribers to its program, simultaneously with the issue of
the U.N. stamps, a set of 16 cacheted covers, each bearing a stamp with the
marginal inscription tab.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of block of stamps

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HIGHLIGHTS;
SEEING RED

SECTION: Section 3; Page 21, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 333 words


The two-week winter holiday: luxury hotel accommodations in big cities, treks
through rustic rural areas and a lazy day-long boat trip down the Mekong River
in scenic Vietnam.

Vietnam? Many may think that Americans last left that country illequipped for
tourism. Not so, according to New York's Guardian Tours, which this winter is
sponsoring the first American tours to Vietnam.

Granted, Guardian is not your typical travel agency. A revenueproducing arm of
The Guardian, a self-described ''Marxist-Leninist independent radical weekly,''
its connections with left-wing governments throughout the world have allowed it
to obtain visas when conventional tour groups cannot.

''The United States does not have diplomatic ties to any of the countries we
tour,'' said Stewart Ozer, co-manager of the group.  ''But we just telex the
visas through another country's office.''

During the two-week Vietnam visit, the 20 tourists stay in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh
City (formerly Saigon) and Danang, tour schools and agricultural cooperatives
and float down the Mekong River. With a price tag of $1,700, not including the
$1,200 airfare to Bangkok, ''These tours are obviously not for starving
Socialists,'' Mr. Ozer said.

This is not the weekly's first venture into travel. ''All through the 1970's,
until 1976, any American who wanted to go to China besides Nixon had to go
through us,'' Mr. Ozer said. In its eight years as travel agents, the Guardian
has also ushered 500 Americans through Cuba on its $599 one-week tour. This year
the agency is offering a Nicaragua tour ''to view the triumph of the Sandinista
revolution first-hand'' for 10 days, costing $895. There is also a $795
''social/political'' one-week tour of Grenada.

''There's no ideological brainwashing,'' Mr. Ozer said. ''The groups are fairly
well mixed and the discussions are very lively. The only problems that we've had
have been with suspicion that some tour members were C.I.A. agents, but then the
tour group was just shadowed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPAIGN 1980: HEAD-ON COLLISIONS ON THE LOW ROAD

BYLINE: By TERENCE SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1028 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When the political history of 1980 is written, mid-September is likely to be
recorded as the time when the Presidential campaigns of the two major-party
candidates took a headlong dive for the gutter. Suddenly, the air was thick with
political invective. President Carter warned darkly of the stirrings of racism
and hatred in the campaign, while Ronald Reagan countered with accusations of
political cowardice and dishonesty.

Mr. Carter got headlines with his remarks about racism, which he said -
repeatedly - had ''no place'' in the campaign, while Mr.  Reagan got the laughs
with his favorite joke about the President's integrity. ''We have a President
who promised he would never lie to us,'' Mr. Reagan said over and over during a
campaign swing in Texas. ''That reminds me of the quote from Ralph Waldo
Emerson: 'The more he talked of his honor, the faster we counted our spoons.''
The Texas crowds laughed and nodded to show that they got the message.

By Thursday, the controversy surrounding the President's remarks had reached
such a point that he was compelled to devote much of a nationally televised news
conference to a defense of his campaign tactics. He had never meant to suggest
that Mr. Reagan was a racist, he said. But the President pointedly repeated his
contention that the Republican had introduced ''codewords'' like state's rights
and references to the Ku Klux Klan into the campaign.

Harsh talk is no stranger to Presidential campaigns. The Johnson-Goldwater race
in 1964 produced some vintage abuse about the ''lunatic fringe'' and being
''soft on communism.''

The Nixon-McGovern campaign was rich in character assassination, with the
Democrat pouring it on as he slipped in the polls. The Nixon Administration,
George McGovern charged before the Watergate scandal had unraveled, was ''the
most corrupt in history,'' the President a ''fraud,'' and his bombing of Vietnam
the ''worst crime since the Nazi extermination of Jews in Germany.'' All of that
was directed at the man who originally called Helen Gahagan Douglas the ''Pink
Lady.''

But granted that strong language is hardly new in Presidential campaigns, last
week underscored the negative quality of the 1980 race. It is negative in two
senses: the level of discourse and, judging from the polls, the attitudes of the
voters. More than in most years, the voters are vocally unhappy with the choice
before them and admitting that they are voting against rather than for a given
candidate. A recent Yankelovich poll, for example, indicated that 43 percent of
the voters who preferred Mr. Reagan said they were ''really voting against Mr.
Carter,'' while 34 per cent of the Carter supporters said their choice was based
on opposition to Mr. Reagan.

Not surprisingly, the figures for the disenchanted supporting independent John
B. Anderson are even higher. A striking 61 percent of his supporters admit to
being motivated by an aversion to both Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan. The ''anti''
vote has never been higher, nor the mood of the voter more sour.

Mr. Anderson, of course, has built his candidacy on the alleged inadequacies of
the two major party candidates. But in the past few days, there have been
significant changes in his strategy. He has shifted the main burden of his
attack to Jimmy Carter and acknowledged that he is going to remain in the race
to the end, even if the result is to elect Mr. Reagan.

Both major party candidates are clearly trying to build their own constituencies
by appealing to the negative view of the opposition.  In their campaigning
across the country, both Mr. Reagan and Mr.  Carter seem locked in a continuing
battle to make the other man the central issue. On Tuesday, when Mr. Reagan
first heard of Mr.  Carter's imputations of ''racism,'' he quickly stepped
before the television cameras to denounce the President's remarks as
''shameful,'' and ''harmful,'' and an effort to ''tear the country apart.''
Surveying his candidate's exposure on the evening television news programs that
night, Lyn Nofziger, Mr. Reagan's spokesman, confided to a reporter: ''I think
we won that round.''

By Friday, however, Mr. Carter's aides were convinced that his stout defense of
his tactics at his press conference had at least minimized the damage, if not
turned the whole episode to his advantage. ''The re hashing of the racism issue
may have been a negative,'' said a top Carter campaign official, ''but I doubt
it hurt us all that much. It may even have helped.'' But after they thought they
had put it to rest it erupted again yesterday with disclosures that President
Carter' campaign had placed advertisements in 100 blackoriented newspapers
charging that the Republicans are trying to beat him because ''Jimmy Carter
named 37 black judges, cracked down on job bias, and created one million jobs.''

Whichever the case, the candidates have so far kept their focus squarely on the
alleged failings and inadequacies of the other.  Little has been heard in the
way of new solutions to the nation's problems.

One explanation for the sharpening rhetoric of the campaign is the fact that the
race is so close so early. Allowing for the margin of error, the polls indicate
a virtual dead heat between Mr. Carter and Mr. Reagan, with Mr. Anderson well
back. In an apparent stalemate, a politician's natural tendency to go for the
jugular is accentuated.  Leslie C. Francis, who succeeded Tim Kraft last week as
national campaign manager of the Carter-Mondale 1980 Committee, disputes the
notion that the current race is unusually negative in tone and devoid of
stimulating discussion of the issues. ''I've heard that about every campaign
I've ever been involved in, from the city council level to the Presidency,'' he
said.

''But it is true that in the primaries this year and so far in the general
election, the voters seem to be basing their decision on the personal qualities
of the candidates,'' Mr. Francis continued. ''We think there is a tremendous
difference between their political philosophies and the direction they would
take the country, but we're having a hell of a time getting the message across.
No one seems to be listening.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SCHMIDT FACTOR

BYLINE: By John Vinocur; John Vinocur is the chief of The New York Times bureau
in Bonn.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 35, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6793 words


One of Helmut Schmidt's old Social Democratic buddies in Hamburg was asked
recently to describe the man. He made a list of characteristics: lightning
intelligence, vast technical expertise, pragmatism and tirelessness. The
accounting also included permanent irritability, a tendency to depression,
know-it-allism and arrogance. ''Oh, yeah,'' he said, remembering something.
''He's convinced most of the time that he's the only real leader in the Western
world. He's also probably right. The problem is he's German.''

Five years ago, the notion of a West German world leader would have seemed a bit
of local boosterism. Now it is a time for taking oneself very seriously in Bonn.
A kind of institutionalized awe has set in. It has taken increasing hold over
the last three years, a period in which West Germany and Mr. Schmidt, partly
through American leadership troubles, partly through their own strengths, have
been carried forward into a place where they have a considerable say about how
the world is run. The vocabu-lary of caution that was always the shapeless
garment of West German postwar policy seems to be falling away. These days, the
summit meeting in Guadeloupe in January 1979, which brought West Germany and Mr.
Schmidt into the Western Big Four for the first time, sometimes gets referred to
in Government circles in Bonn as the ''deflowering'' that allowed a German
return to the highest levels of international politics. Although the idea still
comes wrapped in conditions and provisos and references to the country's Nazi
past, Mr. Schmidt began this summer to talk for the first time about West
Germany's ''leadership role,'' a phrase that had always been scrupulously
avoided.

Last year, Mr. Schmidt insisted in an interview that West Germany really was not
an economic giant. Now he says that, with the exception of the United States,
his country's financial and commercial strength is the greatest in the world.
Without West German leadership, he goes on, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization's nuclear modernization program would never have been approved. He
was the prime force behind the creation of the European Monetary System. This
summer, Mr. Schmidt claims, his exercise of independent leadership - his
insistence on talking to Leonid Brezhnev at a time when the United States was
trying to punish the Soviet Union for the invasion of Afghanistan - reintroduced
the East-West dialogue and, in his words, pulled the world ''back, thank God,
from a terrible phase.'' The time is past, the Chancellor says, when West
Germany considers as right everything that the United States wants to
accomplish.

But the question is, Where does Mr. Schmidt want to take West Germany and the
Europeans who see him as a leader? The man running against him in national
elections on Oct. 5, Franz Josef Strauss, says that direction is toward
''self-neutralization,'' away from the United States and away from the Atlantic
alliance. A polling organization, which, like all the other public-opinion
surveyors in Germany, says that Mr. Schmidt can't lose against Mr. Strauss, also
reports that most Social Democrats prefer a course between the two superpowers
rather than alongside the United States. Mr. Schmidt continues to proclaim his
loyalty to the United States, but the temptation to fill what he considers a
leadership vacuum may increase if the next American President, regardless of who
wins, continues the policies that have made Europe doubtful of American
leadership.

A number of Europeans have encouraged Mr. Schmidt to assert himself. ''You've
got to do even more leading, Helmut,'' James Callaghan, the former British Prime
Minister, has told him. The same kind of prodding has been heard from Edward
Heath, Mr. Callaghan's Conservative predecessor, and from Constantine
Caramanlis, the Greek Prime Minister. This advice apparently comes, too, from a
long trail of others who sit at the Chancellor's office desk with its miniature
statue of Marcus Aurelius, the Roman Emperor and Stoic philosopher, or at the
bar in his house on Neubergerweg in Langenhorn, a bland, middle-class Hamburg
suburb.

But more international leadership involves taking on new burdens and, until now,
Mr. Schmidt's standard answer to such urgings has been a catalogue of West
German weaknesses and vulnerabilities. As the Chancellor outlines them, his
country is susceptible to blackmail because of Berlin and its long eastern
border with the Communist world, and limited in its exercise of power because it
refuses to have nuclear weapons and will not send its troops out of the NATO
area.

This talk of vulnerability fascinates and sometimes irritates people coming to
West Germany for the first time, their heads full of the remarkable statistics
of economic yield and production and accomplishment, their eyes skimming from
the grass that always seems trimmed to the garbage cans that seem never to lose
their covers, along streets where everything seems to function. Even the faces,
much like Mr. Schmidt's, look back offering, if no embrace, a willfulness, a
readiness to get on with things. But the Germans' conviction about their
vulnerability, the fragility of the life they have gotten so attached to, is
profound, and their desire not to take risks is equal to it, coloring everything
Helmut Schmidt does.

The West Germans, and Mr. Schmidt foremost among them, have never really made up
their minds about how strong they are, and this makes it very difficult for both
to define what they can and want to do.  When Mr. Schmidt talked about West
Germany's growing leadership role this summer, he quickly added that his country
is not a world power and will never become one. ''It's in the middle category,''
he says, not enhancing his reputation for precision. But when Mr. Schmidt is in
an expansive mood, or an electioneering one, he likes to remind listeners that
West Germany has the world's greatest currency reserves, the second greatest
gold reserves, the world's biggest exports per capita and the hardest currency
of any major industrial country. During the oil crises and recessions of the
last six years, he says West Germany has shown in comparison with other
industrial societies that it has ''come out relatively well, indeed, the best.''
West German per capita annual income has climbed to a level where it is ahead of
the United States ($9,278 in 1978 compared to $7,572), and its citizens are the
world's greatest travelers. When Mr. Schmidt is really rolling, he tells his
countrymen they are living in the best, fairest and freest Germany ever. History
says he's probably right.

At the same time, it is a rare exchange student, visiting businessman or member
of an official delegation who has not heard ''Do not ask too much of us, do not
overrate us.'' Up until two years ago, West German foreign-aid contributions in
relation to gross national product had been at a very low level, and even now
the Government is reluctant to issue a timetable showing how it plans to meet
the United Nations' aid target of 0.7 percent for industrial countries. By
United States Defense Department measurements, the German armed forces, though
undoubtedly the best in Western Europe, have not been developing at the rate
NATO set up as a goal to meet Soviet military expansion. When West Germany was
pressed once again last winter for additional help to smooth out the Common
Market's payments and agricultural problems, the Government's answer was, ''We
aren't Europe's paymaster.'' The country's economy is only one-third the size of
that of the United States, Mr. Schmidt reminds people when they press him too
hard for help, and his aides will stress that West Germany's capacity for
expansion is relatively limited, given the high costs of social security to
industry and the problems of productivity it faces.

It is possible to argue that this yes-no-yes attitude about itself is a kind of
adolescent identity struggle on the road to the country's inevitable
consecration as leader of Western Europe and, perhaps, a role as a kind of
associate superpower. There are the obvious reservations about pushing too hard
because of the past - Mr. Schmidt said last year that ''the greater the relative
success of Germany, the longer the memory of Auschwitz will last.'' There is
also a resistance to responsibility that comes from the 35-year habit of being
able to concentrate on business and on welfare programs at home while the
British were dissolving an empire, the French were fighting two colonial wars
and dealing with their own left, and the Americans were struggling through race
problems and the Vietnam War.  And beyond the Germans' personal hesitations,
there are aspects of modern Germany that might give proponents of a greater
German leadership role pause.

Mr. Schmidt congratulated himself and the nation for weathering without
convulsion the 1976-77 terrorist onslaught, an attempt to shake the state by a
group of middle-class young people who, among other things, hated Germany's very
palpable materialism and premium on order. But there have been troubling moments
for democracy, too.  A law was passed that permitted judges to read letters
between lawyers and individuals jailed as terrorists, contacts that are
privileged under American law. Mr. Schmidt, before he changed his mind, had
himself called for legislation that would have allowed magistrates to monitor
private conversations between lawyers and suspects, and it was later disclosed
that the Government had bugged many such conversations.

West Germany is relatively free of the class afflictions of Britain or France,
but the social fabric is not without strain. Sociologists have worked hard
trying to figure out why drug addiction is rising rapidly and why a word had to
be coined (''kinderfeindlichkeit'') to describe the dislike of children, a
phenomenon painfully acknowledged by members of Mr. Schmidt's Government and
underscored by statistics that show West Germany as Europe's leader in auto
accidents involving children. Some attribute the attitude to a repressed
aggression meted out against something smaller and weaker, others suggest that
it reflects a kind of self-centeredness that has contributed to a 50 percent cut
in the birth rate since 1964.

At the same time, the birth rate among the foreigners who have come to take
menial industrial jobs in Germany is twice that of native Germans. Out of a
population of 61 million, there are now about 4.1 million foreigners. A quarter
of them are Turks, and most are concentrated in the big cities, so that the
foreign population in some places reaches 20 percent. A poll this summer of
young foreigners, many of them born in West Germany, showed that two-thirds
considered themselves as ''unwelcome guests'' who had almost nothing to do with
Germans of their own age. They are often alienated, unemployed and inadequately
schooled. Already this situation is reflected in a high crime rate, and the
problem and the potential for immense social tension are only expected to grow.

Even the prospect for Germany's economic performance, which has inspired so much
of the admiration for Mr. Schmidt, is less than perfectly secure over the next
10 or 15 years. The Economics Minister, Otto Lambsdorff, suggested this summer
that, contrary to what foreigners suppose, the West Germans just may not work
hard enough anymore and, compared to the Japanese, may spend too much time on
vacation and sick leave. Over the period of a decade, with no one willing to
lower his standard of living, West Germany could find itself in a situation like
the one already gripping Sweden, where the cost of elaborate and ever-growing
welfare programs has cut into industrial competitiveness and made the state a
permanent borrower.  The pressure on Mr. Schmidt in a second term, particularly
from the strengthened left wing of his party, would not be for austerity but for
new social reforms.

Because of the country's deep concern with personal financial security -the
average German, for example, saves 13 percent of his income compared to 4
percent for the average American - relatively small changes in inflation and
unemployment rates can create great public upset. These days, the unemployment
rolls are relatively low, though they have been held down, in part, by means of
such artifices as Government-subsidized 24-month training programs for
prospective bakery clerks. But Mr. Schmidt must confront the reality of a
Government-commissioned report this summer that projects a doubling in the
current 3.7 jobless rate by 1985.

The official inflation rate was 5.5 percent in July, what would be a welcome
figure in the United States, but the system for computing the rise in consumer
prices is different in the two countries. If an opponent of the Chancellor had
the credibility to make the accusation stick, and there are experts who support
it, he could argue that when the world was admiring West Germany's reported
inflation rate of 5.6 percent in February, it would have been registered as 14
percent if the Government had been using American measurements.

Franz Josef Strauss has had none of that credibility. In spite of his high
intelligence, remarkable sense of humor and great speaking skills, he has been
unable to shake his decades-old reputation at home as a cold warrior,
confrontationist and potential wild man. Mr.  Schmidt has played to those
feelings in the electorate (describing Mr. Strauss as ''unpredictable,'' the
same word he has used in private about Jimmy Carter) while successfully
portraying himself as a man of reason and peace.

In an election campaign in which foreign-policy issues have dominated, Mr.
Strauss has struck out at the Chancellor again and again as being a poor and
reluctant ally of the United States in the year of Afghanistan and Poland, a man
who would sell out the Atlantic alliance. The events in Poland, Mr. Strauss
said, exposed the folly of the German Government's policy of supporting loans to
the Polish authorities and of Mr. Schmidt's personal friendship with the ousted
Communist leader, Edward Gierek. Mr. Schmidt was ''betting on both a politically
and economically bankrupt regime,'' he insisted.

Mr. Strauss also warned of growing West German indebtedness, domestic budget
deficits, a current accounts deficit and the continuing need for foreign
borrowing - all of which, he says, will eventually destabilize the country's
economic situation.

It seems a distant memory now, in light of the easy victory Mr.  Schmidt is
expected to win, but it is not insignificant to note, in assessing the
Chancellor's strength and possible scope as a world leader, that just four years
ago he was a politician in trouble. In the October 1976 elections, for the first
time since 1953, his party failed to achieve national gains in the popular vote,
and his coalition's lead in seats in the Bundestag fell from 46 to eight.  After
the election, Mr. Schmidt could not make good on a campaign promise to increase
pensions by 10 percent, a bitter personal embarrassment after a race decided
totally on domestic issues by voters who consider a platform plank a kind of
signed dealer's warranty. The Government just did not have the cash. Almost at
the same time, a wave of antinuclearly destabilize the country's economic
situation.  It seems a distant memory now, in light of the easy victory Mr.
Schmidt is expected to win, but it is not insignificant to note, in assessing
the Chancellor's strength and possible scope as a world leader, that just four
years ago he was a politician in trouble. In the October 1976 elections, for the
first time since 1953 his party failed to achieve national gains in the popular
vote, and his coalition's lead in seats in the Bundestag fell from 46 to eight.
After the election, Mr. Schmidt could not make good on a campaign promise to
increase pensions by 10 percent, a bitter personal embarrassment after a race
decided totally on domestic issues by voters who consider a platform plank a
kind of signed dealer's warranty. The Government just did not have the cash.
Almost at the same time, a wave of antinuclear demonstrations broke out, and Mr.
Schmidt seemed unable to deal with them. When the Bundestag voted on his
nomination as Chancellor, two coalition members deserted him, and he passed with
just one more vote than the required 249. He appeared grim, drawn and seriously
depressed. His Labor Minister resigned.  Looking back, an aide acknowledged that
the Chancellor was ''talking about quitting.''

These long months of doubt, indecisiveness and passivity do not figure among the
vulnerabilities that Mr. Schmidt finds politically handy, that he manipulates to
make domestic policy or to deal with pressure from allies, such as the
do-more-for-defense Americans, or from the third world aid-seekers. In any case,
such periods of uncertainty provide a curious psychological counterpoint to Mr.
Schmidt's sudden moments of flushness. When he was running for election four
years ago, Mr. Schmidt was quoted by a friend as saying he thinks he saved New
York City, since he believed he talked President Ford into giving it Federal
financial aid. This year, he said, again at election time, that West Germany was
in better financial order, with fewer debts, than it was under Kaiser Wilhelm in
1913. The talk intrigues some people and provokes others. With the cocky
reference to the Kaiser, some editorialists said, it didn't take much of a
historian to notice that 1914 was a year of death and disaster.

Helmut Schmidt was born in Hamburg on Dec. 23, 1918, just about a month after
the Kaiser ran out on the Reich to then-neutral Holland.  His father, now in his
90's and a resident of an old people's home in a Hamburg suburb, was a
schoolteacher, and his paternal grandfather, a stevedore. Mr. Schmidt's coolness
and his capacity for hard work are those of his background - a northern port
city and the mists between the proletariat and the lower middle class. He is a
marvelous actor, able to terrify with his iciness or win over with a look of
enraptured attention, and to keep people from coming too close.

He is known to be relatively tight, a non-sufferer of fools who serve no
immediate purpose, and his own best public-relations man. In a country whose
press, like most in Europe, keeps a respectful distance from its leaders, he has
been able to spoon out what he thinks people should know about him - his modest
house, his serious tastes in books and music, his attention to business. No
pictures are printed of Mr. Schmidt, his jacket off, his waistline thick, his
eyes swollen, sitting in his Luftwaffe 707 jetliner after a state visit.  And
there are no lay psychiatrists on television or in the newspapers to discuss the
significance of Mr. Schmidt's nervousness before meetings with other leaders, or
to seize upon an admission in an interview that his father, a Prussian type, did
not tolerate talking back or crying or any show of feelings and never once
offered a word of praise.

His friends admit that his moods can swoop and that he struggles with his anger
-calling the country ''ungovernable,'' for example, and then fighting to regain
control of himself. The heat of his personality, the pull of his dark moods, his
difficulties in keeping control are there, but not spoken of - though he does
acknowledge that El Greco, an artist who lived with despair, is his favorite
painter. There are no documents on this struggle with himself, only the
Chancellor's acknowledged passion for the teachings of Marcus Aurelius and his
endure-and-abjure philosophy of leadership. ''Begin each day,'' Marcus Aurelius
writes, ''by telling yourself - today I shall be meeting with interference,
ingratitude, insolence, disloyalty, ill will and selfishness.''

Ah, yes, ingratitude, insolence - they're everywhere. And the Chancellor
responds with a kind of insecurity that has resulted in quick telephone calls to
the American Ambassador for a Schmidt lecture on world events or in the dressing
down of someone who expresses an errant opinion.

The scene is the Chancellor's personal 707, en route to Washington last March
for a meeting with President Carter. A group of reporters is called into Mr.
Schmidt's compartment to get the word on the next three days. ''Where's
what's-his-name?'' the Chancellor asks, peering around, looking for and then
finding an American reporter. He had written an article about West Germany's
perception of the United States, and now Mr. Schmidt was reading it out loud.
The idea of the story was that sometimes the West German leadership tried to
inflict its very structured method for dealing with world events on a superpower
that, because of its history of strength and distance from Europe, had an ad
hoc, day-to-day approach. The Chancellor scoffed. He knew America, he had been
to America 40 or 41 times (''You could check that,'' he said to an aide) and he
knew more Congressmen, diplomats, business leaders and labor chiefs than the
reporter did. In fact, more than almost any American he could think of. He
grinned in triumph.

Yet, there is also a deep current of compassion in the man. An aide, who loves
him dearly, told about a left-wing member of the Chancellor's party who had
greatly irritated him with a series of critical comments. Though galling, the
arguments were also intelligent, the aide said. The critic fell sick and entered
a hospital. By the aide's account, the Chancellor wrote the man an unusually
warm and deeply personal letter. ''There was no memo on his desk telling him to
do it,'' the aide said. ''He just cared. He cares very deeply, he feels very
deeply - but he holds it down.''

Nobody disputes Mr. Schmidt's quickness of mind, his powers of persuasion. An
adviser, whose authority involves areas of immense technical complexity, says
the Chancellor has the most ''extraordinary range of intelligence I have ever
seen.''

The Chancellor gave a few peeks at himself by filling in the blanks on a
likes-and-dislikes sheet published by a German magazine. His favorite bird, we
learn, is a sea parrot. Golda Meir, he says, is his most cherished real-life
woman hero. Frankness stands as the quality he seeks most in friends. If Mr.
Schmidt is perceived to be a frank man himself, then we will have to believe his
assertion that the biggest mistake he ever made was not pushing ahead with his
original goal of becoming an architect and city planner.

He got good marks in school in drawing, English and history. He joined the
Hitler Youth, advanced to the rank of pack leader and then, he says, was
''suspended,'' apparently because he was considered a bit of a complainer. By
1937, he was in the army, an antiaircraft lieutenant who during the war served
in the Soviet Union and in Berlin and fought in the Battle of the Bulge.
Eventually he was captured by the British. People who don't like Mr. Schmidt, on
both the left and the right, have tried to make something out of his attendance
in 1944 at a Nazi show trial of the plotters who tried to kill Hitler. But he
has said he was forced to attend, and the British, in any case, found Helmut
Schmidt to be clean and quickly let him out of prison camp in 1945, r uling that
he was not a Nazi.

In a moment of ironic bitterness, Herbert Wehner, the party whip in the
Bundestag, once said that Mr. Schmidt seemed to have learned his progressive
politics in officers' clubs. As soon as the young lieutenant went back to
Hamburg and into the university, he became a Social Democratic student leader
and got a degree in economics. Other than preparing income tax returns, he never
had a job outside politics. He reached Parliament in 1953 and became quickly
useful as a clever but abrasive speaker who did much of the verbal softening up
for his party. His reputation became that of Schmidt-the-lip, the big mouth, the
know-it-all, the knife thrower - a part of his character that as Chancellor he
has tried to subdue. The speechmaking brought him national attention, but it
took a flood in Hamburg, a near catastrophe, to bring him to real prominence in
1962 as that state's Senator for the Interior who brilliantly organized the
rescue efforts, standing alongside squad cars with emergency phone in hand for
photographers and telling the confused Mayor to buzz off, that Helmut Schmidt
was in charge.

In the 60's, Mr. Schmidt wrote two books on defense policy. They showed his
immense seriousness, his strong analytical powers and an ability for making
wide-ranging political syntheses. (Never much concerned about being called
immodest, Mr. Schmidt announced that his summer reading list this year included
his own ''Balance of Power,'' written in 1969.) The books probably widened Mr.
Schmidt's public image beyond that of energetic doer; now he was a politician of
real intellectual and theoretical competence. He had none of the inspirational
force field that seemed to surround Willy Brandt, who was also moving toward
power in the mid-60's. But in a less obvious, longer-term way, Mr. Schmidt may
have been an easier figure for many young German men to identify with - people
who saw themselves as competent and aggressive and were probably convinced that
they were smarter and better prepared than the Americans or Englishmen they were
doing business with. Unlike Mr. Brandt, Helmut Schmidt was not throwing morals
or perfect worlds at them. He stood only 5 feet 6 inches tall, and he had
thyroid problems. He had a wife who had been a school teacher and a daughter who
works for a bank. Like many of them, he owned a middle-of-the-line car, an Opel,
drank Coca-Cola and had a little brick house that he bought from a mass
developer. He believed mostly, it seemed, in getting things done. By 1972, Mr.
Schmidt had been both Defense Minister and Finance Minister, impressing everyone
he met in Washington, London and Paris with his unusual capabilities. When Willy
Brandt's better world fell apart in 1974, Helmut Schmidt was there, a man who
seemed to have a grip on things.

The notion of Mr. Schmidt as a world leader is about three years old. It seems
to coincide with the dollar's shriveling against the mark, and the month-in,
month-out comparison of Mr. Schmidt's policies with those of President Jimmy
Carter. Whenever the two men disagreed, the American President did not seem to
win and everybody noticed.

A significant pattern seemed to develop during their first meeting at the
economic summit of the Western industrial countries in London in the spring of
1977. The United States went to the summit with the notion that the West German
economy could stimulate world trade by expanding more, a concept that became
known as the locomotive theory. To the Germans, this meant more inflation, and
Mr. Schmidt resisted; inflation, he said, was the biggest cause of the world's
economic troubles. Next to the inexperience of Mr. Carter, his expertise at the
summit meeting, according to the other leaders, seemed brilliant. ''We were the
first to understand that you cannot cure the world's economic and structural
crisis by printing money,'' Mr. Schmidt bragged. And in the end, he won; talk
about the locomotive theory lingered in the mouths of the Carter Administration
economists for another eight or nine months, and then drifted away.

Mr. Schmidt soon found out that it was possible to resist American pressure in
other areas where he felt West German national interests were at stake. He could
win the arguments, either by means of his own doggedness or because of the
inconsistency, as he saw it, of the other side, and at the same time increase
the esteem he was held in at home. Mr. Schmidt felt that Mr. Carter's
human-rights program was too frontally antagonistic to the Soviet Union, and
could possibly endanger his own success in bringing hundreds of thousands of
ethnic Germans out of countries like Poland, Czechoslovakia and Rumania. He said
so. In time, Mr. Schmidt was able to observe the demise of the human-rights
offensive, much as he had seen the locomotive theory disappear.

Mr. Schmidt did not think very much, either, of Carter Administration attempts
to tell him to whom he could sell nuclear plants. He went ahead with a
controversial deal with Brazil. He also resisted a Carter Administration plan
that would have allowed United States airlines to challenge Lufthansa's
price-setting role by offering their cheap trans-Atlantic fares to travelers in
West Germany.

The sum of the conflicts through 1979 seemed to reinforce Mr.  Schmidt's
conviction that he could increasingly steer his own course. The European
Monetary System he and French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing devised that
year succeeded in large part in immunizing European currencies from the
unsettling fluctuations of the dollar and what Mr. Schmidt saw as American
monetary irresponsibility.  Although Mr. Schmidt has never said it in so many
words, he began to see - as it has been relayed by Kurt Becker, a Hamburg
journalist with a close relationship to the Chancellor - that he must, when
possible with the French, try to fill the leadership vacuum. Perhaps the hardest
blow to Mr. Schmidt's confidence in Mr. Carter was the President's shelving of
development of the neutron weapon after the Chancellor had coaxed his party into
agreeing to allow the deployment of the weapon in West Germany. He had given Mr.
Carter what he asked for, but Mr. Carter didn't want it any more.

By the time of the invasion of Afghanistan last winter, Mr. Schmidt felt he
could get his own way on vital kinds of East-West matters.  The United States,
in essence, wanted the Soviet Union to pay a price for the adventure, to isolate
the Russians sufficiently so that withdrawal would have been the only logical
way to re-establish the detente it counts on for economic viability. But Mr.
Schmidt saw things differently: American leadership seemed erratic to him,
uninterested in providing the Russians with a means to save face. The proposed
sanctions, including interruption of major industrial contracts, could lead, he
feared, to strong political reactions by the Soviet Union against West Germany.
It was no way for his country to proceed.

The Chancellor's plan seemed to be that West Germany could offer the Americans
an Olympic boycott, a cosmetic kind of solidarity that would wash away as an
obstacle to continuing good relations with the Soviet Union by the end of
August, at the end of the summer games. At the same time, the Chancellor refused
to go along with any of the economic restrictions, and West Germany signed a new
trade agreement during his Moscow visit in June. The Christian Democratic
opposition called the policy weak-kneed and lacking in solidarity with the
United States, but to Mr. Schmidt's eyes, it was protecting peace insofar as it
concerned West Germany. His electorate, with the Social Democrats winning an
unexpectedly big victory in state elections in May, supported this approach.
From the Chancellor's point of view, he had won again and even preserved
detente. He may have also convinced himself that, short of a
war-within-the-next-week situation, he could increasingly go his own way.

Yet his victories might be considered more a result of Mr. Carter's incoherence
than of Mr. Schmidt's own logic. In fact, there were consistent signs of
questionable judgment in what Mr. Schmidt was doing, underscoring the limits and
fragility that were his own rather than West Germany's.

The most remarkable example was his continual talking down in private of Mr.
Carter. It became a feature of Bonn life - every visitor to the Chancellor got a
dose. But the attitude spread into semipublic areas as well, and infected much
of Mr. Schmidt's party.  At two off-the-record seminars, attended by
international policy makers, including the United States Ambassador to Bonn, Mr.
Schmidt denigrated the American President and his capabilities. Beyond any
consideration of whether Mr. Schmidt was right, the attacks seemed
ill-considered for the leader of a country still ultimately dependent on the
United States for its security. The Chancellor's friends later explained the
remarks as a reflection of his distress about the state of Western leadership in
general, but many Germans asked if a bigger, more confident man would have given
up so easily in trying to offer wise counsel to the American President.

The seminars in Mr. Carter's weakness eventually stopped, but there were other
fragile moments for Mr. Schmidt when his judgment appeared faulty. On a spring
weekend this year, he seemed again in one of his deeply pessimistic phases. The
world, because of the Afghanistan invasion, had became a very dangerous place,
the Chancellor said. He indicated that there seemed to be some points of
comparison with the situation in 1914 when Europe was marching inexorably toward
war without knowing how to stop. That same weekend, Mr. Schmidt made some
ambiguous remarks that suggested he was open to discussion of a freeze involving
nuclear weapons in Europe, which would presumably have included the same
middle-range missiles that NATO had approved with his urging. If the Russians
had taken Mr. Schmidt's speech more seriously, a high American official said
later, they could have sought to use it to unravel support for NATO's nuclear
modernization program. But Mr. Schmidt soon backpedaled, and the proposal, in
which the Chancellor seemed to be trying to make nuclear policy for Europe and
NATO without a mandate, was not heard from again.

Mr. Schmidt was accused of seeming to take the Soviet Union's interests into
consideration with a bit too much energy. His critics also thought the reference
to 1914 was panicky and historically overdone. The United States and the Soviet
Union in the spring of 1980 really did not seem out of control or blindly
groping toward war. The critics also found another flaw in his policy this year:
He resisted the economic sanctions against the Soviet Union urged by the United
States, but he had agreed to go along with those called for against Iran. There
was also a bit of mechanistic clangor in his constant recommendations on crisis
management, including a speech in New York in March at the Foreign Policy
Association. The United States, Mr. Schmidt said in substance, must be
predictable and make all its intentions known in order to avoid world crisis.
Wasn't this a kind of middle-sized, limited, very European view of things in
that it ignored the deterrent weight for a super power in not being perfectly
predictable?

In the end, his harshest critics said, it appeared that Mr.  Schmidt was happy
to continue having American nuclear protection, but mainly in order to gain
time; his real goal, they charge, is to win enough independence from the United
States so that West Germany and Europe would eventually be more or less exempt
from the rivalries and tensions between the superpowers.

Again and again, Mr. Schmidt's closest advisers stress that this is not what the
Chancellor wants; indeed, they say, he is heartsick about the lack of strong
American leadership and feels he must do all he can to protect peace. He
believes, one aide said, that the United States is the world's most vigorous
society, with the most unlimited potential. When it comes to Mr. Schmidt's
loyalty to the West, Alois Mertes, a leading Christian Democrat expert on
defense and foreign policy, who continually questions Mr. Schmidt's assessment
of the Soviet Union and occasionally his resolve to deal with them, says, ''I'd
put my hand in the fire for the man.'' Rather than turning his back on the
United States, said a former adviser to the Chancellor, Mr. Schmidt thinks he
could use his friendship with Mr. Giscard so that after the French Presidential
elections next spring, the French would be able to move toward some kind of
reinforced association with NATO.

But logic does not really point to a sudden reassertion of an American
leadership role in a sense that would suit Mr. Schmidt. A new four-year term for
Mr. Carter would carry forward all the ill will and mistrust of the first term,
as well as the Chancellor's inclination to save his version of detente by
operating at cross purposes with American policy. An aide has suggested that the
Chancellor is deeply concerned that if the United States does not control its
inflation soon, it will be crippled by it, and increasingly unable to exert its
influence. If the Democratic platform, with its emphasis on jobs rather than
inflation, is taken seriously, then Mr. Schmidt would have an additional reason
for trying to insulate Europe. The Soviet Union, which has sought to exploit the
differences between West Germany and the United States, will probably attempt to
make it increasingly attractive for Mr.  Schmidt to think that he can guarantee
West German security, markets and jobs by increased cooperation.

If Ronald Reagan is elected and there is an attempt to implement the Republican
plank to return the United States to military superiority, then Mr. Schmidt
would be placed in a situation of even deeper concern to him. His whole
philosophy of maintaining peace is based on a balance of power between East and
West. The Russians, he believes, could never again accept a feeling of military
inferiority, and new American arms programs would trigger a Soviet response - an
arms race that would crash down on detente, creating a new cold war.

It is in these circumstances that Mr. Schmidt might be pushed to a very hard
decision involving his leadership. If detente appeared to be dying, then Mr.
Schmidt, according to some of his aides, might attempt to form a broad front of
resistance. He would not only try to enlist Western Europe, but the allies of
the Soviet Union as well, notably Poland and Hungary, with whom he has
established strong ties. None of these Soviet allies want to see a return to the
cold war; none want an end to the trade relations developed over the last 10
years that have raised living standards in many places in the East.  Such a
broad front might be able to dissuade the superpowers from an arms race and to
work within Europe to create new disarmament arrangements that would limit the
possibility of a Soviet-American conflict - or let Western Europe, at least,
steer clear of it.

It has long been assumed that Mr. Schmidt's real gifts, his pragmatism and his
ability to judge reality, would counsel him against turning his back on his
ultimate protector and trying to convert Western Europe into an independent
third force, an arbiter between East and West, which could jump in and out of
events where it saw advantage or reason for concern. It also appears that the
force of events is likely to hold Mr. Schmidt on course. If he could outflank
the implications of Afghanistan, a far-away and somewhat vague issue for
Europeans, he has found it difficult to outrun Poland, a problem next door. The
recent events in Poland make Mr.Schmidt's assumptions about continuing calm in
central Europe much less certain. Any desire to steer a third course, one away
from the Russians but also away from the Americans, requires this calm and
stability. Without it, perhaps, some of the Helmut-lead-us urging seems a little
hasty.

Now Edward Gierek is gone, a man Mr. Schmidt regarded highly, and the person he
was counting on in Eastern Europe to anchor, to the extent that he could, what
Mr. Schmidt's aides talk about as the effort to hold on to detente. The Polish
situation also led to the cancellation of talks with Erich Honecker, the East
German leader, and a new hard tone from East Berlin toward Bonn. Mr. Schmidt's
hopes of bringing Mr. Honecker into his constellation are now sidetracked.
After Poland, the time seems less fitting for leadership down new avenues.
Rather, it may be a time when Mr. Schmidt's strengths may be best used in
tightening the Western alliance, regardless of his obvious doubts about both Mr.
Carter and Mr. Reagan.

Whatever the appeals of striking out in a new direction for West Germany, Mr.
Schmidt's intelligence and his ability to read reality point more now toward
caution than adventure.

''I have always been doubtful about political leaders who promote visions,'' he
has said. ''We have in this country seen at least two periods of, shall we say,
'visionism' in German leaders - Kaiser Wilhelm II and the second one much worse.
... I'm not a visionary and I'm skeptical of all the vi-sionaries. Germans have
an enormous capability for idealism and the perversion of it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN INTIMATE MEMOIR OF THE BRETHREN Chief Justice Warren Burger;
by William O. Douglas

SECTION: Section 6; Page 39, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5074 words


Justice William O. Douglas, a staunch champion of individual rights during his
36 years on the Supreme Court, died in January at the age of 81. His tenure -
the longest of any justice - was marked by a passionate advocacy of civil
liberties and, away from the Court, by his forays as a naturalist,
conservationist and world traveler. He also wrote more than a score of books,
including an autobiography.  The second volume, ''The Court Years, 1939-75,''
will be published next month. The following exerpts offer glimpses into Justice
Douglas's experience on the bench and into the individuals who shared it with
him.
By William O. Douglas
t seemed to me that I had barely reached the Court in the spring of 1939 when
people were trying to get me off. Most of them saw a political role for me,
starting, perhaps, in the executive branch; some were promoting me for the
Presidency. Negative decisions in these matters were not difficult for me, as I
never wanted to run for office - not even for superintendent of schools of my
home town of Yakima, Wash. Running for a state office or for Congress never
occurred to me. As to any other job in the executive branch, I was not
interested. I saw none that caught my fancy and I was sure none could measure up
to the challenge, interest and excitement of my old job with the Securities and
Exchange Commission. (In 1933, Joseph P.Kennenedy, chairman of the S.E.C., asked
Douglas, an expert on bankruptcy, to join the staff of the newly formed agency.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt was impressed with Douglas's thorough
investigations of big-business practices and, after appointing him to the
commission in 1936, named him chairman in 1937.)

I was content to stay put for a while. The S.E.C. job had paid $10,000 a year,
which people in Yakima thought was a handsome income. And so it was in the 30's,
but Washington was an expensive place. I had a wife and two children, and while
at the S.E.C. I ran into debt at the rate of $5,000 a year just supporting the
family. More public life meant more debts, but my salary on the Court was
$20,000, so although at the start I did not particularly enjoy the work of the
Court, I settled into it for the long haul with no thought of resigning.

At the S.E.C., I had been accustomed to living on the run: The hours were busy,
the appointments many, the days long. But at the Court, there was no need to see
anyone. Appointments dropped off; the routine of reading and research set in. It
took me two years or more to get used to that new workday, but in time I came to
love the routine as well as the institution itself.

When I joined the Court, it comprised (besides the ''old-timers,'' James C.
McReynolds, Pierce Butler, Charles Evans Hughes and Harlan F. Stone)
Hugo L. Black, Owen Roberts, Stanley F. Reed and Felix Frankfurter. C harles
Evans Hughes, who was Chief Justice when I took my seat, was t hen 77 years old.
I was 40 (the youngest Justice on the Court at t hat time), and that
differential served not to separate us but to b ring us together. Perhaps he
liked me. Perhaps he sensed that I w ould long shape up the stream of Court
history from which he was a bout to depart and that he therefore should make me
his confidant a nd emissary. Whatever the reason, he took me at once into his c
onfidence.

Not long after my appointment, Hughes made a statement to me which at the time
was shattering but which over the years turned out to be true: ''Justice
Douglas, you must remember one thing. At the constitutional level where we work,
90 percent of any decision is emotional. The rational part of us supplies the
reasons for supporting our predilections.''

I had thought of the law in the terms of Moses - principles chiseled in granite.
I knew judges had predilections. I knew that their moods as well as their minds
were ingredients of their decisions. But I had never been willing to admit to
myself that the ''gut'' reaction of a judge at the level of constitutional
adjudications, dealing with the vagaries of due process, freedom of speech and
the like, was the main ingredient of his decision. The admission of it destroyed
in my mind some of the reverence for the immutable principles. But they were
supplied by constitutions written by people in conventions, not by judges.
Judges are, after all, not creative figures; they represent ideological schools
of thought that are highly competitive. No judge at the level I speak of was
neutral. The Constitution is not neutral. It was designed to take the Government
off the backs of people, and no wiser man than Hughes ever sat on our Court. I
say that, although his predilections, drawn from a different age, were not
always mine. I never, for example, could envision Hughes in a boxcar filled with
wobblies (members of the Industrial Workers of the World, a revolutionary
workers group formed in the early 1900's), as it roared across the dusty plains
of Washington State at night, but it was not difficult to picture Hugo Black,
Wiley Rutledge, Felix Frankfurter and Frank Murphy there. I could, however,
imagine Hughes as an advocate pleading our cause or as a judge putting into
imperishable words the tolerance that Government must show even the most lowly
of us.

Hughes was once described as being as undramatic ''as an adding machine.'' He
was indeed like a terrier after a rat - intent on cornering every fact. He
''believed in God but believed equally that God was on the side of the facts.''
He had a photographic mind.  William T. Gossett (who was Hughes's son-in-law and
who had been a lawyer in his firm) relates how Hughes, standing in Westminster
Hall, London, as president of the American Bar Association in 1924, delivered
flawlessly, from memory, a 5,000-word speech. This knack worked wonders in the
in forma pauperis cases. (In these cases, poor people are allowed to sue without
liability for court costs.) He personally took every document addressed to the
Court -whether typewritten or in a penciled scrawl - labeled it an ''application
for leave to file a petition'' and reported each case to the conference (where
Justices regularly decide what cases the Court will consider, and discuss those
that have already been heard).

To give an example of the need involved in such a case: Once, I was in the
office, alone, before the staff came in. Mrs. Douglas had promised me that she
would call me at 8 A.M. sharp, and since the Court's switchboard opened at 8:30,
I watched the buttons on my phone. Sure enough, at 8, the light went on and I
lifted the receiver. A lady's voice -not Mrs. Douglas's - said she had a call
for me from Bowling Green, Ky. She said, I thought, (it was) a Mr.  Andrew
Binke, whom I knew, so I told her to put him on. A man answered, giving a
different name -someone I did not know.

He said, ''I am in jail. The sheriff let me out to make a call.'' ''Why are you
in jail?'' ''My wife put me there. I got out once, but she put me back in.''
''Why?'' ''I don't know, but I need a lawyer, and in thinking about it, you are
the only one I can think of.'' ''You need a good legal-aid lawyer. You can get
one in Bowling Green.'' ''No lawyer - legal-aid or otherwise - will help me in
Bowling Green.'' ''Then call Louisville. They have a fine bar, good legal aid, a
fine law school, an active Civil Liberties Union.'' ''O.K. Thank you very much.
Now I gotta go back in the cell and see if the sheriff will call Louisville for
me.'' Thus the waves of despair and poverty, and the feeling of helplessness
often lap at the very edges of the Court.Hughes was, to use a phrase of Justice
Louis D. Brandeis's, ''a very efficient Chief Justice.'' He accomplished in four
hours what it would take the average judge eight hours or more to do. At that
time the Court met at noon and we always walked in not 30 seconds late or 10
seconds late - but exactly at 12. Hughes would be in his robe by five minutes to
12, and if one of the Brethren had not appeared by three minutes or two minutes
to 12, he would send a messenger down the hall to get him. One morning he was
impatient because it looked as if McReynolds would be late. So he sent a
messenger down to McReynolds's office, which was only a few steps away. The
messenger entered, bowed low and said, ''Mr. Justice, the Chief Justice says you
should come at once and put on your robe.'' McReynolds, looking up and calling
the messenger by name, said, ''Tell the Chief Justice that I do not work for
him.'' McReynolds turned up in Court about 30 minutes later.

Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. once called Justice Benjamin Cardozo ''a great
and beautiful spirit.'' Cardozo was a classicist.  He loved to take old concepts
from Greek and Italian jurisprudence and pour them into Anglo-Saxon ideology.
Once, I followed a train of thought he developed in a lecture and found myself
reading a Florentine treatise entitled ''On the Nobility of Law and Medicine,''
published in 1399. There I read a lively debate in which one side maintained
that law was handed down directly from God amid thunder on Mount Sinai, while
science had been put into immutable form by Aristotle.

Cardozo sat on the New York Court of Appeals for 18 years, and on the United
States Supreme Court six years (in 1932, President Herbert Hoover appointed him
to succeed Holmes). As a New York judge, he spent a great deal of his life
fashioning rules of the common law. Of his various creations, I suppose that Mac
Pherson v. Buick Motor Company, decided in 1916, was the most famous. That case
held a manufacturer liable to the ultimate consumer for a latent defect in the
manufactured commodity that could have been discovered by reasonable inspection.

Some have thought that the glory of Western law was in the creative ability of
common-law judges. In their eyes, Cardozo was the shining example. Others
believe that rules of law should not be judge-made but legislative in origin.

Curiously, it was the construction of legislation by judges that Cardozo
discussed with me in our one and only extended conversation.  He had become
fascinated with writings of men such as James M. Landis of the Harvard Law
School, who, with great skill, showed the problem of translating confused
legislative jargon into a consistent mosaic.  Legislators do not write with
precision: Vague phrases are used to mark compromises; a hiatus may be left in a
statute as a matter of necessity occasioned by a deadlock of opposed forces.
Cardozo, as a member of the Supreme Court, frequently met this problem - and he
had great facility in resolving it.

An intellectual - always a recluse - he had a wonderfully illuminated face, an
engaging wit and a penetrating mind. He coined many golden phrases, but perhaps
one of his most enduring was the remark describing freedom of speech as ''the
cornerstone of the free society.'' One of his long-term friends, the late Judge
Jonah J.  Goldstein of New York, told me that he knew Cardozo to crack a joke
only once. Cardozo (who was one of two Jewish justices on the Court at the time)
had traveled to Albany to attend the inauguration of Herbert H. Lehman as
Governor, and Goldstein, hearing that Cardozo was in town, looked him up. He
located him in the library of the Court of Appeals, walking slowly while he read
a book. As Goldstein approached, Cardozo removed his pince-nez and asked, ''What
can I do for you?''

Goldstein replied, ''Nothing at all.'' ''What brings you here?'' ''The
inauguration. Hearing you were here, I dropped by to pay my respects. You see,
Mr. Justice, we Jews look at you as the Catholics look at the Pope.''

Cardozo's eyes twinkled as he said, ''The difference, Goldstein, is important.
You don't have to kiss my toe.''

In the summer of 1937, after the great heat of the Court-packing battle had
passed, Willis Van Devanter retired. (In 1936, President Roosevelt, attempting
to rid the Court of aged conservatives who were blocking implementation of much
of his economic recovery program, proposed increasing the number of Justices to
as many as l5 - one new seat for each Justice who, reaching the age of 70,
declined to retire. The plan touched off a bitter national debate and eventually
Congress turned down the Court-packing proposal and passed instead an act that
allowed Justices aged 70 to retire at full salary.)

F.D.R. had promised the first vacancy on the Court to Senator Joseph T. Robinson
of Arkansas, one of the most reactionary men I have known. When Robinson died
suddenly, however, F.D.R. considered two senators: Hugo L. Black of Alabama and
Sherman Minton of Indiana. Rather than approaching them directly, F.D.R. had
Attorney General Homer S. Cummings take the message to Minton and ask Minton to
discuss it with Black, who was F.D.R.'s first choice.)

Minton talked to Black in the Senate cloakroom late one afternoon, saying that
although he, Minton, would like the job, he thought Black would make the greater
judge. Black discussed the appointment that night with his wife, Josephine, and
they decided he should accept.  Hugo told me that the central reason for
accepting the appointment was that they had just learned that one of their sons,
Sterling, might become permanently deaf. If he stayed in the Senate, Black would
be able to spend little time with his children. If he was on the Court, he would
have more time. And so F.D.R. sent Black's name to the Senate on Aug. 12, 1937.

Black, being a member of the Senate, was quickly confirmed. In a few days,
however, it was discovered that while Black was practicing law in Alabama, he
had joined the Ku Klux Klan. A hue and cry went up for his removal.

Hugo Black was not attacked because of his technical and brief membership in the
K.K.K. That was only the facade. The opposition came from those who had fought
against his causes when he was a senator: minimum wages, the Fair Labor
Standards Act, the Public Utility Holding Company Act and so on. Black's house
was picketed en masse, an experience that I think colored his decisions in all
subsequent cases involving picketing, mass demonstrations, protest marches.
Harassed, bombarded by telephone calls, denounced by radio broadcasts, Black, in
order to clear up the matter, finally made a talk to the nation on
coast-to-coast radio to explain his Klan membership.

I think the explanation lies in the fact that it is apparently the practice of
politicians to join all sorts of vote-getting groups.  They are our original
joiners. Not being a joiner, I do not appreciate the philosophy behind it. But I
am sure that Black never for a moment embraced the creed of the Ku Klux Klan.

He was, however, seared by the experience, and seldom made public appearances or
speeches after going on the Bench. In the spring of l970, while the storm of
impeachment raged about me, I had my physical checkup and went directly to
Court. (During the Nixon Administration, the Republican leadership in Congress
vainly attempted to impeach Justice Douglas, claiming - among other things -that
the Justice had engaged in ''gross impropriety'' when he did not disqualify
himself from sitting on obsenity cases involving publisher Ralph Ginsberg, whose
magazine had once published a book excerpt written by Douglas.) I wrote Black a
note: ''My blood pressure is l40 over 70 - which indicates that the bastards
have not got me down.'' Black responded: ''Fine! Mr. Ford and his crowd cannot
get you. . . . After my appointment to the Court, when my opponents were after
me most viciously, I told my wife we needed an inscription on our bed reading as
follows: 'This too will pass away.' And it did. So will the flurry and the noise
about you.''

Black was ''the tiger that Roosevelt tossed into the Court,'' according to Frank
Maloney, who was in the Senate at the time. And there is truth in the statement.
But Black had greatness also, as the years revealed. He was ridiculed by the
press of the Establishment as having no ''legal experience.'' He actually
brought to the Bench more courtroom experience than any Justice appointed in
this century. He was also my closest friend on the Court, and my companion in
many hard judicial battles.

Both Cardozo and Brandeis were men who did not seem to enjoy life in the raw.
They were happy, but their happiness was in the quiet determination that
dominated their lives or in exquisite moments like those when the violin of an
Isaac Stern took possession of an audience. Felix Frankfurter was more robust.
He loved laughter and gaiety and the riposte. He was probably the best
conversationalist that my generation knew. He would hold court in the drawing
rooms of Washington and show with splendor his scintillating mind.

Frankfurter was the eclectic whose inventive genius led to much improvising. He
was primarily a teacher, and the habits he had acquired in that role carried
over into all subsequent ones. Whenever a new Justice appeared at the Supreme
Court, Frankfurter seemed to spend extra time and energy converting him to a
particular school of thought that Frankfurter preferred.

The press was continually rife with untrue stories that Frankfurter and I were
always at loggerheads. There was one press report to the effect that someone had
hired a lip reader to attend our sessions to ''read'' what I was saying to one
of the Justices next to me. The news was that I commented after one of
Frankfurter's frequent questions, ''Why doesn't the son of a bitch keep his
mouth shut?'' But that was wholly apocryphal.

We always had the most junior Justice in time of service act as keeper of the
door to the conference, but when anyone had a message to send out, he took it
himself, opened the door, waited for a page to appear and handed the message to
the page. Felix had one interesting innovation to this routine. Never would he
hand his note to a page. Always he dropped it on the floor at the page's feet,
even though the page held out his hand to receive the message.

Frankfurter had a basic weakness. I think he had deep inside him a feeling of
inadequacy. He was a man of short stature. Perhaps that was part of it. He
longed to be accepted. He was an artist at teasing and taunting members of the
Establishment and their advocates. But he also needed to be accepted and honored
and admired by them. While he wanted the Establishment to be decent and
civilized, his basic positions were ultimately aligned with it.

Frankfurter aroused people; they either loved him or hated him. He was not
unique in that respect. Hugo Black, and I also, had the quality. Arthur
Houghton, who had been in the theatrical business and who was a close friend of
Joe Kennedy's (Douglas's former boss at the S.E.C), never met Felix but for some
strange reason he hated him with ardor. Every time I saw Arthur he would let go
at Felix. My defense of Felix only made Arthur more violent.

One Christmas I purchased an excellent photo of Felix and asked him to autograph
it for Arthur Houghton. Felix hesitated, saying he did not remember him. I
assured him that he was well remembered by Arthur. So Felix signed the photo. I
tipped off Joe Kennedy, and when I went to hand over the Christmas gift to
Arthur, Joe was there.  Arthur, unwrapping the gift, became apoplectic, stormed
up and down, denounced Felix, me, the Court and all who were friends of the
aforesaid. With that he tossed the $25 photograph into the roaring fireplace.

One of the best men covering the Court in my time was Dillard Stokes, who worked
for The Washington Post. He was accurate and meticulous and neither pro-Black
and pro-Douglas nor anti-Frankfurter. He had one trait, however, that cost him
his job.  At the end of each term he put into tables the production of each
Justice in opinions for the Court. Frankfurter despised those columns, since
they showed, truthfully, that he wrote fewer opinions for the Court than any
other Justice. He ranted and inveighed against Stokes: ''Cases are not
fungible,'' he would shout. Finally he induced Philip Graham, his former law
clerk and publisher of The Post, to remove Stokes from the assignment.

Once I was asked who, in my opinion, were the most outstanding Justices with
whom I served. I modified the answer by compiling a list of the outstanding men.
The All-American team in my estimation (listed alphabetically) was: Hugo Black,
William Brennan, Felix Frankfurter, John Harlan, Charles Evans Hughes, Earl
Warren, Byron White.

This list reflects not an ideological line, but basic ability and judicial
attitude. These Justices had differing philosophies and points of view, but only
monotony springs from conformity.

Fred Vinson, Secretary of the Treasury, was appointed Chief Justice on June 6,
l946. I heard of his appointment on the radio as I was driving to Lyndon B.
Johnson's home for dinner. After dinner, Lyndon, who was then Representative
from Texas's 10th Congressional district, suggested that the guests excuse him,
Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn and me while we went to Vinson's apartment to
drink a toast to the new Chief Justice. He was not there when we arrived. His
lovely wife, Roberta, greeted us, and she was in tears.

''I never wanted my husband to be Chief Justice,'' she wailed.

The truth was that President Harry S. Truman had asked Fred that afternoon how
he'd like to be Chief Justice. Fred indicated he would not mind in the least.
''Don't say anything about it,'' said Truman.  So Fred, who had confided in
Roberta about every major decision in their lives, did not call her. In about an
hour, however,
he heard the announcement over the radio and tried unsuccessfully tor each her.
On her way home, she heard it on the radio and started c rying. The fact that
she had not been consulted meant to her that F red did not love her anymore.
''I never can go back to Fred,'' she kept saying.

It took several Scotch and sodas to quiet Roberta, and several more to honor
Fred Vinson when he appeared.  The first day he spent at the Court as Chief
Justice was a memorable one. Around 5:30, I went to his office. We sat and
talked awhile, and then he asked his secretary to send for the Court car.

I did not want to miss this scene, as there was then no such thing as ''the
Court car.'' I walked with Vinson down two flights to the garage, where we
waited and waited. Finally there was a roar and a Ford pickup truck came around
the corner. Vinson, as Secrtary of the Treasury, had at his command nearly 30
cars, day and night. He pointed to the pickup and asked me, ''What's this?''

''The Court car,'' I replied.  He climbed in, and as the pickup moved out of the
garage, he turned to look at me. Never have I seen such a humiliated Chief
Justice.

Earl Warren had been Governor of California for 11 years and was still in that
office when, in 1953, President Dwight D. Eisenhower named him to the vacancy
caused by Fred Vinson's death. In retrospect, Eisenhower must have been sorry,
for Warren was not exactly Eisenhower's type.

Richard M. Nixon, then Vice President, and William F. Knowland, then Senator
from California, were responsible for the nomination.  Nixon went to Ike saying
something like, ''You must get Warren out of California. He has control of the
Republican Party machinery and we can't do business with him.'' So, several
years later, when ''Impeach Earl Warren'' signs went up around the country and
Nixon fans complained about the Chief Justice, I always reminded them that Nixon
was responsible for Warren's being there: ''Let's give Nixon credit for
something liberal and progressive.''

Warren, as Chief Justice, was as nonchalant as Hughes was meticulous. In
Warren's day, Court convened at l0 A.M. instead of at noon. Warren never reached
Court until five minutes to 10 and we were never on the Bench until three
minutes after 10 or later.

Only two times did Warren lose his composure at conference and take out after a
Justice. Once, someone reported to Warren that I was sending manuscripts of
books to the Court typing pool. The story was false. Warren never mentioned to
me the rumor. Rather, he brought it up at conference, not mentioning my name,
but saying that the pool was being used by a Justice to turn out books on which
royalties were received. When it came my turn to talk, I explained that I used
an outside stenographer and paid her with my personal checks. But there was an
iciness in Warren's attitude, reflecting utter disbelief.  Another time, Warren
had mentioned the possibility of appointing someone as Clerk of the Court;
Frankfurter had gone to the man immediately to dissuade him, as Frankfurter had
a competing candidate. Warren heard of Frankfurter's mission and in a loud voice
denounced him at the next conference and threatened to take reprisals if
Frankfurter ever repeated such a mission. What reprisals a Chief could take
against a Justice I never could imagine.

Earl Warren had a capacity for growth, and under the impetus of the judicial
oath he grew and grew. When he was governor, Warren had fervently espoused the
program of evacuating and locking up Japanese (United States citizens and
noncitizens alike) during World War II - an advocacy that he later regretted. As
Governor, he opposed reapportion-
ment of the Legislature, a measure he endorsed in the ''one man, onev ote'' line
of decisions by our Court. Reasons that appeal to g overnors do not always stand
up under the pitiless scrutiny a man m ust give a problem when he takes the
judicial oath.

Clearly Warren ranked with John Marshall and Charles Evans Hughes as one of our
three greatest Chief Jus-
tices. In his youth, he had been a brakeman on freight trains in ando ut of
Bakersfield, Calif. He had come up the hard way, and although h e did not have
the erudition in the law that Marshall and Hughes h ad, he had an understanding
of the needs of the common man as o pposed to the needs of those in corporate
and other hierarchies.  H is was an intense sense of jus-
tice, a passion for ''constitutional law and order.''

Warren was a stickler for the proprieties. When he resigned from the American
Bar Association because he did not believe in some of its policies, the rumor
was spread that Warren was dropped from the membership roll because of
nonpayment of dues. Warren was furious and went to great pains to correct the
record. ''Think of what my grandchildren might think of me if these lies went
unanswered,'' he said.

He voted with disgust on cases involving obscenity. Hugo Black and I never liked
obscenity either, but we believed that all utterances and all publications were
protected by the First Amendment. Whether Earl Warren would in time have come to
that conclusion no one knows.  But, in his view, ''the sea of ethics,'' on which
he believed the Constitution rested, gave no sanctuary to any indecencies. That
leaves room for highly subjective constitutional decisions. I say this not in
criticism of Earl Warren but only to present his approach to problems that had
been conditioned by his long life in American politics.

Burger was extremely personable, and he honored good personal relations. His
idea of the Court was different from that of many of his predecessors. He
thought of the Court as a symbol of authority which had best not be exercised.
He announced in conference shortly after he took office that the cases we should
decide each term should never exceed 100. He also announced from time to time
the precedents we should overrule. Miranda v. Arizona (which required that
police warn a suspect of his constitutional rights before questioning him),
Gideon v. Wainwright (which required states to provide counsel for all
defendants charged with felonies and unable to pay a lawyer) and many others
were on the list, and he eyed closely the votes that might be marshaled to
achieve that result. Burger worked hard on it, but what was going on under
Burger had gone on before, and will go on again, as political
realignments on the judiciary are made by Presidents.

Burger loved being Chief. He took our conference room as his office - and
without consulting us. He was also very concerned with security. In the 1970
term, Burger told us that word had come from the F.B.I. that some important
Federal official, perhaps a Justice of the Court, would be kidnapped and held
for ransom in exchange for the release of Federal prisoners. I spoke up to say,
quite selfishly, ''Tell the F.B.I. that the kidnappers should pick out a judge
that Nixon wants back.''

Burger's concern for law and order became apparent in April 1971 when the
Vietnam veterans came to town. They sat on the front steps of the courthouse,
singing and acting in an orderly way. Unknown to us, Burger sent orders from the
Bench to the marshal to disperse them. On his orders, 113 were arrested, the
police refusing, however, to arrest one veteran in a wheelchair who pleaded to
be taken in with the rest.

Earl Warren died at 8 in the evening at Georgetown Hospital on July 9, 1974. I
went to see him at 4:30 and one look satisfied me that he would not be with us
long.

Warren was in Georgetown Hospital because Nixon, as Commander in Chief, had
denied him access to the superior facilities of Walter Reed Hospital, which he
wanted to go to. Telling me of the way Nixon had blackballed him at Walter Reed
brought tears to his eyes. Not having any guile himself, he could not attribute
guile to others. He had charity as well as integrity. He represented the America
that was wholesome, not the America of the adventurers who used White House
power for personal ends.

That last day, though low in energy, the Chief was bright in spirit and very
lucid. He held my hand, pulling me to the bed and asking me to be seated. He
wanted to talk about the Big Case, the one argued July 8, involving Nixon's
refusal to deliver tapes to Judge John J.  Sirica (tapes of White House
conversations that had been subpoenaed by the special Watergate prosecutor Leon
Jaworski). I would not, of course, listen to an outsider, a volunteer who was
seeking to trap me. But Earl Warren and I were long associated and he was still
in the inner circle of the Justices. He plainly was dying and he wanted his
views known. What he said was this:

''If Nixon is not forced to turn over tapes of his conversations with the ring
of men who were conversing on their violations of the law, then liberty will
soon be dead in this nation. If Nixon gets away with that, then Nixon makes the
law as he goes along - not the Con-

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of William Douglas in 1939 photo of Cathy Douglas
photo of retired Justice Tom Clark with Justice William Douglas and

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THIRD WORLD VS. THE MEDIA

SECTION: Section 6; Page 116, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4739 words


Philip H. Power, owner and chairman of the Suburban Communications C orporation,
attended the UNESCO General Conferences in 1976 and 1 978. Elie Abel teaches
journalism at Stanford University and will bea member of the U.S. delegation to
the UNESCO General Conference in B elgrade this week.
By Philip H. Power and Elie Abel
ot so many months ago, an intrepid researcher put a simple question t o a
meeting of American newspaper editors: ''How many of you are f amiliar with the
term 'new world information order'?'' There were 2 82 persons in the group; two
raised their hands.

Only in America, it is safe to say, could the question have elicited so meager a
response. It would be hard to tell from reading American newspapers or watching
the evening news on television that for the past decade a furious debate has
been raging within UNESCO - the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization - and other United Nations agencies over the question of
Western
dominance of world news and information resources, and the issue of b uilding a
new world order in the realm of communications. There is ag reat deal at stake
in this debate for the American news media, theira udience and the
high-technology corporations (mostly American) whosec omputers talk to other
computers across the width of an ocean via s atellites 22,000 miles up in space.

The debate over a new world information order, a concept as yet undefined by its
most impassioned advocates, does not appear as such on the agenda of UNESCO's
21st General Conference, which opens this Tuesday, Sept. 23, in Belgrade,
Yugoslavia. But it will almost certainly dominate the discussion under one or
another agenda heading. UNESCO General Conferences, held every two years, used
to be fairly calm, relatively nonpolitical sessions at which scientists,
educators and assorted intellectuals discussed campaigns to wipe out illiteracy
and to preserve the rotting stone fabric of such monuments as the Acropolis. In
the 1970's, new problems began to surface, although the old ones (illiteracy,
for example) had not been vanquished. Of the new issues, none have generated
more heat than the complaints against the Western media - the allegations that
they are inaccurate, unfair and unbalanced in their treatment of d eveloping
countries, and that the dependence of those countries u pon the information
resources of the United States, Britain and F rance (and, to a degree, the
Soviet Union) is a symptom of cultural i mperialism.

Orchestrated by an increasingly sympathetic UNESCO secretariat, these
complaints, along with various proposals for putting things right, have sharply
politicized the last three General Conferences.  It seems all but certain that
the conference in Belgrade will run true to form. Some of the issues at stake
will be:

Whether UNESCO, in the name of a more balanced flow of information between
developing and developed countries, will endorse ownership or control of news
media by national governments.

Whether UNESCO, out of a concern for the safety of journalists on hazardous
missions, will give its blessing to a licensing system.  (Before protection can
be offered, of course, some official body must decide who is a journalist - and
who is not.)

Whether UNESCO will promote a code of conduct for journalists and media
institutions that applies equally to Tanzanians and Burmese, Russians and
Americans.

Whether UNESCO will call for concrete and practical measures, such as
preferential telecommunication tariffs and the expansion of world newsprint
production, to aid the poorest developing countries; or instead will tilt in the

direction of ideological solutions that can do little to expand the c apacity of
the developing countries to make their voices heard in t he world.  n what
Daniel Bell has labeled the ''postindustrial age,'' a n ation's power must be
measured not simply by millions of tons of s teel produced or automobiles
assembled, but also by the quality and q uantity of the information it can
summon up on short notice. In thisa rea, the United States leads the world
today, even as it appears to b e falling behind in more conventional, industrial
categories.

''The feeling among many nonindustrial countries,'' says Gerald Long, managing
director of Reuters, the British international news agency and one of the
''transnational'' agencies heavily assaulted by third-world critics, ''is that
they lack the information structure present in the industrial world, in which
they are right, and that they should have that structure, in which aspiration
they are justified; that their countries are little and poorly reported in the
press of the industrial countries, which is true, and should be better reported,
which is desirable.''

Long's cool language, however, fails to reflect the frustration and anger felt
by intellectuals and Government officials in developing countries as they face
what looks like a news and information system stacked against them.

A Guatemalan civil servant, for instance, watches an American camera team swoop
in, grab the visuals that television requires of a devastating hurricane, and
ignore the less spectacular but perhaps more important story of slow but steady
progress in birth-control programs. She concludes that American television is
infected by the catastrophe theory of news, especially when events in smaller,
less developed countries are concerned.

An Indian newspaper editor leafs through the local competition and discovers
that nearly 90 percent of the international stories printed that day are
reported, edited and moved (34 million words per day!) by one of the four great
international wire services -The Associated Press, United Press International,
Reuters and Agence France-Presse -all of them Western-owned. He concludes that
his view of the
world, not to mention that of his readers, is highly colored by a ssumptions and
attitudes almost entirely non-Indian.

A high-ranking American arrives at Cairo's steaming airport on a United States
military plane and tries to telephone President Anwar el-Sadat. His call soon
becomes hopelessly snarled in Egypt's overloaded domestic telephone system. In
frustration, the American places the call via a United States satellite hookup
to Washington and then back to Sadat in Cairo, completing it in a few minutes.
An Egyptian observer wonders whether Western imperialism still lives; in the
19th century, cables from one French African colony to an adjacent one had to be
routed through Paris.

Some third-world spokesmen have set forth a far-reaching and hostile critique of
a global information system dominated by a free capitalist press. Western
news-agency reporting about developing countries is often uninformed and tends
to concentrate on the negative or sensational. The great bulk of the
international news used by third-world newspapers, radio and television is
produced by Western news agencies; very little news produced by third-world
journalists flows the other way. If this ''imbalance in flow'' is the direct
result of freedom of the press in the West, is it a fair price for third-world
news media to pay for someone else's freedom?

It is easy enough to understand what has provoked the demand for a new world
information order and why developing countries have turned to UNESCO for help.
UNESCO's founding constitution, written in 1946, begins with the famous sentence
''Since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the
defenses of peace must be constructed,'' and it goes on to pledge ''unrestricted
pursuit of objective truth, and ... the free exchange of ideas and knowledge.''

UNESCO's mandate as a specialized agency within the United Nations is to
develop, preserve and transmit education, science and world culture for
international understanding and peace. In the 1970's, the newly independent
third-world nations became the majority in the United Nations and UNESCO. The
agency, in which each nation casts one vote, has increasingly become the
preferred forum for developing nations. More dramatically than other specialized
agencies in the United Nations, UNESCO has become an advocate of third-world
wants, developing in the process (although the UNESCO secretariat continually
denies the charge) a staff with an ideology determined as much by its own
momentum and interests as by the wishes of its participating member states.

This process has accelerated greatly since the election in 1974 of Amadou Mahtar
M'Bow as UNESCO's Director General. The first African to head any of the United
Nations' specialized agencies, M'Bow is a fascinating and complex product of the
meshing of the developed and developing worlds that has taken place over the
past 35 years.

Born in 1921 in Dakar, Senegal, then a French colony, M'Bow attended and later
taught at the University of Paris; his French is precise and, on occasion, very
eloquent. In the 1960's, he served as Senegal's Minister of Education, and
returned to Paris to become UNESCO's Assistant Director General for Education in
1970, and Director General four years later.

Although accused by his critics within UNESCO of being a petty dictator
(''Whatever M'Bow wants, he gets, by whatever means,'' says one, ''and his
treatment of personnel is a mixture of a whim of iron and the cult of
personality''), M'Bow passed his first major test on the media issue with flying
colors by countering a Soviet maneuver.

The Soviet Union has never been a great advocate of press freedom.  The Russians
have always insisted that sovereign states must make sure that foreign news
organizations are not used for ''corrupting ends''; to prevent this, the state
should control the news flow across its frontiers. This doctrine has fallen on
some receptive ears in UNESCO, particularly among those developing countries
with authoritarian regimes.

Seeing the shift of power to third-world nations in UNESCO as a chance to attack
a free Western press, the Russians introduced at the General Conference in 1974
a ''draft declaration on fundamental principles governing the use of the mass
media in strengthening peace and international understanding and in combating
war propaganda, racism and apartheid.''

As a means of hobbling a free press, the draft declaration was nicely crafted.
In addition to the notion that the press ought to be ''used'' by governments to
accomplish various objectives - an idea fundamentally opposed to the Western
idea of independent journalism - the document contained, in Article XII, a
quasi-juridical basis for government control of all news media: ''States are
responsible for the activities in the international sphere of all mass media
under their jurisdiction.''

The politics, too, were slick. African support was assured by reference to
apartheid. At a special drafting conference in 1975, the Russians proposed
adding a denunciation of Zionism by equating it with racism, thereby gaining
Arab votes. When the American and 14 other Western delegations walked out in
protest, the Soviet draft in large part prevailed and was formally placed on the
agenda for debate in 1976 at the General Conference in Nairobi, Kenya.

M'Bow's role at that conference proved enormously important. A believer in
decision by consensus, he did not want his General Conference to blow up in a
confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union. Working behind the
scenes, and using the web of contacts and information with which the UNESCO
secretariat can exercise control at a large conference, M'Bow gradually wooed
African and then third-world votes away from the draft declaration. By a sizable
margin, it was deferred to the next General Conference, two years later in
Paris, for further study and redrafting.

The attempt by the Russians to use UNESCO to shackle a free press had been
thwarted, but there were quid pro quos in Nairobi. The United States pledged to
help developing countries improve their media and communications systems. M'Bow
announced the creation of an International Commission for the Study of
Communication Problems (later called the MacBride Commission, after its
chairman, Sean MacBride, a former Irish Foreign Minister and Nobel Peace Prize
winner), made up of 16 specialists from around the world chosen by M'Bow
himself, to conduct a study of ''the totality of communications problems in the
modern world.'' Talk of a ''balanced flow of information'' ran heavily in the
corridors, and the scent of a new world information order hung in the clear
African air.

As the 1978 Paris General Conference approached, it was plain that the third
world had become the power broker in UNESCO, mediating between Eastern and
Western blocs and developing its own agenda.  With four years of experience and
a solid bloc of votes behind him, M'Bow began more confidently forming UNESCO
into an institutional advocate for the developing world.

Working closely with M'Bow was a group of nonaligned nations led by Mustapha
Masmoudi, the Tunisian delegate to UNESCO. In July 1978, the MacBride Commission
received a document from Masmoudi, entitled ''The New World Information Order,''
which proposed that imbalances in information flow be corrected by such measures
as ''regulation of the right to information by preventing abusive uses of the
right of access to information''; ''definition of appropriate criteria to govern
truly objective news selection''; and ''regulation of the collection, processing
and transmission of news and data across national frontiers.'' Masmoudi's text
did not specify who should do the regulating and defining. It seems clear,
however, that such tasks are more congenial to governments, or to international
bodies such as UNESCO, than to journalists.

If adopted, this version of the new world information order would have serious
consequences for the United States. As Senator George McGovern once observed,
''One way to attack a nation such as the United States which depends heavily on
information and communications is to restrain the flow of information.''
Adopting Masmoudi's proposal would mean accepting the idea of state control
(i.e., censorship) over all news or information crossing a nation's borders. It
could reduce greatly the amount of news about the world available to Americans
and their Government. It might provide justification for countries to exclude
from their markets American movies, television programs and advertising. It
might even produce the extraordinary result of nationalizing information
throughout the world, thereby enabling governments to tax or even prohibit
computer conversations via satellites. For example, several airlines in Eastern
Europe book local flight reservations using a data base stored in a computer in
Atlanta, Ga. Some European governments are now claiming that such data bases are
national property and cannot be exported.

Although the paper presented to the MacBride Commission bore Masmoudi's
signature, there is evidence that it was in fact written by a committee of media
experts from several countries, including East Germany and Vietnam, who worked
on the project with funds authorized by M'Bow. Details of authorship aside,
Masmoudi's impact on the entire debate has been significant because of his role
as a spokesman for the nonaligned nations, his great intelligence and analytic
skills and his intimate working relationship with the UNESCO secretariat.

Masmoudi is another product of French education grafted onto French colonial
stock. With an M.A. in law and economics from the University of Paris, Masmoudi
served as Minister of Information in Tunisia, thereby becoming familiar with the
ways government can shape and control the news media in a developing country,
before he assumed his UNESCO post in Paris.

Masmoudi's conception of the new world information order provided the
opportunity for a compromise in November 1978, at the Paris General Conference.
Adopted by consensus after six weeks of grueling negotiation (at which the
United States media were represented by the former publisher of Newsday, William
Attwood, whose experience as a foreign correspondent and Ambassador to Guinea
and Kenya had prepared him admirably for the job), a new Declaration on the Role
(not ''uses'') of the Mass Media was finally drafted. The Russians were kept out
of the negotiations until a text had been agreed to.  They were then told that
they could either accept the compromise version or have no declaration at all;
they bought in.

The result was regarded in the West as a great victory for freedom of the press.
The old Article XII, condoning state control of the news media, had been
eliminated. Press freedom and access by journalists to all news sources,
including those in opposition to the government, were endorsed. The idea of a
mandatory right of reply to supposedly inaccurate news stories was softened.

But as the celebration champagne flowed, the price that Masmoudi and the
nonaligned group had exacted became clear: In exchange for UNESCO endorsement of
press freedom, the West would be expected to support a new world information
order, to be obtained largely through UNESCO. Article VI read, ''For the
establishment of a new equilibrium and greater reciprocity in the flow of
information, ... it is necessary to correct the inequalities in the flow of
information to and from developing countries.'' And Article IX: ''It is for the
international community to contribute to the creation of conditions for a free
flow and wider and more balanced dissemination of information. ... UNESCO is
well placed to make a valuable contribution in this respect.''

By a technique described by William Harley (now a consultant to the United
States Commission on UNESCO and one of the most knowledgeable Americans on this
issue) as ''the constant reiteration of the forever unclear,'' the slogan of the
new world information order had become inextricably linked in UNESCO rhetoric
with ideas of a free press.  The ironclad formulation became ''a free flow and
wider and more balanced dissemination of information.'' Just how that wider and
more balanced flow could be achieved, and with what trade-offs, remained unclear
and still is at the center of the argument.

The next step, however, was obvious. If UNESCO was ''well placed'' to help bring
about a new order, it would need mechanisms by which to do so.

One was the MacBride Commission, which was intended to provide an analytical
base for future UNESCO activities. The commission membership reflected the
political arithmetic of the contemporary United Nations system: four members
from African countries, three Asians, two Latin Americans, two North Americans
and five Europeans -three from Western Europe, one each from the Soviet Union
and Yugoslavia. The weight of numbers lay with those who favored one degree or
another of state control.

Although the commission had no alternative but to examine the concept of a new
world information order, bound as it was by the mandate of Director General
M'Bow and a resolution of the 1978 General Conference, it showed considerable
skepticism. The Soviet member made clear his own distaste by drawing a parallel
between a new information order and the New Order that Adolf Hitler tried to
impose on Europe. A Latin American, himself a strong proponent of the idea,
conceded that it was not ''a perfectly definable concept.'' Another commissioner
from a large nonaligned country called it ''nothing but a propaganda slogan.''

There was, however, no substantial disagreement within the commission on the
central point: that perhaps two-thirds of mankind is currently deprived of
access to modern communications, and that much needs to be done to bring the
peoples of the poorest developing countries into contact with one another and
with the great world beyond their frontiers. There was less argument about the
historical causes of the imbalance than about the remedies that might be
prescribed.

One remedy, to be discussed in Belgrade, is to establish, ''within the framework
of UNESCO'' but involving other United Nations agencies and professional groups,
a program for the development of communications. The program would consider the
demand for a new world information order. What will make it difficult for the
West to deal with this demand at Belgrade is that it consists of two separate
parts: the notion that information-rich countries ought to help information-poor
countries to build their own national media systems; and the notion that
developing countries can attain eventual parity by restricting the operations on
their soil of the so-called transnational corporations in the information field
- Western news agencies, newspapers and magazines, television and motion picture
companies, and producers of computers, data-processing and telecommunications
equipment.

It is this last point that makes defenders of press freedom widen their eyes in
alarm. Harold W. Andersen, president of The Omaha World-Herald and chairman of
the World Press Freedom Committee, an umbrella group founded in 1972 to work for
press freedom, is sensitive to the dilemma behind the demand for a new world
information order. ''We who are resisting efforts to impose government control
over the news media are working ... with any organization sincerely interested
in the training of journalists from developing countries and the development of
communications technology within those countries. ... But we will continue to
resist as vigorously as we can any effort, within or without the United Nations
structure, to advance policies which encourage government influence over, or
control of, the news media.''

Resistance is not easy. Until now, the debate has been conducted in terms of
emotional, often overheated rhetoric emitted by both thirdworld spokesmen and
defenders of a free press, who are often very much in disagreement with each
other. And it has been expressed in documents usually shrouded in the
stupefyingly opaque language known on the diplomatic circuit as ''Unescese.''

A moderate version of a new world information system, by and large supported by
the West, would focus on improving and expanding the news and information
capacities of the third world without necessarily reducing or circumscribing the
existing news systems of the developed world. It would concentrate on upgrading
the technical means by which news is reported and distributed and avoid
regulating the content of news. In practice, this would entail research into the
communications needs of developing countries; technical help to improve their
newspapers, radio and television stations, and telephone and telegraph systems;
and assistance in setting up regional news-gathering pools, including even a
worldwide north-south news agency concentrating on news of developing countries,
but not seeking to exclude Western wire services.

Many Western news organizations, initially hostile to any UNESCO or third-world
questioning of their performance, have started to take notice. Indeed, an
impressive record of help to third-world countries is being built by news
agencies such as U.P.I. and A.P., which have trained 47 journalists from 18
third-world nations in the past five years. The World Press Freedom Committee,
pushed by its executive director, George Beebe of The Miami Herald, has since
1976 raised more than $600,000, given more than 40 grants to developing
countries, held a series of seminars and workshops abroad to help train more
than 300 third-world journalists and started a flow of surplus presses,
typesetters and radio equipment from United States media to third-world news
organizations. Another Western response to third-world demands has been to
increase the amount of competent research into what had previously been an
overlooked problem.

UNESCO itself in 1976 requested a major study through the International
Association for Mass Communications Research. Robert L. Stevenson, a professor
of journalism at the University of North Carolina, undertook the American part
of the study. His findings suggest that at least some of the third-world charges
against the West are overblown. ''The assertion that the Western (news) agencies
ignore the third world in regional service to those parts of the world is simply
not true,'' he reports, and ''the argument that the third world is singled out
for special (negative) treatment is also not supported by data.'' The noted
communications scholar Wilbur Schramm studied Asian newspapers and radio
stations, concluding that in general their editors received from Western wire
services far more stories -and far more positive stories - on developing
countries than they in fact chose to publish.

Such rearch will provide a useful basis for discussions among journalists
themselves, who, after all, are the people most directly affected by, and the
most skeptical of, debates about their trade conducted mostly by politicians.
Perhaps the most anxious spectators at
Belgrade will be journalists from certain third-world countries who b elieve
that UNESCO listens too closely to politicians and to those w ho seek to
control, regulate and limit the thoughts of their c ountrymen. A Sudanese
journalist warned Western friends: ''UNESCO p oliticians will do what member
states tell them to do, and member s tates themselves are run by politicians.
Politicians in power, p articularly in unstable, developing countries, simply
have no c hoice other than to regard the use and control of the news media as a
n essential way for them to stay in power.''

Hilary Ng'weno, editor of the Weekly Review in Nairobi, put the case forcefully
some years ago: ''Because most delegates to UNESCO are government
functionaries,'' he wrote, ''their concern is not with imparting information but
with influencing people. For them information is not information until its
probable impact on selected audiences has been ascertained. There is good
information, or information fit for human consumption, and there is bad
information - that which must not be fed to the public. The truth or untruth of
the information is of secondary importance. ... Indeed, sometimes the greater
the truth, the greater the desire on the part of the government functionary to
delay its dissemination, especially if the truth happens to be unpalatable.''

The argument at Belgrade will not only be over freedom versus control of the
news media, although that is the aspect that will spawn the most headlines. It
is, at heart, a version of the age-old debate over ends and means. If the agreed
end is a world news and information system that is ''wider and more balanced''
than it is today, what are the best means to obtain it?

One way, set forth by supporters of the more radical version of the new
world information order and their allies in the Soviet bloc, would b e to
curtail and control the news and information media of the West i n order to
allow media in the developing world to grow. Another way,s et forth by the West
and by some developing countries, is to c oncentrate instead on building up the
technical resources and p rofessional skills that will enable the third world to
play a g reater role in a global information network. Certainly common sense s
uggests that third-world nations will not be able to enhance their o wn
capacities to communicate by attempting to block or destroy the e xisting
capacities of advanced countries, which can immensely assistt heir own
development.

Regardless of what is decided at Belgrade, the pace of technology may well
outrun the ability of international political institutions to catch up. For
example, there is in force today an international treaty prohibiting direct
broadcast of television signals from a satellite into a country without that
country's permission. The treaty is self-enforcing because current television
sets cannot receive signals from satellites without an enormously expensive
dishshaped antenna pointed at the heavens. But both American and Japanese
companies are in the process of developing dishes that may in time become so
cheap that families who can afford a television set in the first place will be
able to afford a dish as well. Governments may struggle to control the flow of
news and information across their borders, but satellites and the technology
behind them may make such efforts futile. The jinni may already be out of the
bottle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of killing of ABC-TV correspondent Bill Stewart
photo of UNESCO General Director Amadou Mahtar M'Bow

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA, RUSSIA, CHINA AND THE FUTURE

BYLINE: By JAMES CHACE; James Chace, the managing editor of Foreign Affairs, is
the author of ''A World Elsewhere: The New American Foreign Policy'' and is
completing a book on American foreign and economic policy.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2412 words


STALIN'S SUCCESSORS Leadership, Stability, and Change in the Soviet Union.  By
Seweryn Bialer.  312 pp. New York: Cambridge University Press. $19.95.

THE SOVIET TRIANGLE Russia's Relations With China and the West in the 1980's.
By Donald R. Shanor.  296 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $13.95.

''BUT you see, the trouble with this country is that you have too many
specialists, so to speak - Kremlinologists, who don't know anything at all
(about) what's going on in my country.'' These cautionary words, attributed to
Anatoly Dobrynin, the long-time Soviet Ambassador to the United States, properly
warn the reader to beware of any new book about the Soviet rulers by a leading
''Kremlinologist.'' However, ''Stalin's Successors,'' a brilliant study of the
Soviet leadership by Seweryn Bialer, a professor of political science at
Columbia and acting director of its Research Institute on International Change,
belies the notion of ill-informed scholars. It is indispensable for any
understanding of the nature of the regime with which we are now engaged in a new
cold war.

Professor Bialer's analysis of the nature of Soviet elites is not easy reading,
and the general reader will be most interested in his description of how Soviet
society evolved from a regime of terror in the Stalinist era to the still
oppressive but more traditional authoritarian welfare state of today. In the
past decade, Leonid Brezhnev's Russia successfully achieved strategic parity
with the United States and became what it had never been before, even in the
dark days of the late Stalinist era: a global military power. At the same time,
the Soviet leadership was perplexed about how to use its new military power to
advance Soviet political interests without getting into a direct confrontation
with the United States. The Afghanistan adventure was proof that this could be
done. The result, however, has been a spiraling arms race and a new danger of
war by miscalculation, as the United States seeks new military strategies to
counter Soviet political influence in Southwest Asia and the Middle East, and
the Soviets strive to consolidate their new gains while holding together their
restive allies in Eastern Europe. Would the Polish leadership have had so much
flexibility in dealing with the rebellious shipyard workers if Russia had not
been so bogged down in Afghanistan?  As Professor Bialer explains it, the
invasion of Afghanistan clearly reveals ''an abandonment of certain assumptions
seemingly fixed in Soviet thinking - that the Soviet Union had much to gain from
cooperation with the West, and especially the United States, and much to fear
from the United States should (Soviet) behavior transgress certain unstated but
well-understood bounds.'' It is indicative of the change in United States-Soviet
relations after the deterioration of detente in the early 1970's that a
conservative, cautious Soviet leadership dedicated to gradualism should be
willing to redefine what constitutes a low risk at low cost in its foreign
policy. With little to fear from the United States, and little to hope for from
it either, the Soviets have ''carefully and deliberately'' chosen new means -
direct military intervention - to pursue an old goal, ''the extension of
political power abroad.'' In using substantial military force outside its
recognized sphere of influence for the first time since World War II, the Soviet
leadership showed ''a new degree of confidence'' because it believed the United
States would do little to thwart its expansionist drive, and had little to
induce the Soviets to modify their behavior and little to offer in trade and
arms control agreements.

It is important to remember that the Soviet leaders who have ruled for the past
15 years are of Stalin's generation, ''reared, educated and socialized into
politics in the system he created.'' The almost complete elimination of the
preceding elite generation during the prewar Stalinist terror meant that a
rather young elite emerged just after World War II; this group clung to power
through the less draconian purges of the postwar Stalinist period and survived
the upheavals of the Khrushchev era. Today, like most aging rulers, they are
characterized by their conservatism and their dedication, above all, to the
stability of the Soviet state.

There is no clear indication of who Mr. Brezhnev's successor will be, but the
new leader will doubtless come from the present Politburo and thus is likely to
be in his 70's - an interim leader with a short tenure. It will be the leaders
who follow the present Politburo who will probably make real changes in the
Soviet Union; they will be the first post-Stalinist elite. It is impossible to
predict what this new generation will do, but the longer Mr, Brezhnev delays the
succession, the shorter the period of interim rule is likely to be, and the
greater the chance for violent disruptions resulting from the massive changes
that will take place with the disappearance, in short order, of the whole
current generation of leaders.

The new generation that will follow did not experience the Stalinist terror at
first hand. It does not appreciate ''the enormous price paid for Soviet
achievement.'' Moreover, it entered political life during the Khrushchev period,
a time of ''open recognition of the growing inadequacies of Soviet development
and the backwardness of Soviet technology and (of) extravagant predictions of
matching Western achievements in the foreseeable future, predictions that
collapsed with no little embarrassment.'' Having been nourished by the ''grand
claims of Soviet propaganda,'' the new generation, Professor Bialer believes, is
devoted to the cult of the state and also ''grossly materialistic in wants and
expectations.''

But, as Professor Bialer wisely warns us, their commitment to modernization and
lust for material goods do not imply that the new elite ''will be easier to deal
with in the international arena.'' If anything, it ''may well be that they will
be less cautious, more prone to take risks than the present leadership exactly
because they have not experienced at first hand the cost of building Soviet
might.'' The implication for American foreign policy should be clear: In the
late 1980's, when this generation comes to power, Washington must exhibit great
steadiness, precisely because of the likelihood of a more assertive - or even
adventurous -leadership than we have known since the days of the 1962 Cuban
missile crisis.

As regards international relations, Professor Bialer is right to stress the
Soviet view ''that the world is divided into opposing systems of competing
values'' and that such an attitude ''works inherently against the acceptance of
any long-range status quo.'' He shows us that we are still witnessing the
dynamic rise of a great power in an ''inevitable'' competition with other powers
that ''undermines the likely success of balance of power policies, that limits
the scope of bilateral United States-Soviet agreements, and that precludes the
inherent stability of long-range solutions.'' The problems arising between the
United States and the Soviet Union are not, as Professor Bialer points out,
rooted in mutual misperceptions. At bottom, the Soviet Union and the United
States have ''a genuine diversity of their interests ... and a genuine asymmetry
in the development of their international appetites and consciousness of what is
possible and attainable in the international arena.'' But misperceptions do
exist, and they affect the ''policy making process'' of both countries.

What the Soviet Union perceives, first and foremost, is the centrality of its
relations with the United States. The two superpowers see in each other ''mirror
images of their greatest danger.'' Despite the rise of traditional great powers
(such as China) and regional powers (such as Brazil) or economic powers (such as
Japan and the European Community), the Soviets do not see any decline in the
determining role of their conflict with the United States in international
relations. Not only do the Soviets believe that the United States-Soviet
relationship ''governs the prospects for a nuclear holocaust,'' but they also
see America as a key to ''the magnitude of the Soviet conflict with China'' - a
United States-China alliance would be the ultimate Russian nightmare.  Finally,
there is a psychologically important reason why the Soviets see their
relationship with the United States as absolutely central: ''The United States
is what the Soviet Union wishes to be.''

The Soviet policy makers, unlike many in the West, do not believe that the
U.S.S.R. ''is achieving a position of either military or overall superiority''
to the United States. Nor are they content to believe that, having achieved
strategic parity with the United States, it is assured once and for all. Only a
continuous effort will yield any degree of security, and they see their military
buildup as at least a partial counterweight to ''their strongly perceived
economic and technological inferiority vis-a-vis the West.'' Does this mean that
the military buildup is solely in order to compete with the United States? Not
if we consider Soviet behavior in the third world, the only arena where the
Soviets believe that military force can be used outside their own sphere of
influence. For the Soviets, whatever undermines the status quo in the
non-Communist world is probably a trend in their favor.

Thus, revolution and nationalist aspirations in the third world almost always
receive wholehearted Soviet support. Moreover, because of its weakness in
resources other than military, the U.S.S.R. tends to want to foment, escalate or
maintain conflicts rather than seek a peaceful solution to them, especially in
the early stages, when they are most likely to be solved without resorting to
military force. To gain what Professor Bialer calls ''their place in the sun,''
to achieve the status and influence they crave, the Soviets will continue to
meddle in the third world even while seeking to mitigate tensions with the
United States, a power that itself shows no small proclivity to become involved
in third world conflicts.

Finally, the United States cannot deny the Soviet Union the trappings of a
global power by trying to exclude it, in Professor Bialer's words, ''from
participating in the solution of international problems.'' What the United
States can do is give the Soviet Union something to hope for as well as
something to fear. But to develop a wise policy that will combine these two
elements, we must first understand the nature of our adversary and avoid what
Professor Bialer calls our ''excessive and sometimes hysterical preoccupation
with the military facet of the competition with the Soviet Union and
particularly with the specter, in my opinion largely illusory, of potential
Soviet strategic superiority.'' In the next decade the world is likely to be a
more dangerous place than anything we have known for at least a generation. In
order to contain almost certain disorder, we had best try to understand the
sources of Soviet conduct, and reading Seweryn Bialer is one of the best ways to
begin.

* Donald Shanor's look at the United States-Soviet Union-China triangle is a
very different sort of work. Unlike Professor Bialer, who displays his academic
credentials with voluminous citations and abstract formulations, Mr. Shanor, a
veteran journalist who is now the director of the International Division of the
Columbia University Graduate School of Education, gives the reader a nimble tour
across the shattered terrain of United States-Soviet relations. Mr. Shanor
stresses the China factor and highlights the dangers of trying to push China
into a formal alliance with the United States and to use the leverage that close
relations between China and America give Washington in dealing with Moscow. For
the United States to ''play the China card'' in order to bring pressure on the
Soviet Union requires the skill of a Bismarck; and when China attacked Russia's
ally, Vietnam, soon after the United States had established full diplomatic
relations with Peking, one might well ask, who was playing what card against
whom? And where was our Bismarck?

Mr. Shanor's conclusion, urging the West to work for detente between the two
Communist giants, is a hopeful prescription for reducing tensions worldwide, but
the author may also be indulging in wishful thinking in believing that detente
between the U.S.S.R. and China ''would encourage those same forces in the Soviet
Union that are encouraged by detente with the West.'' The evidence is lacking,
and the author supplies little in the way of footnotes and sources, which are
almost never identified.

But Mr. Shanor is right to focus on the triangular diplomacy of the great
powers. The management of relations with China and Russia is a traditional part
of balance-of-power politics in a world where the behavior of the nation-states
still remains the most powerful force for war or peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings of bear

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WILD CHILD OF THE MEDIA

BYLINE: By MORRIS DICKSTEIN; Morris Dickstein is the author of ''Gates of Eden:
American Culture in the Sixties.'' He teaches English at Queens College.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2441 words


SOON TO BE A MAJOR MOTION PICTURE By Abbie Hoffman.  Introduction by Norman
Mailer.  Illustrated. 304 pp. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons/Perigee Books.
Cloth, $13.95. Paper, $6.95.

WHO but Abbie Hoffman (a.k.a. Barry Freed) could get himself splashed across the
front pages and television screens the very week he was publishing a book?
Whether or not he planned his surrender on a 1973 cocaine charge to coincide
with the appearance of this autobiography, his timing displays the sure gift for
media manipulation that he showed in his glory days as a Yippie. Yet his return
removes some of the drama that surrounded the book when I first read it in
galleys in March, when it was about to be published by another house: the drama
of a disembodied voice from the underground and of a missing person reflecting
on his suppressed identity.

There was never any doubt that Abbie Hoffman would someday reappear, but this
book remains the product of his years of flight and disguise. Though only a few
pages deal with the period since he jumped bail in 1974, they already tell us,
with minor alterations, the basic facts about his underground life: that he
changed his face, kept in touch with friends, had a mental breakdown and
recovery, wrote many articles, showed up in New York for a memorial concert for
folk singer Phil Ochs, and even built up a career under a new name as a local
activist, which brought him to the brink of wider fame before he pulled back.

The common wisdom, left over from the 1960's, is that Abbie Hoffman was a clown.
A true child of the media-saturated environment of the past two decades, Hoffman
seemed to live on the public attention his wide escapades attracted. We shall
probably never know how much his manic resourcefulness and unerring theatrical
instinct operated to serve his ego or to serve a cause. Probably both. But what
this clown always had was an infinite capacity to suprise us, and he does so
again with this unexpectedly good book, easily one of the best autobiographies
to come out of the 60's.

The only silly thing about ''Soon to Be a Major Motion Picture'' is its title
(not so silly: the movie rights have actually been sold).  Unlike his earlier
nonbooks, such as ''Revolution for the Hell of It'' and ''Steal This Book,''
it's a very straight story, though it's also rollickingly funny, full of
inimitable one-liners. It should have kept its original title, ''Abbie,'' for it
is truly a book by Barry Freed about Abbie Hoffman. In a harrowing epilogue
Hoffman drops his happy-go-lucky persona and describes the confusions of
identity, the terrors and nightmares of life on the run, which led him into a
severe emotional crisis.

After that breakdown, he tells us, he occasionally worked on the book as a kind
of therapy, but also as a duty to his former self and to the period. ''I kept
'Abbie' in a box under lock and key and when I could handle it, I'd pull down
the box, get out the notes, and work on this book. Talk about being reborn! I
never was quite sure I was writing an autobiography or a biography.''

Abbie is out of the box now, both in the flesh and in print, and what's most
surprising is how much the same he is. Those who turn to the book as an album of
Great Moments from the 60's will not be disappointed, for Hoffman wouldn't know
how to be dull. In politics he argues that ''one of the great mistakes any
revolution can make is to become boring,'' for this is also the kind of order
under which people lose their freedom. But his sense of the present is too vivid
for him to cling to an idealized version of his years of fame, and he detests
any phony nostalgia: ''By going underground -forced to become a new person - I
probably overcame much of the tendency to look back at those years with teary
fondness. ... I don't see myself as an antiwar veteran. Nostalgia is a mild form
of depression.''

In his brief introduction, Norman Mailer strikes just the right note by
stressing how smart Hoffman is, and how purposeful. ''He is serious. Abbie is
serious. His thousand jokes are to conceal how serious he is. It makes us
uneasy.'' Though he describes himself as ''the neighborhood prankster'' and ''a
stand-up comedian,'' Abbie Hoffman's politics are as consistent and intact as
his sense of humor. Where his friend Jerry Rubin always seemed like an
adolescent opportunist and a media freak - it was no surprise to see him doing a
caricature of a 60's radical on ''Saturday Night Live,'' then landing a job on
Wall Street - even Hoffman's most outrageous performances, climaxing in his
behavior at the 1969 Chicago conspiracy trial, had a clear political goal: to
remove the aura of legitimacy from what he saw as unjust and oppressive
authority.

It was ''the sixties-turned-seventies myth of disillusioned assimilation,'' he
says, that drove him to complete this book, which is a political testament
disguised as a vaudeville routine. On the Lower East Side in the late 60's, his
aim was to politicize the hippies, not to make the larger world an adjunct to
the counterculture. Of his recent work as an environmental activist, foolish for
someone trying to keep a low profile, he says that ''I have never seen myself as
anything more than a good community organizer. It was just that the Vietnam War
made the community bigger.'' For all his masterful manipulation of the media in
his heyday, the book provides convincing evidence that self-advertisement and
self-ridicule, learned in part from Mailer, were artfully acquired tools of the
trade, rarely ends in themselves.

Born in 1936, Abbie Hoffman grew up as a middle-class kid in Worcester, Mass.,
the son, appropriately enough, of a pharmaceutical dealer, a man with very
conventional aspirations for his children.  (''My father and the U.S. Government
were the only people who ever called me 'Abbott.' '') As his behavior toward his
namesake, Judge Hoffman, at the Chicago trial showed, Abbie is more marked by
growing up Jewish than by anything else in his background, and the early pages
of this book have more than a touch of Philip Roth.

At Brandeis, which was an important refuge for left-leaning intellectuals during
the McCarthy period, he studied with some of the most charismatic teachers in
America, including Herbert Marcuse, Abraham Maslow, Frank Manuel, Paul Radin,
Kurt Goldstein and Philip Rieff. During the 60's, playing the barbarian
know-nothing, he claimed he got all his ideas from television. ''That was of
course a put-on, nobody ever learned much watching television. I studied with
the greatest gurus of the fifties.'' Later he immersed himself in the work of
men like Mailer and C. Wright Mills, just as he closely studied the mass media
to prepare for his ''spontaneous'' performances.

Hoffman was doing graduate work in psychology at Berkeley in 1960 when HUAC came
to hold hearings on subversive activity in the Bay area, hearings that provoked
the first mass demonstrations of the 60's as hundreds of protesting students
were beaten and arrested.  More than a little politicized but still deeply
attached to the world he grew up in, Hoffman returned to Worcester to raise a
family, working as a psychologist, a traveling drug salesman, and the manager of
a movie theater - all jobs that strikingly anticipate his later course of life.
''Blessed with souped-up adrenal glands, a gift of gab, and chutzpah, I had all
the makings of a first-class Willie Loman.'' But in his Massachusetts territory,
Hoffman spent less and less time selling face cream and more time as a
civil-rights organizer, first in the N.A.A.C.P. and then in SNCC. ''I recognized
I had the ability to make outrage contagious.'' By 1967 he was in New York
selling revolution, ''copying the drug companies'' by paying less attention to
the message than to the way he presented it. Again and again, he describes
himself as a super-salesman for radical ideas.

Hoffman indicates in detail how he learned to turn dry political convictions
into street-talk and media events. Like Allen Ginsberg, he was a personal link
between the political and cultural radicalism of the period, between the
politics of conscience and protest and the histrionics of self-expression, the
drug scene and epater les bourgeois. The first of these, which was his deeper
loyalty, survived the 60's only with difficulty as the Movement collapsed. The
second, he feels, survived only too well, losing its political edge as it was
assimilated by the middle class: ''The ease with which the larger society
absorbed and diluted hippie culture I still regard as a defeat. Long hair, dope
smoking, and freaky clothes have long since lost their social bite.'' But he
isn't led to wonder how much bite they had to begin with.

In an amusing chapter called ''Rags to Rags,'' Hoffman describes how American
capitalism was eager to market him at the height of his fame, and how he clung
to dignified poverty. ''I could have become a millionaire in 1970 with
surprisingly little effort.'' (Two manufacturers were eager to put out an
''Abbie Doll,'' one in a boxed set with a policeman: ''The Abbie Doll always
gets busted.'') But he never sees the full irony of his own admitted adherence
to the marketing mentality.

As a speaker in demand on college campuses, Hoffman avoided the cold rationalism
of old radicals and of New Leftists like Tom Hayden (whom he portrays as a
calculating and manipulative person, ''absolutely without humor''). Along with
his fellow anarchist Paul Goodman, Hoffman aimed to bring out the life-affirming
feelings in his listeners. ''I tried never to play on the audience's guilt, and
instead appealed to feelings of liberation, a sense of comradeship, and a call
to make history. I played all authority as if it were a deranged lumbering bull
and I the daring matador.''

But Hoffman is better remembered for his ingenious surrealist stunts than for
his Goodmanesque evocations of community. Some of them still make wonderfully
funny reading today, such as his satiric plug for Mao's little red book on the
Merv Griffin show (''You know how many copies this guy's sold? He's sold close
to a billion - this guy outsells the Bible twelve to one! Why don't you put him
on your show? You can see by his picture he's a neat dresser and all''), the
same show that turned Hoffman into a bluish blur for wearing a shirt that looked
like an American flag.

Once in Buffalo, hoping to provoke a big bust, he turned on a suggestible
audience with joints that were rolled entirely from catnip. (The police didn't
take the bait but the audience did.) When his son ''america'' was born he sent a
staid announcement to the White House, from Mr. and Mrs. A.H. Hoffman. This
automatically elicited an embossed message of congratulations from President and
Mrs. Nixon, which was duly leaked to the press, provoking a heated denial from
Ron Ziegler. The book concludes with one of his most hilarious set-pieces, a
mock recantation in which he takes it all back, every insult against middle
America, his whole career. ''It's damp underground,'' he says, lampooning our
need for the troublemaker to repent, the prodigal to return: ''Now can I come
back?''

Who can tell what would have happened had the cocaine bust not forced him into
hiding, and what may yet happen to him now that he has surfaced again in a
drastically different political climate?  Abbie claims the police set him up,
but he was also, by his own admission, recklessly self-destructive. The need to
go underground saved him from the sadder fate of a washed-up performer whose
audience has turned elsewhere. And the more reflective life of an exile, hard on
the man, did good things for his writing.

There's not a trace of self-pity in this autobiography, but neither is there an
awareness of the limitations of the publicity mentality, which condemned him to
play the role of the all-licensed fool before the increasingly capricious
powers-that-be. Described by a Government study as an ''exhibitionist,'' he
gladly accepts the charge: ''By definition we projected ourselves into the
public eye like politicians, clergymen, artists, actors, and athletes. I really
doubt there's ever been a society that craved entertainment to the extent ours
does.''

Though the pseudo-event may be the great American art form, perhaps Abbie should
be less complacent about the company of politicans, actors and athletes. For all
his deep convictions, he sees no irony in his assigned role as a popular
entertainer. He ought to look more closely at the social roots of this craving
for excitement, which expresses itself at present less in politics than in the
vogue of horror films, Gothics and spy novels. And he might consider the speed
with which this craving discards those on whom it feeds.

Isolation and flight cut Abbie off from his ''image,'' like the man in the fable
who lost his shadow. This brought out the more serious and thoughtful self that
always lurked just behind the clownish facade. It could simply be another image,
but somehow I doubt it.This is one book that doesn't feel ghost-written, though
a kind of ghost wrote it. I hope Abbie Hoffman makes his peace with the law and
is able to function again as a community organizer, for his old colleagues are a
dispirited lot and there is much in the community that still needs mending.
Until then we have this intelligent and funny book, a reminder of things past
but perhaps also an omen of things to come.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Abbie Hoffman in collage

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BYLINE: By LANGDON WINNER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1625 words


THE CENTER DOES NOT HOLD THE WINDING PASSAGE Essays and Sociological Journeys
1960-1980.  By Daniel Bell.  370 pp. Cambridge, Mass.: ABT Books. $25.

IN the final chapter of the sociological classic ''The Protestant Ethic and the
Spirit of Capitalism,'' Max Weber ponders the future of modern society, noting
that an increasingly rationalized, materialistic capitalism has become severed
from the religious asceticism at its foundations. ''For the last stage of this
cultural development, it might well be truly said: Specialists without spirit,
sensualists without heart; this nullity imagines that it has attained a level of
civilization never before achieved.'' The recent writing of Daniel Bell echoes
Weber's gloomy speculation and brings it up to date. Although contemporary
society remains vital in the sphere of technical and economic innovation, it is,
in Mr. Bell's view, no longer able to generate the sources of social solidarity
and religious meaning that could sustain people during the troubled times ahead.

''The Winding Passage'' gathers together 17 of Mr. Bell's articles and reviews
published in various journals and anthologies during the past two decades.
''They are,'' the preface explains, ''essays written in my middle years, midway
in the journey of our life, in that dark wood, seeking a return to the straight
way of my ancestors.'' Donning the mantle of a 19th-century culture critic, Mr.
Bell covers a vast range of disciplines and topics. Pieces on Thorstein Veblen,
Charles Fourier, neo-Marxian economics, the ''New Class,'' national character,
ethnicity and social change, liberalism, computers and telecommunications,
Jewish identity, and a number of other subjects are included here with no
particular theme uniting them. The majority of papers, however, were written in
the mid-1970's and continue development of ideas announced in Mr. Bell's ''The
Coming of Post-Industrial Society'' and ''The Cultural Contradictions of
Capitalism,'' especially his notion of the ''disjunction of realms'' in society.

Mr. Bell holds that three important segments of modern life - the economy,
polity and culture - exist as largely separate entities, obeying different
''axial principles.'' The economy or ''technoeconomic realm'' runs on the
principle of efficiency and functional rationality and has a bureaucratic
structure. The polity, at least in its Western democratic forms, takes equality
as its axial principle, realized through institutions of representation or
participation. Finally, the culture, a sphere in which people seek meaning for
their lives and answers to ultimate existential questions, is now governed by
the principle of self-realization or, as Mr. Bell fears, of untrammeled
self-gratification.

Langdon Winner is the author of ''Autonomous Technology'' and teaches politics
at M.I.T.

At stake in this schema is a flat rejection of all attempts at ''holistic''
social theory. ''A Marxist or a Functionalist views society as some kind of
historical period or closed system, integrated through the mode of production or
a dominant value system, and believes that all other, superstructural or
peripheral, realms are determined by or predominantly influenced by this
principle of 'totality' or 'integration.' '' In contrast, Mr. Bell's approach
emphasizes social pluralism, multiple causation, fragmentation, and the play of
contradictions in society without the promise of happy resolution. He wants to
go beyond standard theories to explain why distinctly different parts of society
move according to different rhythms of change - why, for example, the steady
rate of devel-
opment in the techno-economic sphere seems to bear little direct relationship to
the chaotic flux of cultural styles and fashions.

Those who pick up ''The Winding Passage'' hoping to see the logic of this new
model spelled out in rich detail will be disappointed.  Mr. Bell is still
content to describe his three realms and axial principles as if they were
separate merry-go-rounds spinning at diverse speeds in different corners of the
same amusement park with no coherent link between them. The ''recasting of
sociological theory'' mentioned in the preface will have to wait for a later
book. What these investigations offer the reader is a bright, wonderfully
gregarious intellect ranging among a wealth of source
materials in social science, history, fiction, poetry, drama, philosophy and
religion, identifying problems that are both fascinating and troublesome.

Chapters on the economic sphere observe capitalism rapidly restructuring itself
to accommodate new science-based technologies, most notably those in
telecommunications and information handling.  Miniaturization in electronics
makes possible a new international division of labor in which routinized
manufacturing is shifted from Western industrialized countries to less-developed
nations around the globe. As the ''external proletariat'' expands, technically
trained post-industrial professionals in the United States must somehow coexist
with a large force of permanently unemployable bluecollar workers at home. Mr.
Bell notices the social stress these developments are likely to cause, but
offers no remedies.

Equally disruptive forces, he believes, now threaten our political institutions.
With the growth of state power has come a ''revolution in rising entitlements''
that brings newly formed interest groups into public life, pressing their claims
for government spending and for the right to participate in decision making. The
modern polity faces simultaneous problems of how to aid capital formation and
economic growth and how to satisfy the voracious demands of its citizens for
social services. Mr. Bell's eclecticism makes him sensitive to both left- and
right-wing formulations of these issues.  Thus, he mentions the Marxist views of
Jurgen Habermas on the ''legitimation crisis'' in the same paragraph that he
applauds Samuel P. Huntington's conservative notions about the ungovernability
of democracy. Mr. Bell's own proposal skates the line between liberal and
conservative solutions. He recommends that governments make greater use of
market mechanisms ''by giving people money and letting them buy the services
they need in accordance with their diverse needs, rather than through some
categorical program.''

The condition of contemporary culture only serves to exacerbate our economic and
political maladies, Mr. Bell argues. Prominent developments in modern art,
literature, religion and intellectual taste have, according to Mr. Bell, carried
the corruptions of nihilistic modernism, reckless hedonism and bizarre spiritual
excess right into the center of everyday life. No one defends tradition anymore;
everybody has taken off on some weird trip. Pioneers in this degrading spectacle
are the artists and writers whose experiments in modernism, ''the self-willed
effort of a style and sensibility to remain in the forefront of advancing
consciousness,'' have left the values of Western civilization in a shambles.
Amplifying the debauch are purveyors of mass culture who transform the
destructive ideas and images of the ''adversary culture'' into widely marketable
commodities.

As he surveys the disorder of our world, Mr. Bell is much less concerned with
social injustice than with the omnipresent perils of instability. Socialist
hopes for the reconstruction of society are repeatedly dismissed as confused,
utopian and downright foolish.

Civil rights and anti-Vietnam War demonstrations of a decade ago are remembered
not as responses to legitimate issues, but rather as portents that the United
States is now ''vulnerable to the kind of mobilization politics that has been a
feature of ideological conflicts in European societies in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries.'' What bothers Mr. Bell is that, faced with turmoil on
every side, our leaders lack depth and moral stamina. Scientific and technical
professionals are frozen in an instrumental, utilitarian mentality that renders
them incapable of ''vision.'' Members of the cultural intelligentsia have
exhausted themselves in pursuit of an increasingly hollow ''self.'' Specialists
without spirit, sensualists without heart.

This emphasis in Mr. Bell's writing produces what I find to be a strange
imbalance. Rather than criticize the socially disruptive policies of
transnational corportions that blithely shut down factories in the United States
and open them in South America with the flick of a computerized switch, this
book seems more anxious to discredit Norman O. Brown's concept of ''the
polymorph perverse.'' Indeed, the economic and technical patterns of advanced
capitalism seem beyond moral judgment in Mr. Bell's thinking. Ephemera in the
cultural realm attract a disproportionate share of his worry.

''The exhaustion of Modernism, the aridity of Communist life, the tedium of the
unrestrained self and the meaninglessness of the monolithic political chants all
indicate that a long era is coming to a close.'' The book's final chapter looks
forward to the rise of new religions that might restore our spiritual center of
gravity. Such faiths would return to the past, renew a sense of tradition and
reacquaint the populace with ''the ricorsi of the existential predicaments.''
That old-time religion should be good enough for us.

Even when one disagrees with Mr. Bell's conclusions or finds his prose a little
too glib, one must recognize that he performs a great service. Not intimidated
by the boundaries that separate academic fields, Mr. Bell spans a vast
territory, weaving ideas together in a consistently insightful display. ''The
Winding Passage'' complements his already substantial contribution to our
understanding of modern life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Daniel Bell photo of Thorstein Veblen photo of
Hannah

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES;
TOURS FOR THE VIGOROUS AND INTELLECTUALLY CURIOUS

BYLINE: By SUZANNE DONNER

SECTION: Section 10; Page 3, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1600 words


Expeditions sponsored by academic institutions have become one of the popular
choices of travelers who want to combine learning with touring. Fordham
University, for example, is offering a 23-day tour of the Middle East from Dec.
29 to Jan. 23, 1981. The group is limited to 30, and most participants, who have
ranged in age from 20 to 70, have taken the tour for academic credit. The
credits may be gained by keeping a journal of notes and observations that is
turned in afterwards for either a pass/fail or letter grade.

Beginning the 23-day tour are 10 days in Egypt (Cairo, the Sphinx and the Great
Pyramid of Cheops, and the temples, tombs and monuments of Abydos, Luxor, Aswan
and Abu Simbel). Following are three days in Jordan (Petra, Jerash and several
Old Testament sites), and 10 days in Israel and on the West Bank. Six days will
be spent based in Jerusalem with side trips to Jericho, Bethlehem, Hebron,
Masada and the caves of Qumran, the site of the discovery of the Dead Sea
Scrolls. The tour ends with four days along the Mediterranean and in the
northern part of the country.

The group's lecturer/escort will be Dr. Byron E. Shafer, a professor and
specialist in ancient Near Eastern and biblical studies. The price of the tour
for participants who wish academic credit is $2,499; otherwise, the cost is $200
less. The price includes flights on regularly scheduled airlines, transfers to
and from hotels, first-class accommodations with private baths (doubleoccupancy
basis) and Continental breakfast and dinner daily.  Single supplement is $326.
Not included are visa fees, airport and bridge taxes in Egypt and Jordan,
lunches, beverages or tips.

Participants should be physically fit; some walking is part of the tour,
particularly in Jerusalem. For details of the itinerary write to Dr. Byron E.
Shafer, Fordham University, 113 West 60th Street, New York 10023 (212-841-5373
Monday through Friday, 9 to 6).

Four study tours of China will be conducted in 1981 by Columbia University's
Office of Continuing Education and East Asian Institute. The tours are offered
in conjunction with a series of lectures on current and ancient Chinese
civilization that begins this Wednesday; no academic credit is offered.

Each tour group will spend at least 15 days in China as well as several days in
Tokyo and Hong Kong. Two of the university's China specialists will conduct each
of the tours.

The dates and itineraries are: May 16 through June 4 - Peking, Xian, Shanghai,
Guilin and Canton (air fare is $1,537 and land arrangements are $2,445 a person
in double occupancy); July 25 through Aug. 13 - Peking, Xian, Shanghai, Hangzhou
and Canton (limited to secondary school teachers; air fare $1,640 and land
arrangements $2,353); Aug. 8 through Aug. 28 - Peking, Xian, Shanghai, Suzhou,
Guilin and Canton (air fare $1,640 and land arrangements $2,558); Oct. 10
through Oct. 29 - Peking, Hangzhou, Shanghai, Guilin and Canton (air fare $1,640
and land arrangements $2,353).

In the lecture series Wm. Theodore de Bary will speak on ''Confucian China and
its Critics,'' and Myron L. Cohen on ''Chinese Society: Past and Present.''
During the spring term art and archeology will be covered by Richard Vinograd, a
primer on the Chinese language will be offered by the Department of East Asian
Languages and Culture, and a series of background lectures will be given by
Roberta Martin, of the East Asian Institute, and other specialists.

The tours use regularly scheduled flights - air fare is subject to change - and
fares include stopover privileges in Taipei, Tokyo, Honolulu and the West Coast.

For further information write to the Office of Continuing Education, 102 Low
Memorial Library, Columbia University, New York 10027 (212-280-2838). The first
lecture, a free orientation session, will be held this Wednesday at 7 P.M. in
the Altschul Auditorium of the International Affairs Building, 118th Street and
Amsterdam Avenue. (Night entrance to the International Affairs Building is
through the Law School at 116th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.)

The University of Connecticut is developing study tours, with criteria for
academic credit to be determined, that will begin in January 1981. Among the
areas to be visited are Israel and Egypt, Mexico, Spain, Greece, Italy,
Yugoslavia and Bermuda. For information on these tours write to the Office for
International Education and Development, Box U-6, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, Conn. 06268 (203-486-3117).

Historic Homes

On Oct. 4 the Wethersfield Historical Society in Wethersfield, Conn., will hold
a tour of Old Wethersfield. Five private homes, in the process of being restored
or recently completed, and five public buildings will be open from 10 A.M. to 4
P.M. on the self-guided tour. Hosts at each property will answer questions, and
box lunches will be on sale at the parish house of the Congregational Church,
250 Main Street.

Tickets will be $6 ($5 if purchased in advance). The price includes a tour
booklet with map, background information and photographs of the houses before
and during restoration. For advance tickets write to the Wethersfield Historical
Society, Old Academy Museum, 150 Main Street, Wethersfield, Conn. 06109.

European Barges

Continental Waterways, a company that operates barge tours in England and
France, now has an American office. The company's 1981 brochure lists voyages on
the Thames and the Canal du Midi as well as in Champagne, Burgundy, Alsace and
Brittany. The barges operate weekly from April through October, carry six to 16
passengers and cost from $660 to $980 a person in double occupancy.

For details write to Continental Waterways, 11 Beacon Street, Boston 02108
(617-227-3220).

New Destinations

Travelers with an affinity for politics may find of particular interest the
tours to Nicaragua, Grenada, Vietnam and Cuba being offered by Guardian Tours,
an agency created by the Guardian Independent Radical Newsweekly.

Two 10-day tours to Nicaragua, from Dec. 27 to Jan. 7 and Feb. 5 through 15,
include visits to Managua, Leon and Esteli. On the itinerary are meetings with
literacy workers, women's organizations and the Sandinista Defense Committee as
well as stops at an agricultural cooperative, a school and a factory. The price
is $895 a person in double occupancy; it also includes transportation on
regularly scheduled flights, transfers, all meals and guide service.

Trips to Grenada are planned for Jan. 6 through 13 and Feb. 13 through 20. Tour
participants will stay in a guest house on Grand Anse Beach, near St. George's,
the capital. The price of $795 a person in double occupancy includes
transportation on regularly scheduled flights, transfers, two meals a day and
guide service.

The agency's tours of Vietnam, which are arranged through Regent Holidays of
England, run from Dec. 15 to Jan. 3 and Feb. 16 to March 7. According to Anne
Fuller, Guardian Tours' manager, these tours are the first to be open to
Americans since the end of the war in 1975.  Visitors will spend 16 days in
Vietnam, with five days each in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, and
four days in Bangkok. On the itinerary: a farming cooperative, a new economic
zone, a school, factories and the tomb of Ho Chi Minh. Land arrangements will
cost $1,700 and include hotel accommodations and all meals in Vietnam, hotel
rooms and breakfast in Bangkok and flights in Asia. Air travel (regularly
scheduled) between Bangkok and the United States is additional.

The eight- , 10- , 12- and 15-day tours to Cuba, which will begin again in
November, cost $595 to $920; participants are flown on charter flights. Many of
these tours are designed for specialinterest groups such as teachers,
health-care workers and economic and social planners.

For further information write to Guardian Tours, 33 West 17th Street, New York
10011 (212-691-0404).

Country Fair

Winterthur Museum and Gardens at Winterthur, Del., is sponsoring its second
country fair next Sunday from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Among the day's entertainments
are hot-air balloon rides, fiddle and bagpipe music, games and displays of
horse-drawn carriages and zoo animals.

The day will begin with a two-mile run for television and radio celebrities;
quarter-mile and five-mile runs may be entered for a $5 fee, which will include
admission to the fair and a T-shirt.  Admission to the gardens is included in
the fair ticket price of $3 for adults and $1.50 for children under 12; rides
and tours of the museum are additional.

Winterthur, a museum of decorative arts made or used in America between 1640 and
1840, is on State Route 52 six miles northwest of Wilmington, Del. No tickets
will be sold in advance; a special parking area will be available for the
handicapped.

Waterfront Festival

On Oct. 4 and 5 the 14th Annual Fell's Point Fun Festival will be held on
Baltimore's waterfront. Among the continuous entertainments from 11 A.M. to 9
P.M. each day will be Dixieland and jazz performances, clowns and jugglers,
craft and art exhibits, a flea market and ethnic food and refreshment stands.

The festival is sponsored by the Society for the Preservation of Federal Hill
and Fell's Point. Proceeds from the festival will be used to restore the
interior of the Robert Long House at 812 South Ann Street. Its exterior
restoration is nearing completion and the public may visit the house during the
festival.

Out-of-town visitors should take Interstate 83 to Fallsway Street, then east to
Fayette Street and south to South Broadway. The festival is at the foot of South
Broadway.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Caves of Qumran

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DISABLED TRAVELERS ARE ASKING FOR,AND GETTING,MORE HELP

SECTION: Section 10; Page 18, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1316 words


FRANCES GRANDY works in the news department of The Times.

By FRANCES GRANDY

Until recently, vacation travel has been difficult for the wheelchair bound, the
blind or the developmentally disabled. They have had to contend with too narrow
doorways, too high curbs and the prejudice and insensitivity of the ''normal''
people who surround them. But things are changing, including the handicapped
themselves.  They are demanding greater opportunities to travel, and in New York
and across the country, travel agents and tour operators are listening to their
demands.

Lou Nau, for example, is an accomplished world traveler, although he has been
confined to a wheelchair since World War II. Mr. Nau, a retired architectural
engineer and a writer for New World, a magazine for the handicapped, visited
Norway, the Netherlands and London last year and took a cruise from London to
Spitzbergen in the Arctic Circle.

Mr. Nau said that he finds most hotel personnel ''very accommodating'' toward
him as a handicapped person. ''In Europe,'' he noted, ''people are more apt to
help. One time in Italy I was booked on a train that turned out to be
inaccessible. Several people helped me up, and it was no problem.'' He has
never, he said, found himself in a place that was so totally inaccessible that
he had to give up and abandon his plans.

Mr. Nau's European jaunt was arranged for him by Pinetree Tours, a Los
Angeles-based agency that had previously arranged for him to travel to New
Zealand as one of six handicapped travelers in a larger group of nonhandicapped
vacationers. (Mr. Nau, like many handicapped persons, prefers to travel this
way, rather than as part of a separate, handicapped-only, group.)

Pinetree Tours is one of 200 members, a number of them based overseas, of the
Society for the Advancement of Travel for the Handicapped (S.A.T.H.). The
organization is a nonprofit coalition of travel agents and tour operators who
work to educate those in all phases of the travel field about the needs of the
handicapped. Their goal is to sensitize the industry, and they are able to exert
considerable muscle. If a hotel, for example, is not amenable to having
handicapped guests, the agencies quite often do not book their regular clients
there either.

As president of the New York Region of S.A.T.H., Grace Gourdine travels
internationally to lobby for the handicapped traveler. She reports her findings
to the executive director and founder of S.A.T.H., Murray Vidockler, and,
whenever she finds a place inaccessible, agitates for changes on the spot,
meeting with hotel managers or tourism boards. ''When I go on a trip, I check
everything,'' she said. ''How do passengers get off the plane? Where are they
met? How do they get to the hotel?''

This summer Mrs. Gourdine went to Egypt to meet with Jihan Sadat, the wife of
President Anwar el-Sadat. ''My pet project is the Cairo museum,'' she said.
''The first floor is fairly accessible, but am I particularly interested in the
Tut exhibit on the second floor, which is reachable only by stairs. I hope to
persuade them to install an elevator.'' Mrs. Gourdine was pleased to report that
a new luxury hotel under construction in Cairo has been designed especially to
accommodate the handicapped (although it will be open to the general public). It
will have wide doorways, grab bars in the bath and two olympic-size swimming
pools.

Barbara Jacobsen of Flying Wheels of Owatonna, Minn., says: ''The handicapped
have become gutsier, more demanding and more determined to be independent.''
Mrs. Jacobsen and her husband, Judd, have run Flying Wheels, one of the first
agencies to serve the handicapped, for 13 years. Mr. Jacobsen was disabled after
an swimmming accident in 1957, and is on the board of several commissions on the
handicapped; their agency runs tours to the West Coast, Hawaii and Scandinavia
as well as a Caribbean cruise on the Queen Elizabeth 2.  The Jacobsens will also
check out destinations for individuals, as they did for a couple who wanted to
go to Costa Rica even though the agency does not conduct tours there.

There are travel opportunities for developmentally disabled persons as well. The
Guided Tour, a Philadelphia-based agency, is a program for the mentally retarded
that is geared to teach them the skills of daily living, travel among them. Many
of their clients have never been away from their families or institutional
residences before, and many of them have never learned to function
independently.

Irv Segal, who is also National Recreation Chairman for the American Association
on Mental Deficiency, founded the Guided Tour seven years ago, when he was a
social worker for Nationality Services, working with recent immigrants. One
immigrant had a mildly retarded son and she wanted help in allowing him to
travel. ''I had no experience,'' Mr. Segal said. ''I didn't know how the
handicapped 'should' be treated.'' He simply planned a trip the way he would for
any other group, and it worked well.

The Guided Tour has conducted trips to Disney World, the Poconos and Lake George
as well as to England, Mexico and Canada. The tour members take in all the usual
tourist activities, even to scuba diving in Hawaii. Mr. Segal often gets in
touch with local groups on a similar functional level so his clients can make
new friends.

The client is usually referred to the Guided Tour by his case worker, who can
brief the tour staff, which is composed of fulltime social workers and special
education teachers. Depending on the functional level of the group, the
staff-to-client ratio is three to five counselors to one traveler.

Carl Russell, of Wilderness Encounters in Webster Groves, Mo., takes clients
with a variety of handicaps white-water kayaking down the Middle Fork and lower
Salmon Rivers and Hells Canyon of the Snake River in Idaho. Many of his clients
are injured athletes and Vietnam veterans who were physically active before they
became disabled. Mr.  Russell maintains that he will take anyone with any kind
physical or mental handicap as long as they can hold on, follow directions, do
not need any special equipment and have the right attitude.

A wide variety of activities, such as photographic workshops, climbing, camping
or canoeing and a preliminary workshop for all water sports and land trips, are
offered. Clients are taken on an individual basis after a face-to-face or
telephone interview.

Some Aids to Access

The Society for the Advancement of Travel for the Handicapped maintains a New
York office at 26 Court Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 112242 (212-858-5483). While it
is not a travel agency, it will supply listings of accessible hotels and
sightseeing attractions as well as listings of local travel agents who are
particularly responsive to the needs of travelers with physical and
developmental handicaps.

There are also a number of free guides for the handicapped traveler. Several are
available from the Easter Seals Society, 2 Park Avenue, Room 1815, New York
10016 (212-532-8830); among these are a Guide to Accessibility of Airport
Terminals, published by the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance
Board, and an Airport Guide for the Handicapped and Elderly. The society also
has listings of accessibility guides to various cities and regions.

Rehabilitation International U.S.A., 20 West 40th Street, Room 1815, New York
10018 (212-869-9907), will provide the International Directory of Access Guides,
a worldwide master list of guides for the handicapped traveler. The office of
the New York State Advocate for the Disabled, Two World Trade Center, Room 3712,
New York 10047 (212-938-0186 or 212-938-0187; toll free, 800-522-1369), has a
selection of free pamphlets, chiefly concerned with travel in the New York
metropolitan area and New York state, as well as counselors who will answer
specific travel questions. - F.G.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
A NICE GUYCONTEST?;
Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 21


There is an enduring naivete in American politics, defying logic and experience.
So one is reminded by the latest flap in the 1980 campaign: the indignant
argument about whether or not Jimmy Carter called Ronald Reagan a racist.

In Atlanta the other day, in the Ebenezer Baptist Church, Carter spoke to an
audience of black leaders. ''You've seen in this campaign,'' he said, ''the
stirrings of hate and the rebirth of code words like 'states' rights' in a
speech in Mississippi ... Hatred has no place in this country. Racism has no
place in this country.''

Reagan and his campaign staff waxed indignant at what they called a sneaky
attack on the Republican candidate. So did some columnists and editorial
writers. At the President's press conference there were spiky questions on the
subject, one suggesting that Carter's words in Atlanta were an example of his
tendency to ''get mean'' in campaigns. Carter said he had not called Reagan a
racist and did not think he was one.

Did Carter intend to tie Reagan to racism? Of course he did. His press
conference attempt to slip away from the charge was handwringing hypocrisy
worthy of Uriah Heep. There is a mean streak in Carter the campaigner, and there
always has been.

But the outraged protestations of innocence from Reagan and his men are equally
laughable.  On Aug. 3, in his first major sally of the general election
campaign, Reagan spoke at the Neshoba County Fair in Philadelphia,
Miss.Philadelphia was the scene of one of the most brutal expressions of
Southern racism: the 1964 murders of three civil rights workers, James Chaney,
Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner. The event and the place are powerful
symbols for anyone concerned with civil rights.

''I believe in states' rights,'' Reagan told the predominantly white audience at
the fair. Those were indeed code words - the ones used by Southern white
politicians in the old days to rouse audiences against racial integration and
the Supreme Court.

Now there are two ways of looking at Reagan's decision to go to Philadelphia,
Miss., and speak about states' rights. He may have done it to court the votes of
whites not yet reconciled to the changes in the Southern way of life. Or he may
have done it in ignorance of the symbol.

Neither interpretation can commend Reagan to anyone who cares about civil
rights. For a man prominent in public life for many years not to know what
happened in Philadelphia, Miss., would not be a plus. The liklihood, moreover,
is that the staff members who arranged Reagan's trip did know.

The subject of civil rights illustrates something important about Ronald Reagan:
the distinction between his personal qualities and his political ideas. I have
no doubt that he is genuinely outraged at the suggestion of personal prejudice
against blacks. Last March he told Robert Scheer of The Los Angeles Times:

''I will weigh my fight against bigotry and prejudice against that of the most
ardent civil rights advocate because I was doing it when there was no civil
rights fight. I, on the air as a sports announcer years and years ago, was
editorializing against the gentleman's agreement that kept blacks from playing
organized baseball, I dealt with it in my personal life, I played on a college
football team alongside a black who's today my best friend, when this was not
commonplace.''

But his record in politics is different. He opposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964
and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. As Governor of California he picked
relatively few blacks for important appointments. Reporters traveling with him
during the primaries saw no blacks on his large staff.

The point is more general. Reagan's secret weapon as a candidate is his
amiability. On television or in person he comes across as a comfortable old
shoe, not one of those scary figures of the hard right. But his political ideas
do come from the far right. So does most of his staff. And so does the basic
constituency that made him the candidate.

That has to be kept in mind when Reagan makes what the press calls a gaffe. When
he calls the Vietnam War ''noble'' or expresses doubt about the theory of
evolution, he is saying what comes naturally to him and his supporters. His
longtime aide, Lyn Nofziger, put it candidly the other day in a talk with a
reporter from The (London) Sunday Times. Nofziger said:

''The conservative Reagan constituency - and that's not small - got worried when
moderates like Bill Casey and Anne Armstrong and George Bush took the leading
roles in the campaign. They wondered where Reagan was going. They liked those
remarks about Vietnam, evolution and the Klan. It was like revaccinating the
Reagan constituency.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

QUESTIONS RAISED ON THE READINESS OF ARMY FOR A PROTRACTED CONFLICT;
Defense: Is the U.S. Prepared?  Fourth of seven articles.

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2654 words

DATELINE: FORT STEWART, Ga.


Confronted by shortages of materiel, skilled specialists and a clear definition
of mission, American military leaders fear that the United States Army might be
little more than a temporary barrier to a major Soviet land attack in the
Persian Gulf or other crisis areas.

Unit commanders say that the chance of stemming an enemy onslaught for a few
days or weeks in one theater of action are good. But whether America's ground
forces could hold out more than a matter of weeks in the face of overwhelming
enemy numbers is a subject of deep military anxiety.

As Col. James Shelton, a brigade commander in the new Rapid Deployment Force,
put it: ''My brigade's ready to fight right this minute. But as for the big
picture, who knows? We'd probably be stretched very thin very soon. Our
sustainability would be doubtful.  We'd give a good account of ourselves at the
start, but I'd hate to say how long we'd survive.''

Realistic Training Is Aim

Despite the Army's many admitted shortcomings, commanders make training as
realistic as possible, and most soldiers seem aware of the possibility they
could be fighting soon in the Persian Gulf or elsewhere in the Middle East.

Adjusting the bipod of his Dragon missile-launcher, a soldier jammed his eye
against the sight, took a deep breath, thumbed the safety lock and pressed the
trigger bar. A simulated wire-guided rocket shot toward a target jeep speeding
across the dusty range.

The progress of the imaginary missile, the position of the jeep and the
shooter's tracking movements registered simultaneously on a computer. An
instructor watched the computer display as the trainee guided the missile on its
10-second flight.

''Steady, you're jerking,'' the instructor said. ''Stop breathing.  You're
letting that missile float, bring it down or you'll lose him.  That's it, keep
the tracking smooth. Steady, steady ... Good! Target hit. Another Iranian tank
bites the dust.''

Like most electronic training aids used by the Army these days, the Dragon
simulator is fun to shoot. Soldiers have learned to score well and seem
confident that they could shoot real weapons equally well in combat.

But how well would the Army fare if land war broke out now; if Soviet tanks
invaded Western Europe; if enemies of the United States blocked access to oil
fields; if vital American interests were threatened in Asia, Africa or Latin
America?

One of the difficulties in answering such questions is in finding a clear
definition of what is expected of the Army.

Defend Against Attack

While the Army's primary mission is to repel any attack on the United States, it
is also supposed to assist the United States' European allies and Japan against
Soviet attack.

In the words of the Organization of the Army reference book, the primary mission
of the United States Army in Europe ''is to safeguard, with our allies, the
freedom, common heritage and civilization of the member nations of NATO.''

But the Army's mission is less explicitly defined in other parts of the world.
Is it supposed to deal with brushfire crises anywhere, and if so, how many is it
expected to be able to handle simultaneously?

A fairly optimistic answer was given by Gen. Edward C. Meyer, Army Chief of
Staff.  ''As I told one brigade commander who was thoughtfully concerned about
shortages and their potential impact,'' General Meyer said, ''I have gone to war
twice in units that were short the stuff of a perfect army, and we did well. The
nation could demand the same of us in the future.''

But behind such statements is the reality that the 673,500 men and women of the
active United States Army, grouped in 16 combat divisions and various support
commands, are outnumbered by the Soviet army more than 2 to 1. Even buttressed
by a 358,500-member Army National Guard and 196,000-member Army reserve,
America's ground forces are thin compared with the Russians', whose own force of
reservists may number as many as 25 million.

Soviet Tank Advantage

The Russians have more than four tanks for every American tank, and there are
similar numerical disparities between most other kinds of weaponry used by the
two nations.

The five United States Army divisions stationed in West Germany and South Korea
are at full strength or over strength. But of the 11 remaining divisions in the
United States, from which the force to deal with emergencies would have to be
drawn, most are well below full strength. Four of them exist as divisions only
because ''roundout'' brigades of National Guardsmen are attached -one National
Guard brigade for every two active Army brigades. For lack of men, entire
fighting units have been ''zeroed out'' of some divisions.

Some National Guard units are highly regarded by liaison officers from the
active Army who inspect them periodically. But morale and training are said to
vary widely. Training is usually limited to 38 days a year, and the Guard has
usually been armed with hand-me-downs.

PICKUP FIRST ADD ARMY

Fighting in 3 Months

In theory, the Guard could be fighting within three months after the onset of an
emergency, but many career Army officers said in interviews that they doubted
the reserves and National Guard would help much in a sudden, all-out war.

Besides fighting the Russians, the Army might have to take on lesser enemies in
other parts of the world, perhaps several at a time.

Nevertheless, America's all-volunteer Army is one of the largest in the world,
and it is roughly meeting its numerical recruiting goals.  Its equipment and
weaponry are reasonably up to date, and a drive toward technical modernization
is under way. Why, then, are there misgivings about its capacity to win wars?

They stem partly from a fear that ammunition, fuel replacement and parts could
not be produced fast enough to meet an emergency. Even now, many Army men said
in interviews, some training is curtailed because of shortages of ammunition and
constraints on the use of fuel.

Reliance on Simulators

A shortage of .45-caliber ammunition has meant that trainees no longer get to
familiarize themselves with submachine guns, for instance.

The Army's most potent infantry antitank weapon is the TOW (tubelaunched,
optically tracked, wire-guided) missile, each costing more than $4,500. But to
keep training budgets down, only a handful of the best trainees gets to fire a
live TOW missile, and even then, he shoots only one or two a year. Weapon
simulators, like that of the Dragon antitank missile, are coming into increasing
use, but experts say they believe trainees should use real ammunition to get the
feel of it.

Motor pool sergeants and weapons computer experts report parts shortages,
especially for some of the newest high-technology equipment.

Another problem arises from the radical transition in doctrine, tactics,
training and equipment the Army is undergoing. The tactics that have prevailed
in the American Army since World War I, by which foot soldiers and tanks cover
one anothers' movements, are being changed.

The new infantry tactics, according to Gen. Donn A. Starry, chief of the Army's
Training and Doctrine Command at Fort Monroe, Va., are modeled on those of Nazi
Germany's Panzer Grenadiers. Future American infantrymen will do most of their
fighting inside the new, fast Infantry Fighting Vehicles (I.F.V.), supported by
60-ton XM-1 tanks.

New, Speedy Tank

The XM-1, costing about $1.4 million each, and Infantry Fighting Vehicles will
begin reaching line units later this year.  ''It's going to require a complete
re-education of a generation of N.C.O.'s and officers,'' an armor doctrine
officer commented, ''but there's no alternative. We needed the new tank with its
speed, special armor, safety features, powerful cannon, thermal vision devices,
computer and so on. We also needed something better than the M-113 armored
personnel carriers we've had for the past 20 years, which are really just taxis
to carry foot soldiers to battles. So why not change tactics as well?''

But some officers fear that the transition may create uncertainties that could
cost the Army dearly in an emergency. Even General Meyer seems less than fully
confident. Since Vietnam, the Army's main priority has been to strengthen the
defense of Europe, he recently told reporters, and this has meant stressing
armored warfare. But tanks and Infantry Fighting Vehicles should not overbalance
the Army's ability to react to emergencies elsewhere in the world, he said.

''Fortunately, we haven't gotten so far that we've screwed it up yet,'' General
Meyer said, adding that, because the modernization is just starting, ''there
hasn't been enough dollars spent to do anything dumb.''

Critics of the Pentagon frequently charge that when the Army and other services
come to Congress for more money, the problems are overstated and the potential
threat is exaggerated.

But at present, the chief concern of most Army leaders seems to be with the
quality of human beings in uniform.

30 Percent Loss Each Year

Today's Army consists mostly of new soldiers and officers, very few of whom have
experienced combat. The Army loses 30 percent of its personnel a year, many of
them experienced senior sergeants who are replaced by raw recruits.

Nearly half the enlisted recruits entering the Army score in the lowest
intelligence group that can be accepted for service.  Informal surveys have
shown that most soldiers join the Army because they cannot find other work, and
they often come from economically underprivileged and undereducated groups.

A heavy preponderance of soldiers enlist from Southern states.  In a typical
combat-ready unit, the Second Brigade of the 24th Infantry Division
(Mechanized), 46 percent of the men are black. Two of the brigade's 16 company
commanders are black, and none of its battalion commanders is black.

Volunteer recruits are generally younger than the earlier draftees and come with
fewer skills. They must be trained in everything from opening bank accounts to
reading simple manuals, their instructors say. Many are unable to do arithmetic.


'Perfectly Trainable Kids'

How does this affect the Army's fighting potency?  ''It doesn't,'' according to
Col. Ernest Johnson, commander of a basic training brigade at Fort Knox, Ky.
''These kids are perfectly trainable, even in high-technology weapons systems.
In those systems you don't need to know what makes them work, anymore than you
need to know electronics to adjust a color TV set. You just learn to work the
knobs right. I came into the Army as a private 29 years ago, and I feel that
soldiers today are at least as qualified as they were then.''

Many other Army men of all ranks asserted that intelligence and skills tests do
not measure a soldier's worth and that training is the key factor.

''Give me a kid off the streets of Harlem or a Tennessee farm,'', said Maj.
James Clary, a tank officer. ''They have the right instincts and street sense,
and they make good soldiers. Education doesn't help.''

For noncombattant Army jobs, women are playing a growing role.  Because they are
filling support and rear echelon jobs, the young men in the Army face a
substantially greater chance of seeing combat than did draftees, in the event of
war.

Moving Off the Post

Women are trained like their male counterparts in basic soldiering. But then
they go to the medical corps or become automobile drivers, mess supervisors,
clerks and typists, key punch operators, public information specialists and
parachute riggers.

''Good gracious, I didn't join the Army to fight,'' a Philadelphian said as she
hung up some freshly laundered fatigues. ''It's just a nicer kind of life than
working on the outside. It'll be nicer still when I move off post next month to
an apartment I've rented in town.''

Women leave the Army before completing their enlistments more frequently than
men, largely because of pregnancies and other medical reasons.

But Army leaders argue that, in emergencies, there will always be enough fat in
the Army that the support jobs will get done.

Emphasis on Training

The problem, leaders agree, is not so much a matter of filling up the ranks with
either men or women as it is in keeping soldiers adequately trained.

Although officers concede that it takes longer to train today's recruits,
training has been reduced because of the lack of money, men and resources.

The money once available for training has been gobbled up by ever more expensive
weapons, General Starry and most other senior Army commanders believe. And many
Army men and women of all ranks see heavy Congressional financing of weapons
procurement undermining fighting capacity because, they say, it diminishes the
role of human welfare and training.

Apart from the new wash-and-wear fatigue uniforms, soldierly existence is
threadbare these days, and even the 11.7 percent raise approved by Congress in
August will improve matters only marginally, many say.

The monthly base pay of a buck private will increase $52.50 from the present
$448.80. A full colonel whose job may entail supervision of 5,000 men and women
will still earn about $33,000 a year.

Free Lunches for Children

Many soldiers are eligible for food stamps. Some of their children are eligible
for free school lunches.  Sergeants complain that military travel and housing
allowances are so small that families are being broken up. Increasingly, wives
and children remain in the United States, because wives cannot afford to give up
their jobs.

For this reason, commanders say, the Army is rapidly losing its key men - senior
sergeants. Nearly all the Army noncommissioned officers stationed in the United
States reportedly moonlight, and in many cases the income from these civilian
jobs is higher than military pay. Since re-enlistment means overseas assignment
and an end to moonlighting, financially hard-pressed sergeants -many are tank
commanders - leave the Army.

The Army makes do in several ways. Good soldiers are often given temporary
promotions as ''acting jacks'' to command tanks. At the Armored School at Fort
Knox, basic tank trainees who do well in their courses are sometimes held over
to act as tank commander instructors for the next cycle of trainees.

While money is a direct factor, many Army commanders perceive the underlying
manpower difficulty as societal attitudes.  ''Part of it is that Americans are
antimilitary and don't want to pay either tax money or human service for
national defense,'' a battalion executive officer said.

General Starry believes that people lacking ethical values cannot be good
soldiers. The values of the turbulent late 1960's ''are the values that were
imprinted on today's recruits, but they are not the values of the military,'' he
said.

But the General thinks Army life is enough of a ''significant emotional event''
to create good soldiers.

Views on the Draft

How people come to the Army is also under scrutiny. Line officers and the Army
high command have mixed feelings about the draft versus voluntary service.
Nearly all those interviewed believed that some form of national service, not
necessarily military, should be required of all young American men and women.

Many emphatically endorsed a return to the draft.  ''It's the only fair way and
the only way the Army can begin to feel itself part of American society again,''
an infantry battalion commander said.

But a four-star general said: ''Young people today, including my own children,
won't accept an order from anyone as to what to do with their lives. They want
to serve, but they don't want to be forced to serve.''

Can the Army realistically hope to draw from the American people the support
policy makers regard as essential for adequate national defense?

A brigade commander shrugged: ''Roosevelt couldn't get that kind of support for
the armed forces until Pearl Harbor. It's probably the same now.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
China Rejects Hanoi Offer For Resuming Negotiations

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sept. 23


China said today that growing tension along its border with Vietnam and the
deteriorating situation in Indochina had made it impossible to resume peace
talks with Hanoi.

The Foreign Ministry said in a statement that a Vietnamese proposal issued on
Sept. 12 that the talks, which were broken off in March after eight months of
fruitless negotiations, be resumed in Hanoi on Oct. 6 was ''nothing but a trick
for propaganda purposes, an attempt to deceive world opinion.''

The Chinese turned down the Hanoi proposal, saying that the Vietnamese are bent
on hostility toward China and aggression in Indochina, particularly toward
Cambodia. The statement said Hanoi ''does not have the slightest sincerity''
about a negotiated settlement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WEST EUROPE WATCHES IRAN-IRAQ WAR WITH CONCERN

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 474 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Sept. 23


Western European nations are watching the Iraqi-Iranian fighting with growing
concern for their citizens in the warring countries and for their flow of
imported oil.

Some governments are considering evacuating hundreds of their nationals from
Iraq and Iran in special planes if necessary. Both commercial telecommunications
and commercial airline service to Europe from Baghdad and Teheran have been
virtually cut off.

An official in Rome said Italy might evacuate 1,400 Italians from Iraq and 1,500
from Iran if the situation worsens. The Swedish Government said it might
evacuate about 400 Swedes from Iraq and 100 from Iran.

French and West German officials said they were following the situation closely
because a long conflict could lead to the collapse of the Iranian regime and the
destablization of the entire region.

Appeal for Action by U.N.

Chancellor Bruno Kreisky of Austria described the fighting as a potential danger
''for all of us'' and called on the United Nations to take action to restore
peace. He postponed a scheduled trip to Iraq at Baghdad's request.

Prime Minister Anker Jorgensen of Denmark referred to the ''dangerous and
regrettable developments'' and added: ''Obviously, serious risks are involved.''

Newspaper editorials stressed the potential hazards of the fighting. In London,
The Guardian said that ''full-scale war between well-armed neighbors at the head
of the Islamic gulf is one of the most dangerous confrontations, superpowers
apart, that could have been devised.''

The Austrian newspaper Kurier compared the situation to the one that existed in
the Balkans before 1914 and said a small dispute could ''drag in the big
powers.'' The Copenhagen newspaper B.T. said it feared that soon ''the
superpowers would revert to their old habits of intervention.''

Compared to Vietnam Years

In Turin, Italy, La Stampa said the crisis ''is perhaps the most serious the
world has seen since 1965, when the United States began escalating war efforts
in Vietnam.'' La Repubblica of Rome said the two countries ''are key members of
an area which geography and economy have transformed into a powder keg which is
easy to explode.''

The Madrid paper A.B.C. cautioned that the conflict ''can be anything but a
forgotten war.'' In Hamburg, West Germany, the newspaper Bild Zeitung suggested,
in a reference to the Iranian leader, that the war ''could be the beginning of
Khomeini's end.'' In Bern, Der Bund asserted that ''no Persian officer today
will stick out his neck to risk having his head chopped off perhaps in a week by
an Islamic revolutionary tribunal.''

''It would be understandable,'' said Amsterdam's Algameen Dagblad, ''if the
Soviet Union or the United States actively supports one or the other of the two
parties, but such an intervention could lead to an international conflict.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MUSKIE, AT U.N., RENEWS VOW NOT TO INTERFERE IN IRAN

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 22


Secretary of State Edmund S.  Muskie, in a fresh bid for the release of the
American hostages, today renewed his pledge that the United States would not
interfere in Iranian affairs.

Speaking to the delegates of the 154 nations in the General Assembly, Mr. Muskie
said: ''We respect the right of the Iranian people to choose their own form of
government without any interference of any kind.''

Mr. Muskie used much the same language in a private letter sent on Aug. 20 to
Prime Minister Mohammed Ali Rajai of Iran. Mr. Rajai made the letter public and
suggested that the captives' release depended on American ''repentance'' for
''satanic acts'' against Iran.

Today Mr. Muskie stopped short of acknowledging guilt but did adopt a
conciliatory tone. He said he knew ''that in Iran, as in the United States,
there are deep feelings as a result of grievances and suffering perceived in the
past.'' Washington, he said, was prepared ''to resolve fairly the issues between
us.''

No Reference to Fighting

The speech was notable for its omission of any reference to the clash between
Iran and Iraq. The Secretary emerged from a lunch at the West German Mission,
however, to tell reporters that the United States regarded the clash as ''a
serious matter'' and was ''concerned, seriously concerned.''

He said he expected to discuss the border war with Andrei A.  Gromyko, the
Soviet Foreign Minister, at their meeting on Thursday.  Mr. Muskie is considered
likely to warn the Russians against any attempt to exploit the fighting.

Western and Moslem diplomats here privately agreed that Iraq's seizure of the
Shatt al Arab waterway at the head of the Persian Gulf was an accomplished fact
and lessened the prospect of interference with the world's oil supply. The
diplomats reasoned that Iraq, despite its radicalism, was far more stable than
Iran and has demonstrated its independence of the Soviet Union. Two-thirds of
all exported oil moves through the Gulf.

Rejection of U.N. Appeals

''If Iran comes to the U.N., it will get scant sympathy,'' a Moslem envoy said,
adding that the reason was that Teheran had repeatedly rejected United Nations
appeals to release the hostages or permit a United Nations commission to arrange
their release. Should Iraq continue its advance and seize Iranian islands in the
Gulf, however, the diplomats said the United Nations would be compelled to play
some role in seeking a cease-fire.

Apart from any action on Iran and Iraq, this session of the Assembly, due to end
in December, is likely to adopt more resolutions denouncing Israel. They will
probably deplore Israeli settlements on Arab land seized in 1967, rebuke
Israel's formal annexation of the Arab sector of Jerusalem and reaffirm support
for the Palestine Liberation Organization. In addition, the forum is expected to
repeat its condemnation of the Soviet assault in Afghanistan and Vietnam's
continued military presence in Cambodia.

In Mr. Muskie's appeal to Iran, he reminded Teheran that its international
isolation would end if it freed the 52 hostages.  Whether the heightened
conflict with Iraq, particularly the losses suffered by Iran, will spur the
captives' release is in doubt here.  An Iraqi diplomat complained today that
''for months we have been trying to talk with those people'' about the
territorial dispute, ''but like your hostages, there is no one to talk to.''

This is why diplomats here, including the Americans, doubt that the hostages
will go free until an orderly government emerges in Teheran.  Mr. Muskie also
said that after the Nov. 4 election, President Carter would press Senate leaders
to act on the second arms limitation treaty. Officials said, however, that no
effort would be made to put the treaty into effect until January.

At their Thursday meeting, Mr. Muskie plans talks with Mr. Gromyko that could
lead to a third strategic arms treaty. Mr. Muskie wants to discuss reducing
Russian and American medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOLSOM DEFEATS SENATOR STEWART IN ALABAMA'S DEMOCRATIC RUNOFF

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 398 words

DATELINE: BIRMINGHAM, Ala., Sept. 23


Jim Folsom Jr., son of former Gov. James Folsom of Alabama, defeated United
States Senator Donald W. Stewart today in a close race in a runoff election for
the Democratic Senate nomination.

With 99 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Folsom, a state Public Service
Commissioner, had 202,119 votes or 51 percent. Senator Stewart had 195,975 votes
or 49 percent.

Mr. Folsom called the victory ''a very humbling experience'' and asked Democrats
to close ranks for the general election on Nov. 4.  His opponent then will be
Jeremiah Denton, a Republican who is a former Navy pilot and survivor of more
than seven years in a prisoner of war camp in North Vietnam.

Senator Stewart did not concede defeat late tonight, saying all the votes had
not been counted. But he said the results did not look promising.

Fewer than 20 percent of the state's two million registered voters cast ballots
on the rainy election day.  Senator Stewart, who was elected two years ago to
fill the unexpired term of the late Senator James B. Allen, led a fourcandidate
primary on Sept. 2 with 49 percent of the vote. Mr.  Folsom ran second in the
primary with 36 percent.

Senator Stewart had been the subject of publicity over a Justice Department
investigation of possible financial violations in his 1978 campaign. He was
cleared of wrongdoing, but Mr. Folsom raised the issue repeatedly.

The 40-year-old Senator served eight years in the Alabama legislature before
running for the Senate. Mr. Folsom, 31, was in public relations before winning a
spot on the state panel that regulates utility rates.

In another runoff, James E. Bacon, a 62-year-old retired school teacher,
defeated Robert Shores, a 28-year-old court reporter, for the Republican
nomination in the 7th Congressional District. Mr.  Bacon will face
Representative Richard Shelby, a Democrat from Tuscaloosa, in the general
election.

In another development, the Party of Alabama nominated Representative John
Buchanan, a Republican, in a last-ditch effort to return him to the 6th District
Congressional seat he has held for 16 years. Mr. Buchanan said: ''If I am
certified on the ballot, I will re-enter the race. It would be delighful to
run.''

Mr. Buchanan was defeated in the Republican primary on Sept. 2 by Albert Lee
Smith, an insurance salesman. The Democratic nominee in the race is Pete
Clifford, a Birmigham city councilman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JUSTICE DEPT. AIDE SAYS F.B.I. LACKED AUTHORITY TO CONDUCT BREAK-INS

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 583 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22


The former chief of a Justice Department study group that investigated break-ins
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation testified today that he knew of no law or
court decision permitting the Attorney General to delegate to the Director of
the F.B.I. the power to approve such break-ins.

William L. Gardner, appearing in Federal District Court as a Government witness
at the trial of two former F.B.I. officials accused of authorizing illegal
break-ins in 1972 and 1973, said that the question of whether the President had
inherent constitutional power to authorize break-ins in national security cases
was ''a matter of some legal debate.''

If the President did possess the power, Mr. Gardner testified, he could delegate
it to the Attorney General, but no further. Thus, at the very least, Mr. Gardner
said, Federal agents had to get explicit approval from the Attorney General each
time they wanted to enter a home without a warrant when pursuing a foreign
intelligence investigation.

On Warrantless Searches

W. Mark Felt, the acting associate director of the bureau at the time, and
Edward S. Miller, the former assistant director in charge of the intelligence
division, are being tried on a one-count indictment that accuses them of
conspiring to violate the constitutional rights of citizens in authorizing
agents to break into homes in New York and New Jersey to help locate fugitive
members of the Weather Underground, the militant antiwar group.

Thomas A. Kennelly, an attorney for Mr. Miller, asked Mr. Gardner repeatedly
today whether there was any statute or court case before 1973 forbidding the
President or the Attorney General to delegate to the Director of the F.B.I. the
power to approve warrantless searches.

Even if the Attorney General had approved the searches, Mr. Gardner said, they
would not have been legal because the Weather Underground was mainly a domestic
organization. Under a 1972 Supreme Court decision, he said, warrantless searches
are forbidden when the target is a domestic group rather than a suspected agent
of a foreign power.

Prosecutors introduced a memorandum from June 19, 1972, the day of the Court's
decision, in which Attorney General Richard Kleindienst directed the Acting
Director of the F.B.I., L. Patrick Gray, to ''terminate immediately'' all
surveillance in domestic inquiries. Mr. Gardner identified the document and said
it had been initialed by Mr. Felt and Mr. Miller.

Defense attorneys dispute this point, saying that members of the Weather
Undergound had extensive ties to Cuba, North Vietnam and the Palestine
Liberation Organization.

'Items of Personalty'

Other documents introduced as evidence showed that Federal agents recorded their
''surreptitious entries'' in cryptic language. After entering an apartment and
searching through the tenant's personal belongings, agents wrote that ''a highly
placed, sensitive source of known reliability was contacted and furnished items
of personalty.''

The elaborate procedures ordered by Judge William B. Bryant to protect national
security information led to continued delays in the trial. At one point today,
the chief prosecutor, John W. Nields Jr., asked Mr. Gardner to describe the
premises searched in ''Program C,'' the code name being used to describe a
Federal program involving break-ins. When Mr. Kennelly objected, the lawyers and
the judge held a whispered conference at the bench for 50 minutes. Mr. Nields
then continued with another line of questioning.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 23, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV:NEW MEXICO PRISON RIOT

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 593 words


RECAPITULATING still another horror story about the nation's penal system,
''Death in a Southwest Prison'' will be presented on ABC-TV tonight at 10
o'clock. This time the documentary focuses on the riot that exploded last
February at the New Mexico State Penitentiary. At the end of 36 hours, 33
inmates were dead and more than 100 seriously wounded. The attackers had been
fellow inmates.

Obviously, there are enough sensational details to fill a complete season of
action-adventure series. A former guard says: ''I was in Vietnam for two years
and I've seen some hellacious sights over there. It's my personal opinion that
these inmates made Vietnam look like a playground.'' With good reason, this
''ABC News Closeup'' prefaces the hour with a warning that certain material
''may be inappropriate for some young viewers.''

Delving into the immediate causes of the riot, the program finds prison
conditions that are by now familiar -brutality, incompetence, overcrowding and
understaffing - all contributing to the formation of a ''nest of resentment,
hate and hostility.''

In addition, this prison openly encouraged, through intimidation and the
granting of special privileges, a system of informants. Some prisoners were
forced to ''sell their souls for their own protection.'' For the most part,
these ''snitches'' were the primary objects of the rioters' rage.

The descriptions of almost unbelievable prison conditions flow by endlessly.
Upward of 1,300 men were stuffed into a facility designed to hold 850. Prisoners
were forced to sleep on floors. Excessive noise, harassment and sexual attacks
were commonplace. When the riots started, the first area to be invaded was the
pharmacy, where pills, drugs and syringes were used to turn the place into ''one
big shooting gallery.''

This documentary, however, goes beyond these standard glimpses of prison life to
reveal a startling pattern of staff incompetence and official neglect reaching,
it is alleged, into the offices of three Governors of New Mexico. The current
Governor, Bruce King, is recorded in a couple of instances - an interview with
William Sherman, ABC correspondent, and an public hearing - that will surely
leave his public-relations staff coping with incipient ulcers.

The program ends with an explanation: ''For most of our six-month investigation,
the State of New Mexico refused 'ABC News Closeup' access to the prison and its
records, and denied us interviews with inmates and state officials. We were
eventually granted some interviews and limited access to the prison. Still, the
state maintains that records which could have shed greater light on the causes
of the disturbance were burned during the riot.''

Still, Stephen Fleischman, the producer, and his staff are able to establish
that guards were peddling drugs to convicts, but were rarely prosecuted when
caught; that a ''middle-management'' clique of 11 men was able to control the
prison as high-level positions were turned over rapidly (the prison had five
wardens in six years), and, most significantly, that existing memoranda prove
various officials knew that the riot was pending but did nothing about it.

In the end, little real change is detected at the prison since the riot. One
former inmate charges things are ''worse now than before.'' The cycle of public
indifference continues even while this year, as reporter Tom Jarriel observes,
''there have been convulsions in prisons and jails across the country,'' from
Hawaii to New York. Stay tuned for your next television documentary on prisons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Questions Raised on the Readiness Of Army for a Protracted Conflict;
Fourth of seven Articles.

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2652 words

DATELINE: FORT STEWART, Ga.


Confronted by shortages of materiel, skilled specialists and a clear definition
of mission, American military leaders fear that the United States Army might be
little more than a temporary barrier to a major Soviet land attack in the
Persian Gulf or other crisis areas.

Unit commanders say that the chances of stemming an enemy onslaught for a few
days or weeks in one theater of action are good.  But whether America's ground
forces could hold out more than a matter of weeks in the face of overwhelming
enemy numbers is a subject of deep military anxiety.

As Col. James Shelton, a brigade commander in the new Rapid Deployment Force,
put it: "My brigade's ready to fight right this minute.  But as for the big
picture, who knows?  We'd probably be stretched very thin very soon.  Our
sustainability would be doubtful.  We'd give a good account of ourselves at the
start, but I'd hate to say how long we'd survive."

Despite the Army's many admitted shortcomings, commanders make training as
realistic as possible, and most soldiers seem aware of the possibility they
could be fighting soon in the Persian Gulf or elsewhere in the Middle East.

Adjusting the bipod of his Dragon missile-launcher, a soldier jammed his eye
against the sight, took a deep breath, thumbed the safety lock and pressed the
trigger bar.  A simulated wire-guided rocket shot toward a target jeep speeding
across the dusty rang.

The progress of the imaginary missile, the position of the jeep and the
shooter's tracking movements registered simultaneously on a computer.  An
instructor watched the computer display as the trainee guided the missile on its
10-second flight.

"Steady, you're jerking," the instructor said.  "Stop breathing.  You're letting
that missile float, bring it down or you'll lose him.  That's it, keep the
tracking smooth.  Steady, steady . . .  Good!  Target hit.  Another Iranian tank
bites the dust."

Like most electronic training aids used by the Army these days, the Dragon
simulator is fun to shoot.  Soldiers have learned to score well and seem
confident that they could shoot real weapons equally well in combat.

But how well would the Army fare if land war broke out now; if Soviet tanks
invaded Western Europe; if enemies of the United States blocked access to oil
fields; if vital American interests were threatened in Asia, Africa or Latin
America?

One of the difficulties in answering such questions is in finding a clear
definition of what is expected of the Army.

Defend Against Attack

While the Army's primary mission is to repel any attack on the United States, it
is also supposed to assist the United States' European allies and Japan against
Soviet attack.

In the words of the Organization of the Army reference book, the primary mission
of the United States Army in Europe "is to safeguard, with our allies, the
freedom, common heritage and civilization of the member nations of NATO."

But the Army's mission is less explicitly defined in other parts of the world.
Is it supposed to deal with brushfire crises anywhere, and if so, how many is it
expected to be able to handle simultaneously?

A fairly optimistic answer was given by Gen. Edward C. Meyer, Army Chief of
Staff.

"As I told one brigade commander who was thoughtfully concerned about shortages
and their potential impact," General Meyer said, "I have gone to war twice in
units that were short the shuff of a perfect army, and we did well.  The nation
could demand the same of us in the future."

But behind such statements is the reality that the 673,500 men and women of the
active United States Army, grouped in 16 combat divisions and various support
commands, are outnumbered by the Soviet army more than 2 to 1.  Even buttressed
by a 358,500-member Army National Guard and 196,000-member Army reserve,
America's ground forces anthin compared with the Russians', whose own force of
reservists may number as many as 25 million.

Soviet Tank Advantage

The Russians have more than fear tanks for every American tank, and there are
similar numerical disparities between most other kinds of weaponry used by the
two nations.

The five United States Army divisions stationed in West Germany and South Korea
are at full strength or ever strength.  But of the 11 remaining divisions in the
United States, from which the force to deal with emergencies would have to be
drawn, most are well below full strength.  Four of them exist as divisions only
because "roundout" brigades of National Guardsmen are attached -- one National
Guard brigade for every two active Army brigades.  For lack of then, entire
fighting units have been "zeroed out" of some divisions.

Some National Guard units are highly regarded by liaison officers from the
active Army who inspect them periodically.  But morale and training are said
to(Illegible Word) widely.  Training is usually limited a 38 days a year, and
the Guard has usually been armed with hand-me-downs.

Fighting in 3 Months

In theory, the Guard could be fighting within three months after the onset of an
emergency, but many career Army officers said in interviews that they doubled
the reserves and National Guard would help much in a sudden, all-out war.

Besides fighting the Russians, the Army might have to take on lesser enemies in
other parts of the world, perhaps several at a time.

Nevertheless, America's all-volunteer Army is one of the largest in the world,
and it is roughly meeting its numerical recruiting goals.  Its equipment and
weaponry are reasonably up to date, and a drive toward technical modernization
is under way.  Why, then, are there misgivings about its capacity to win wars?

They stem partly from a fear that ammunition, fuel replacement and parts could
not be produced fast enough to meet an emergency.  Even now, many Army men said
in interviews, some training is curtailed because of shortages of ammunition and
constraints on the use of fuel.

A shortage of .45-caliber ammunition has meant that trainees no longer get to
familiarize themselves with submachine guns, for instance.

The Army's most potent infantry antitank weapon is the TOW (tube-launched,
optically tracked, wire-guided) missile, each costing more than $4,500.  But to
keep training budgets down, only a handful of the best trainees gets to fire a
live TOW missile, and even then, he shoots only one or two a year.  Weapon
simulators, like that of the Dragon antitank missile, are coming into increasing
use, but experts say they believe trainees should are real ammunition to get the
feel of it.

Motor pool sergeants and weapons computer experts report parts shortages,
especially for some of the newest high-technology equipment.

Another problem arises from the radical transition in doctrine, tactics,
training and equipment the Army is undergoing.  The tactics that have prevailed
in the American Army since World War I, by which foot soldiers and tanks cover
one anothers' movements, are doing changed.

The new infantry tactics, according to Gen. Donn A. Starry, chief of the Army's
Training and Doctrine Command at Fort Monroe, Va., are modeled on those of Nazi
Germany's Panzer Grenadiers.  Future American infantrymen will do most of their
fighting inside the new, fast Infantry Fighting Vehicles (I.F.V.), supported by
60-ton XM-1 tanks.

New, Speedy Tank

The XM-1, costing about $1.4 million each, and Infantry Fighting Vehicles will
begin reaching line units later this year.

"It's going to require a complete reeducation of a generation of N.C.O.'s and
officers," an armor doctrine officer commented, "but there's no alternative.  We
needed the new tank with its speed, special armor, safety features, powerful
cannon, thermal vision devices, computer and so on.  We also needed something
better than the M-113 armored personnel carriers we've had for the past 20
years, which are really just taxis to carry foot soldiers to battles.  So why
not change tactics as well?"

But some officers fear that the transition may create uncertainties that could
cost the Army dearly in an emergency.Even General Meyer seems less than fully
confident.  Since Vietnam, the Army's main priority has been to strengthen the
defense of Europe, he recently told reporters, and this has meant stressing
armored warfare.  But tanks and Infantry Fighting Vehicles should not
overbalance the Army's ability to react to emergencies elsewhere in the world,
he said.

"Portunately, we haven't gotten so far that we've screwed it up yet," General
Meyer said, adding that, because the modernization is just starting, "there
hasn't been enough dollars spent to do anything dumb."

Critics of the Pentagon frequently charge that when the Army and other services
come to Congress for more money, the problems are overstated and the potential
threat is exaggerated.

But at present, the chief concern of most Army leaders seems to be with the
quality of human beings in uniform.

30 Percent Loss Each Year

Today's Army consists mostly of new soldiers and officers, very few of whom have
experienced combat.  The Army loses 30 percent of its personnel a year, many of
them experienced senior sergeants who are replaced by raw recruits.

Nearly half the enlisted recruits entering the Army score in the lowest
intelligence group that can be accepted for service.

Informal surveys have shown that most soldiers join the Army because they cannot
find other work, and they often come from economically underprivileged and
undereducated groups.

A neavy preponderance of soldiers enlist from southern states.

In a typical combat-ready unit, the Second Brigade of the 24th Infantry Division
(Mechanized), 46 percent of the men age black.  Two of the brigade's 16 company
commanders are black, and none of its battalion commanders is black.

Volunteer recruits are generally younger than the earlier draftees and come with
fewer skills. They must be trained in everything from opening bank accounts to
reading simple manuals, their instructors say.  Many are unable to do
arithmetic.

Perfectly Trainable Kids'

How does this affect the Army's fighting potency?

"It doesn't," according to Col. Ernest Johnson, commander of a basic training
brigade at Fort Knox, Ky.  "These kids are perfectly trainable, even in
high-technology weapons systems.  In those systems you don't need to know what
makes them work, anymore than you need to know electronics to adjust a color TV
set.  You just learn to work the knobs right.  I came into the Army as a private
29 years ago, and I feel that soldiers today are at least as qualified as they
were then."

Many other Army men of all ranks asserted that intelligence and skills tests do
not measure a soldier's worth and that training is the key factor.

"Give me a kid off the streets of Harlem or a Tennessee farm,", said Maj. James
Clary, a tank officer.  "They have the right instincts and street sense, and
they make good soldiers.  Education doesn't help."

For noncombattant Army jobs, women are playing a growing role.  Because they are
filling support and rear echelon jobs, the young men in the Army face a
substantially greater chance of seeing combat than did draftees, in the event of
war.

Women are trained like their male counterparts in basic soldiering.  But then
they go to the medical corps or become automobile drivers, mess supervisors,
clerks and typists, key punch operators, public information specialists and
parachute riggers.

"Good gracious, I didn't join the Army to fight," a Philadelphian said as she
hung up some freshly laundered fatigues.  "It's just a nicer kind of life than
working on the outside.  It'll be nicer still when I move off post next month to
an apartment I've rented in town."

Women leave the Army before completing their enlistments more frequently than
men, largely because of pregnancies and other medical reasons.

But Army leaders argue that, in emergencies, there will always be enough fat in
the Army that the support jobs will get done.

Emphasis on Training

The problem, leaders agree, is not so much a matter of filling up the ranks with
either men or women as it is in keeping soldiers adequately trained.

Although officers concede that it takes longer to train today's recruits,
training has been reduced because of the lack of money, men and resources.

The money once available for training has been gobbled up by ever more expensive
weapons, General Starry and most other senior Army commanders believe.  And many
Army men and women of all ranks see heavy Congressional financing of weapons
procurement undermining fighting capacity because, they say, it diminishes the
role of human welfare and training.

Apart from the new wash-and-wear fatigue uniforms, soldierly existence is
threadbare these days, and even the 11.7 percent raise approved by Congress in
August will improve matters only marginally, many say.

The monthly base pay of a buck private will increase $52.50 from the present
$448.80.  A full colonel whose job may entail supervision of 5,000 men and women
will still earn about $33,000 a year.

Free Lunches for Children

Many soldiers are eligible for food stamps.  Some of their children are eligible
for free school lunches.

Sergeants complain that military travel and housing allowances are so small that
families are being broken up.  Increasingly, wives and children remain in the
United States, because wives cannot afford to give up their jobs.

For this reason, commanders say, the Army is rapidly losing its key men a senior
sergeants.  Nearly all the Army noncommissioned officers stationed in the United
States reportedly moonlight, and in many cases the income from these civilian
jobs is higher than military pay.  Since re-enlistment means overseas assignment
and an end to moonlighting, financially hard-pressed sergeants -- many are tank
commanders -- leave the Army.

The Army makes do in several ways.  Good soldiers are often given temporary
promotions as "acting jacks" to command tanks.  At the Armored School at Fort
Knox, basic tank trainees who do well in their courses are sometimes held over
to act as tank commander instructors for the next cycle of trainees.

While money is a direct factor, many Army commanders perceive the underlying
manpower difficulty as societal attitudes.

"Part of it is that Americans are antimilitary and don't want to pay either tax
money or human service for national defense," a battalion executive officer
said.

General Starry believes that people lacking ethical values cannot be good
soldiers.  The values of the turbulent late 1960's "are the values that were
imprinted on today's recruits, but they are not the values of the military," he
said.

But the General thinks Army life is enough of a "significant emotional event" to
create good soldiers.

How people come to the Army is also under scrutiny.  Line officers and the Army
high command have mixed feelings about the draft versus voluntary service.
Nearly all those interviewed believed that some form of national service, not
necessarily military, should be required of all young American men and women.

Many emphatically endorsed a return to the draft.

"It's the only fair way and the only way the Army can begin to feel itself part
of American society again," an infantry battalion commander said.

But a four-star general said: "Young people today, including my own children,
won't accept an order from anyone as to what to do with their lives.  They want
to serve, but they don't want to be forced to serve."

Can the Army realistically hope to draw from the American people the support
policy makers regard as essential for adequate national defense?

A brigade commander shrugged: "Roosevelt couldn't get that kind of support for
the armed forces until Pearl Harbor.  It's probably the same now."(Illegible
Word) widely.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
China Rejects Hanoi Offer For Resuming Negotiations

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sept. 23


China said today that growing tension along its border with Vietnam and the
deteriorating situation in Indochina had made it impossible to resume peace
talks with Hanoi.

The Foreign Ministry said in a statement that a Vietnamese proposal issued on
Sept. 12 that the talks, which were broken off in March after eight months of
fruitless negotiations, be resumed in Hanoi on Oct. 6 was "nothing but a trick
for propaganda purposes, an attempt to deceive world opinion."

The Chinese turned down the Hanoi proposal, saying that the Vietnamese are bent
on hostility toward China and aggression in Indochina, particularly toward
Cambodia.  The statement said Hanoi "does not have the slightest sincerity"
about a negotiated settlement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

West Europe Watches Iran-Iraq War With Concern

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 473 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Sept. 23


Western European nations are watching the Iraqi-Iranian fighting with growing
concern for their citizens in the warring countries and for their flow of
imported oil.

Some governments are considering evacuating hundreds of their nationals from
Iraq and Iran in special planes if necessary.  Both commercial
telecommunications and commercial airline service to Europe from Baghdad and
Teheran have been virtually cut off.

An official in Rome said Italy might evacuate 1,400 Italians from Iraq and 1,500
from Iran if the situation worsens.  The Swedish Government said it might
evacuate about 400 Swedes from Iraq and 100 from Iran.

Appeal for Action by U.N.

French and West German officials said they were following the situation closely
because a long conflict could lead to the collapse of the Iranian regime and the
destablization of the entire region.

Chancellor Bruno Kreisky of Austria described the fighting as a potential danger
"for all of us" and called on the United Nations to take action to restore
peace.  He postponed a scheduled trip to Iraq at Baghdad's request.

Prime Minister Anker Jorgensen of Denmark referred to the "dangerous and
regrettable developments" and added: "Obviously, serious risks and involved."

Newspaper editorials stressed the potential hazards of the fighting.  In London,
The Guardian said that "full-scale war between well-armed neighbors at the head
of the Islamic gulf is one of the most dangerous confrontations, superpowers
apart, that could have been devised."

The Austrian newspaper Kurier compared the situation to the one that existed in
the Balkans before 1914 and said a small dispute could "drag in the big powers."
The Copenhagen newspaper B.T. said it feared that soon "the super-powers would
revert to their old habits of intervention."

Compared to Vietnam Years

In Turin, Italy, La Stampa said the crisis "is perhaps the most serious the
world has seen since 1965, when the United States began escalating war efforts
in Vietnam." La Repubblica of Rome said the two countries "are key members of an
area which geography and economy have transformed into a powder keg which is
easy to explode."

The Madrid paper A.B.C. cautioned that the conflict "can be anything but a
forgotten war."

In Hamburg, West Germany, the newspaper Bild Zeitung suggested, in a reference
to the Iranian leader, that the war "could be the beginning of Khomeini's end."
In Bern, Der Bund asserted that "no Persian officer today will stick out his
neck to risk having his head chopped off perhaps in a week by an Islamic
revolutionary tribunal."

"It would be understandable," said Amsterdam's Algameen Dagblad, "if the Soviet
Union or the United States actively supports one or the other of the two
parties, but such an intervention could lead to an international conflict."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Folsom Defeats Senator Stewart In Alabama's Democratic Runoff

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 401 words

DATELINE: BIRMINGHAM, Ala., Sept. 23


Jim Folsom Jr., son of former Gov. James Folsom of Alabama, defeated United
States Senator Donald W. Stewart today in a close race in a runoff election for
the Democratic Senate nomination.

With 99 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Folsom, a state Public Service
Commissioner, had 202,119 votes or 51 percent.  Senator Stewart had 195,975
votes or 49 percent.

Mr. Folsom called the victory "a very humbling experience" and asked Democrats
to close ranks for the general election on Nov. 4.  His opponent then will be
Jeremiah Denton, a Republican who is a former Navy pilot and survivor of more
than seven years in a prisoner of war camp in North Vietnam.

Senator Stewart did not condede defeat late tonight, saying all the votes had
not been counted.  But he said the results did not look promising.

Fewer than 20 percent of the state's two million registered voters cast ballots
on the rainy election day.

Senator Stewart, who was elected two years ago to fill the unexpired term of the
late Senator James B. Allen, led a four-candidate primary on Sept. 2 with 49
percent of the vote.  Mr. Folsom ran second in the primary with 36 percent.

Senator Stewart had been the subject of publicity over a justice Department
investigation of possible financial violations in his 1978 campaign.  He was
cleared of wrongdoing, but Mr. Folsom raised the issue repeatedly.

The 40-year-old Senator served eight years in the Alabama legislature before
running for the Senate.  Mr. Folsom, 31, was in public relations before winning
a spot on the state panel that regulates utility rates.

In another runoff, James E. Bacon, a 62-year-old retired school teacher,
defeated Robert Shores, a 28-year-old court reporter, for the Republican
nomination in the 7th Congressional District.  Mr. Bacon will face
Representative Richard Shelby, a Democrat from Tuscaloosa, in the general
election.

In another development, the Party of Alabama nominated Representative John
Buchanan, a Republican, in a last-ditch effort to return him to the 6th District
Congressional seat he has held for 16 years.Mr. Buchanan said: "If I am
certified on the ballot, I will re-enter the race.  It would be delightful to
run."

Mr. Buchanan was defeated in the Republican primary on Sept. 2 by Albert Lee
Smith, an insurance salesman.  The Democratic nominee in the race if Pete
Clifford, a Birmigham city councilman.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 562 words


Popular greek flirts with idea of bolting his party A2
Israeli court says soldiers can't refuse to serve in territories A3
A West Bank mayor is arrested by Israel A3
British Government's position at a low point A3
Warsaw court objects to Polands first independent union A4
Around the World A5
Senate opens debate on sale of uranium to India A6
Singapore seeks even greater success but worries about values A8
Saudi garners a princely sum for Unicef A9
Roots of Gulf war were sown in Mesopotamia and Persia A10
Western Europe watches Iran-Iraq conflict with concern A11
Excerpts from Soviet Foreign Minister's speech at U.N.  A12

Government/Politics
Immunity denied for Vesco testimony on Billy Carter A18
New York area consumer prices rising faster than U.S. rate A25
Campaign Report A26
Anderson assails Carter for implying only he can keep peace A26
Reagan presses 'high road' response to Carter charges A26
Sydenham Hospital protesters to continue occupation of office B3

General
Around the Nation A16
F.B.I. agent says top aides got advance word on break-ins A23

PARKING REGULATIONS
Because of Succoth, the Jewish Feast of Tabernacles, alternate-side parking will
be suspended throughout New York City tomorrow and Friday. All other parking and
standing regulations remain in effect.

The Living Section
Food The evolution of a recipe: variations on a venerable theme C1

Wine Talk: Taste-comparing popular Soaves C1

A couple on a tofu mission in the West C3

60-Minute Gourmet C3

Best Buys C4

Stay is denied on wine ruling C21
Living Center for Disease Control urges reduced use of tampons C1

A key source for esoteric typewriters C1

Pierre Franey's Kitchen Equipment C2

Metropolitan Diary C2

Under a new chef, La Caravelle turns 20 C6

A Hollywood drive-in fights to survive C6

Gynecologists as perplexed as patients about tampon use C12

Discoveries C15

Personal Health C18

New Yorkers, etc.  C22

Scaasi fashions and a new direction C22

Industry/Labor
Striking actors and their producers negotiate for 21 hours C24

Arts/Entertainment
Met threatens to cancel season unless contracts are reached C23
A change in character for Mary Tyler Moore C25
Judd Hirsch returns to ''Talley's Folly'' C26
Terkel's ''American Dreams: Lost and Found'' is reviewed C29
''A Rumor of War,'' about Vietnam War, on CBS-TV C31
Rona Barrett joining Tom Snyder on NBC's ''Tomorrow'' C32

Obituaries
Robert W. Kean, former Representative from New Jersey D23
Dr. Emanuel B. Kaplan, orthopedic surgeon D23

Sports
Expos beat Pirates and move back into first place B8
Mets lose to Cubs, 6-5, despite five-run ninth B8
Freedom defeats Australia and takes 3-1 lead in Cup series B9
Yanks down Indians, 5-4, with four runs in ninth B9
Dave Anderson on George Brett batting controversy B9
Giants' Carson decides against retirement B9

Features/Notes
Man in the News: Saddam Hus- sein, Iraq's wary President A12
Notes on People B6
Going Out Guide C28

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A30

Containing the fire next time The heroin flood Helping the handicapped ride Soma
Golden: at the debate Letters A30
James Reston: where is the hot line A31
Russell Baker: when there's a bomb in your garden A31
John Oliver Wilson: saving the American dream A31
Robert Zager: measuring productivity A31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1980, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV:A RUMOR OF WAR THE VIETNAM EXPERIENCE

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 31, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 769 words


''A Rumor of War,'' a four-hour production being presented in two parts, tonight
and tomorrow at 9 on CBS-TV, is based on the Philip Caputo book that won a
Pulitzer Prize. Mr. Caputo began his story in a terribly ordinary Chicago
suburb, where his innocence took the form of longings for heroic exploits. He
joined the Marines in the early 1960's. A couple of years later, he left
Vietnam, his innocence shattered. ''I learned about death too early, too
quickly,'' he explains, ''I have survived, but that was my only victory.''

Between these two points, Mr. Caputo covers everything from battered ideals to
crumbling traditions. The proud leaders of the Marines, for instance, still
reveling in memories of Iwo Jima and Guadalcanal, are often unable to cope with
the new realities of guerrilla warfare. Most of all, though, Mr. Caputo fastens
on the day-to-day experiences of fighting in Vietnam, on the accumulation of
experiences that eventually transformed disciplined Marines into a rampaging
mob.

''A Rumor of War'' is not a pretty story. It is not even comforting in the sense
that, say, ''Friendly Fire'' encompassed the inspiring struggle of a determined
family at home. It is not wrapped in the overblown allegory of an ''Apocalypse
Now.'' It clings determinedly to the nasty details of what one character calls
''a splendid little war.''

CBS, then, is to be commended for undertaking this project. Vietnam is not a
popular subject. In fact, most people would probably like to forget the war
completely. Undoubtedly for that reason, this production ran into a series of
problems. John Sacret Young, the script writer, has said:

''The struggle to get it made began to seem like the war itself. A divorcing
production team, a trepidatious network, a wary author, scrutinous censors, the
U.S. Marine Corps, uneasy alliances and sometimes warring factions - all had
points of view, understandable or self-protective. I myself got fired several
times and I wasn't alone. The miracle is that the film survived.''

True, but, unfortunately, a good many of the production battle scars are
showing. The story becomes a bit too episodic, jumping from scene to unconnected
scene with a dexterity that is intriguing, but puzzling. Then there are the
scenes that seem to be on special order from nervous network executives. One
involves the boy's hiding from the military police under a prostitute's bed.
This involves a lot of giggling.

A few scenes are woefully underrehearsed, losing the point of several minor
characters in inadequate performances. And some roles, most notably those
involving top level Marine officers, are reduced to easy stereotypes. In a
''special appearance,'' Stacy Keach is wasted as an incredibly moronic major.

Still, ''A Rumor of War'' keeps lurching forward with a riveting portrait of men
under stress. The arrival of these troops in Vietnam in 1965 is ludicrously
casual as a welcoming Vietnamese delegation showers them with flowers and pretty
speeches. Mr. Caputo, played with a kind of detached intensity by Brad Davis, is
the inexperienced officer anxious not to look like a fool in front of his men.
No one is especially worried. Suddenly, the light banter is interrupted by a
rifle shot. It begins to dawn on them that ''maybe there is something out
there.''

The longing for heroic combat gives way to the reality of trudging through hot,
dank jungles searching for an unseen enemy. Death is sudden and rapid. A small
explosion can amputate a foot or rip open a chest. Fear and frustration
escalate. Destruction becomes an emotional necessity. Villages are burned. Mr.
Caputo ends up facing a court-martial for the murder of two Vietnamese men.

Filmed in Mexico and directed by Richard T. Heffron, ''A Rumor of War'' does
finally capture, sometimes with strikingly raw power, many of the peculiar
horrors that mark the American experience in Vietnam. Despite its flaws, it
remains an unusually ambitious and admirable effort for television. Several
strong performances help immeasurably.

In addition to Mr. Davis, Michael O'Keefe as Walter Cohen, the ''Jewish Henry
Fonda,'' and Brian Dennehy as the lovable bear of a company sergeant, are
outstanding. As ''Murph'' McCloy, Keith Carradine provides some presumably
required moments of love interest and still another of his supersensitive
impersonations.

One of the stronger assets of this production is the first-rate, emotionally
attuned music track created by Charles Gross. Produced by David Manson, ''A
Rumor of War'' is a Dick Berg-Stonehenge Production made in association with
Charles Fries Productions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AND ALLIES DISCUSS JOINT FLEET TO PROTECT VITAL STRAIT OF HORMUZ

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 24


Western diplomats said today that they were discussing formation of an allied
naval force if an imminent blockade of the Persian Gulf was threatened.

The idea is under discussion at ''brainstorming'' sessions, these sources said,
where an attempt is being made to define possible consequences of fighting
between Iraq and Iran.

The officials emphasised that the task force notion has not yet been adopted, is
hedged with grave political difficulties and would not be invoked unless there
was a genuine threat to cut off the vital oil route.

As a measure of the concern, the nine foreign ministers of the Common Market
last night issued a statement underlining ''the capital importance for the
international community of freedom of navigation in the Gulf, which it is
imperative not to infringe.''

About 45 percent of Western Europe's oil now flows through the waterway. For
Japan, it is 20 percent and for the United States, ll to 13 percent.

It is uncertain which nations would supply ships for a preventive action. But
one official speculated that the likeliest candidates would be the United
States, France and Britain, all of which have Mediterranean fleets.

Formidable Political Problems

Officials acknowledged that formidable political problems would face such a task
force. For one thing, the Soviet Union would have to give its assent, at least
tacitly, or an unthinkable confrontation would take place.

For another, the oil-producing states that ship crude down the Gulf, especially
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, would also have to agree.  If they did not they could
simply cut off oil production.

A Moslem representative said that if Iran tried to close the Strait, the Arab
producers would ''scream loudly over any Western naval force, and quietly tell
you to go ahead.'' But whether the Russians would regard such a force as a
threat to the existing balance of power is said to be another question.

Finally, the planners say they would have to contact Baghdad and Teheran to
assure them that the force had no designs on their territories and would serve
only to insure freedom of passage for tankers.

'Free Navigation Is Vital'

At a news conference, the French Foreign Minister, Jean Francois-Poncet,
declined to rule out a possibility of a task force. But he said ''at this
stage'' he would not go beond asserting that ''free navigation is vital.''

British officials said they had heard nothing of the plan but one added that
London did not regard this as a proper subject for public discussion.

In 1967, when Egypt closed the Strait of Tiran to Israeli ships, the United
States and its allies developed plans for a naval force to reopen the waterway.
But the plan was dropped. The Arab-Israeli war followed, with Israel capturing
Sinai and settling the blockade problem.

In the General Assembly, China delivered its annual denunciation of the Soviet
Union and a Soviet threat to engulf the world in ''another holocaust.''

Foreign Minister Huang Hua charged that the Soviet ''blitzkrieg against
Afghanistan'' and Moscow's support of Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia were parts
of a larger plan, ''springboards for further expansion.''

''The Soviet Union,'' Mr. Huang said, ''aims to seize strategic sites in the
vast area of crucial importance, from the Red Sea and the Arabian Peninsula in
the west, through the Malacca Strait in the middle and to the South China Sea in
the east - encircle the oilfields in the Gulf and control key international sea
lanes.''

He called for ''effective measures'' to halt the process, starting with world
pressure to compel the Russians to withdraw from Afghanistan and the Vietnamese
from Cambodia.

But apart from urging votes in the United Nations, Mr. Huang was not specific.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FREE SPEECH IS INDIVISIBLE;
by Mary Meehan

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 783 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There was a sigh of relief in ''right-thinking'' quarters over the victories of
Barney Frank and James Shannon in Massachusetts Congressional primaries last
week.

The prevailing opinion seems to be that their successes represent a victory for
the principle of church-state separation.  According to this theory, the Roman
Catholic Archbishop of Boston, Humberto Cardinal Medeiros, threatened the
separation of church and state when he urged Catholic voters to defend the
unborn against abortion.

This was understood to be a suggestion that they vote against candidates such as
Mr. Frank and Mr. Shannon, who support legalized abortion and also support
Federal Government funding of abortions for the poor. Cardinal Medeiros's
position, made public in a pastoral letter that was read aloud from many Boston
pulpits before the primary election, was widely viewed as a dangerous
interference by the church in state affairs.

Civil libertarians should protest the suggestion that bishops, cardinals or any
clerics must restrain themselves from speaking out on the serious issues of our
time.

That suggestion comes close to saying that they have fewer rights than the rest
of us, or that their rights are limited in a special way.

No one, of course, says that there can be any legal restraint on the speech of
men and women of the cloth. After all, the same First Amendment that forbids the
establishment of religion also guarantees the freedom of speech of all citizens.
Yet some critics strongly hint that the clergy - and more particulary the
hierarchy - and even more particularly the Catholic hierarchy - should exercise
self-restraint. Actually, ''self-censorship'' would be a better choice of words.

In forbidding the establishment of a national religion, the Founding Fathers did
precisely that - no more and no less. They barred Congress from forcing citizens
to support financially any church. They did not suggest that church leaders be
forbidden to speak out on public issues. I doubt that this idea even occurred to
them, so insistent were they on the principle of free speech.

In Germany, during the rise of Hitler, some members of the Protestant and
Catholic clergy spoke out against the Nazis. Some who did, such as Pastor Martin
Niemoller, later regretted that they had not spoken out more strongly.

In the United States, we honor the late Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and
other black clerics who led the civil rights movement in the South. Only the
segregationists objected when Dr. King spoke in religious terms against a great
moral evil. Many of the same people who now criticize Cardinal Medeiros
applauded Dr. King and welcomed the leadership of the black clergy in the civil
rights movement. They supported the clergy who helped the farm workers in their
struggle for decent wages. They cheered on the Rev. William Sloane Coffin Jr.
and Daniel and Philip B. Berrigan (and even a bishop or two) when they spoke out
against the war in Vietnam. They take heart when Catholic bishops in Latin
America speak out against repression and torture, when they demand recognition
of basic human rights.

Why is the abortion issue so different?  Surely it is not simply a ''religious
issue.'' Many people who are not religious oppose abortion. They think that
science proves the humanity of the unborn, and they think that the right to life
is the most basic human right of all. They - we - support Cardinal Medeiros when
he speaks for the unborn, just as we supported Dr. King and Mr. Coffin and the
Berrigans when they spoke for civil rights and against the war.

Why is the abortion issue so different?  Is it because most of us never see a
fetus and cannot imagine its early movements or its later ability to feel pain?
An eight-week-old fetus is small enough to be held in the palm of your hand, yet
has a well-formed body, down to tiny fingers and toes and a heart that has been
beating for four weeks. Because the unborn cannot speak for themselves, because
they are tiny and helpless, because we are big and insensitive and lacking in
imagination, they need others to speak in their behalf.

Politics in this country does not suffer from too much free speech; it suffers
from too little. And those who try to intimidate church leaders and discourage
them from speaking out do not advance the cause of civil liberties. They betray
it.
Mary Meehan, who was active in the antiwar movement, writes frequently on
politics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WOMEN'S POWER;
by Marjorie Lansing

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 877 words

DATELINE: YPSILANTI, Mich.


If the Presidential election is as close as observers now predict, women just
may hold the victory margin.  Certainly they will outvote men. But is there a
distinct women's vote?  In every Presidential election since 1964, the total
vote by women has outnumbered that of men, according to Census Bureau estimates
based on surveys. This year, according to a Bureau projection, women constitute
53.4 percent of the overall population. Although women lagged about 10 percent
behind men in voting for President in the 1950's and 1960's, by 1976 women voted
in the same proportion as men, and cast more ballots - 45.6 million to 41.1
million, the Bureau found. Because the increasing vote by women is anchored in
their gains in education and employment, there is every reason to believe that
they will continue to outvote men.

Bloc voting by women could well tip the scales in a tight election. A change of
one vote in each precinct in 1960, and slight shifts in 1968 and 1976, would
have elected a different President.

Historically, women have not constituted anything like a visible voting bloc.
The stereotype has been that politically women don't differ from men; they just
participate less. In 1980, this view is out of date. The emerging organizational
unity of women surprised political observers at both national conventions.
Republican women made the Equal Rights Amendment a leading issue; Democratic
women defied the Carter convention machine to gain unprecedented platform planks
on E.R.A. and abortion.

There will be a feminist vote in the 1980 election. That majorities of women and
men support feminist issues - E.R.A., abortion, equal pay - is supported by
Harris poll findings. However, it is the way women vote on nonfeminist issues
that may play a key role in November.

Though women do not recognize it, they have voted as a bloc on one crucial
issue: opposition to war. Since 1950, foreign policy, far more than any other
issue, has divided men and women. This tendency, reflected in the women's vote,
results from shared personal attitudes, not political organization.
Public-opinion-survey data abundantly describe women as more opposed than men to
American involvement in Korea and Southeast Asia.

In 1969, a Gallup survey found that 64 percent of women respondents declared
themselves ''doves,'' as against 48 percent of the men. In 1972, Gallup found
that 70 percent of women questioned, and 54 percent of the men, favored a troop
withdrawal from Vietnam by year's end. In 1970, a Harris survey found that 64
percent of men interviewed and 47 percent of the women favored full-scale
bombings of North Vietnam. In 1980, this pattern holds true.

In January, Gallup found that 43 percent of the men questioned and 30 percent of
the women favored the use of force if the hostages in Iran were harmed. In a
February poll, Gallup found that 50 percent of the men questioned felt there was
too little defense spending, as compared to 41 percent of the women; 66 percent
of the men, and 53 percent of the women, favored a return to the draft; 65
percent of the men and 55 percent of the women felt that the President was not
tough tough enough in dealing with the Soviet Union.

The message is clear: In foreign policy, women as a group are more
peace-oriented than men.  Women's attitudes on foreign policy have influenced
past elections. In 1952, women's support of Dwight D. Eisenhower and his policy
to end the Korean War led the pollster Louis Harris to speculate on a potential
women's vote. In 1972, women came out in increasing numbers as activists and
voters to support George McGovern, giving their first priority to his peace
stand. The University of Michigan's Center for Political Studies reported in
1972 that 7 percent fewer women than men voted for Richard M. Nixon.

Most social-science analysts believe that foreign policy has been a major
question in five of the last seven Presidential elections, and a key issue
especially in the close races in 1960 and 1968.

This year, domestic economic concerns, which are often cited as the heart of
most Presidential campaigns, have become almost inseparable from international
issues. Inflation and the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and Iran
have become linked, as have grain and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. In
view of these factors, women's tendency to support the candidate whom they
believe to be opposed to war takes on even greater significance.

Neither the individual voter, nor the army of researchers, completely understand
why people vote as they do. Nevertheless, considerable evidence suggests that
women as a group will support the candidate whom they perceive to be the most
trustworthy to be a peacemaker.

Marjorie Lansing, professor of political science at Eastern Michigan University,
is co-author, with Sandra Baxter, of the forthcoming book ''Women and Politics:
The Invisible Majority.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT POLITICS

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 24


This is the campaign of the interpreters, of the official postscripter, of the
gloss makers in the war of the words.

Just as ''advance man'' is a recognized political role, so ''nuance man'' might
be added to the political lexicon this year to describe the aide who goes around
speaking learnedly on what the candidate meant to say moments after the
candidate spoke.

Last week President Carter delivered a speech in Atlanta in which he linked
Ronald Reagan with ''stirrings of hate'' between the races. The President moved
along with his bandwagon as these words were flying out on the news wires, and
when he spoke two hours later in South Carolina he was almost totally ignored by
the press in favor of Jody Powell. The White House press secretary and campaign
''nuance man'' was holding court just 30 feet from Mr. Carter as the President
spoke, interpreting in his low drawl what it was Mr. Carter had said in Atlanta
and trying to blunt the cutting edge of his candidate's words.

Such is the nature of the modern stump. The Republic is attuned now to be on
guard against gaffes from its politicians, and candidates are no longer measured
as being right or wrong as much as having ''misspoken.''

In the arena of campaign ''misspeak,'' the daily political contest frequently
boils down to Mr. Powell and Lyn Nofziger, Mr. Reagan's press strategist,
trading explications as the candidates drone on.  Although elected to nothing,
these two men have put in some of the harshest hours of the campaign, wielding
styptic statements like the ''cut men'' who minister to prizefighters between
rounds.

There is Mr. Powell denying imputations that the President considers his
Republican challenger to be a racist warmonger. And there is Mr. Nofziger
denying that enraged Chinese officials or perplexed Americans have anything to
fear from Mr. Reagan's effusive endorsement of Taiwan.

Conversely, there is a new kind of ''happy warrior'' in American politics,
exemplified lately in the campaign wanderings of Walter Mondale. In times past,
his Vice-Presidential role might have required his waging a simplistic ''low
road'' attack on the opponents' ticket, the way Vice President Agnew came to be
characterized as ''Nixon's Nixon.''

Instead, Mr. Mondale is playing a dual role as he tours the country: He must
carry his share of the postscripting, telling voters what they should have heard
when they heard the President's latest controversial words. And then he gently
mocks alleged Republican gaffes and reprises the campaign thus far in a
monologue that partisan audiences find vastly entertaining.

''Don't be too rough on the Republicans, they've had a tough month,'' the Vice
President says at rallies in St. Louis, Memphis and Hot Springs, Ark. ''They
sent my opponent to China to start the campaign, and they almost ended it
there.''

There are encouraging chuckles, and he continues: ''Then Mr. Reagan went on the
road and announced that he had a new plan to end the war in Vietnam.''

Chuckles grow to laughter and Mr. Mondale, pausing in a twinkling manner
reminiscent of Franklin D. Roosevelt's style of tweaking the opposition, thrusts
home: ''Then Mr. Reagan had doubts on an issue we're all talking about -
evolution, thus picking up a hot potato last dropped by Williams Jenning Bryan
55 years ago.''

''Wait now,'' he tells the laughing Democrats. ''Quit laughing at them. Let's
raise some money and send Mr. Reagan on the road so he can keep talking to the
American people.''

They laugh even louder, but therein Mr. Mondale gets to the heart of
''misspeak'' politics: Keep the opponent talking and parse each sentence
fragment as a potential bit of ammunition.

In his other role as postscripter, the Vice President just as zealously defends
each questioned phrase of the President to its last reinterpretation, even as
George Bush performs precisely the same tasks for Mr. Reagan. Politics thus
seems more words than deeds, or the art of the plausible rather than the
possible.

At a news conference, Mr. Mondale stands up to questions about Mr.  Carter's
''stirrings of hate'' remark, contending that something legitimate and subtler
than the charge of racism was intended.

''Don't try to blow away the basic point,'' he says, offering at length his own
words on what the President said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Jody Powell

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 25, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR STEWART LOSES IN ALABAMA TO SON OF POPULAR FORMER GOVERNOR

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

DATELINE: MONTGOMERY, Ala., Sept. 24


Senator Donald W. Stewart, Democrat of Alabama, narrowly lost renomination in
the Democratic runoff yesterday, largely because his opponent followed a road to
victory that had been paved 30 years earlier by his father.

Jim Folsom Jr., son of a colorful and popular former Governor, James E. (Big
Jim) Folsom, edged past Mr. Stewart by 6,000 votes out of more than 400,000
cast.

In the general election Mr. Folsom's Republican rival will be a retired admiral,
Jeremiah Denton, who was a prisoner of the North Vietnamese for seven and a half
years.

Mr. Folsom recalled today that when his father first ran for Governor in 1946,
''he ran against a whole power structure.'' ''I would say my father defeated the
whole power structure,'' he said. ''We did the same thing yesterday.''

Substantial Support for Incumbent

Mr. Stewart was supported by organized labor and the state's black political
organization, the Alabama Democratic Conference. In addition, he had a
substantial following in the state's banking and business community and a large
campaign fund. When he held a fundraising dinner recently, the majority leader
of the Senate, Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, brought luster and his
fiddle.

But in rural Alabama, old loyalties held. ''Everywhere we went people would
point to the road in front of their house and say, 'Big Jim paved that road.' It
had a significant impact,'' a close aide to Senator Stewart said. Mr. Folsom's
father built Alabama's ''farm-tomarket'' roads in his two terms as Governor in
the 1940's and early 50's.

Although Mr. Folsom's margin was slight, he carried two-thirds of the counties
in Alabama. More significantly, he won a large share of the black vote, which
had previously voted heavily for the candidate endorsed by the Alabama
Democratic Conference, the black caucus that had endorsed Mr. Stewart.

Delmer Duboise, an adviser to Mr. Folsom, said the victory proved that ''Alabama
is ready to go back to a moderate conservatism.''

Reared in Governor's Mansion

Mr. Folsom, 31 years old, spent eight of his first 12 years in the Governor's
mansion. He was a public relations executive in private industry before being
elected two years ago to the Alabama Public Service Commission, which regulates
utilities.

Mr. Stewart, 40 years old, who won a special election in 1978 to serve out the
unexpired term of the late Senator James B. Allen, was seeking his first full
term. He had earned a reputation as a moderate Democrat, but in a state
accustomed to conservative senators, Mr.  Folsom labeled Senator Stewart as a
liberal beholden to out-of-state interests.

Although Mr. Folsom's meager campaign fund was born of necessity, dictating
signs tacked on utility poles rather than television commercials, he used it as
evidence that his was a ''people's campaign.'' Mr. Stewart reportedly had
$500,000 to spend. According to Mr. Duboise, Mr. Folsom had ''about $75,000.''

But apart from his name and handsome features, Mr. Folsom's low-key campaign did
not recall his father's flamboyant populism. Whereas the 6 foot 8 inch tall
''Big Jim'' relentlessly attacked the ''big mules'' in business and industry,
the son called for easing government regulations of business.

The campaign styles of the two candidates contrasted sharply.Whereas Mr. Folsom
was relaxed, Mr. Stewart seemed somewhat nervous and occasionally defensive. Mr.
Stewart had the money to meet voters in every ''branch head,'' The Montgomery
Advertiser said in an editorial, but ''familiarity bred collapse.''

Mr. Denton, 56, the Republican candidate, is highly respected in Alabama for his
patriotism as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 382 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 26, 1980 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'WITHOUT WARNING'

BYLINE: By Tom Buckley

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Weekend Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 320 words


THE old sarge in ''Without Warning,'' which opens today at the Cinerama I and
other theaters, keeps telling his cronies that there are strange critters up by
the lake, critters that ain't of this world. Trouble is, the sarge, played by
Martin Landau, has a way of getting kind of agitated and popping his eyes and
thinking he's back in Vietnam. So it's no wonder his cronies at the Isolated Bar
& Grill don't believe him.

Jack Palance, who runs a little filling station up the road, knows better, but
he's keeping his mouth shut and hoping for a chance to get the robed figure with
the styrofoam head who controls the critters' movements in the sights of his
rifle.

His chance comes when two teen-agers, played by Tarah Nutter and Christopher S.
Nelson, stumble into the bar, screaming for help. What happens after that
manages to be both illogical and predictable.

The big moments, such as they are, in ''Without Warning'' have been borrowed
from ''Alien'' and ''Invasion of the Body Snatchers.'' It is the problem of what
to do between shots of the super-leeches digging into their victims' necks that
has baffled the makers of this wretched film.

Strange Happenings

WITHOUT WARNING, directed and produced by Greydon Clark; written by Lyn Freeman,
Daniel Grodnik, Ben Nett and Steve Mathis; director of photography, Dean Cundey;
film editor, Curtis Burch; music by Dan Wyman; released by Film- ways Pictures.
At the Cinerama I, Broadway at West 47th Street; RKO 86th Street I, at Lexington
Avenue, and other theaters. Running time: 89 minutes. This film is rated R.

Taylor . . . . . Jack Palance
Fred . . . . . Martin Landau
Sandy . . . . . Tarah Nutter
Greg . . . . . Christopher S. Nelson
Hunter . . . . . Cameron Mitchell
Leo . . . . . Neville Brand
Aggie . . . . . Sue Ane Langdon
Dave . . . . . Ralph Meeker
Scoutmaster . . . . . Larry Storch
Beth . . . . . Lynn Theel
Tom . . . . . David Caruso
Randy . . . . . Darby Hinton

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GAPS IN TRAINING ANDEQUIPMENT HINDER RAPID DEPLOYMENT FORCE;
Defense: Is the U.S. Prepared?  Sixth of seven articles

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2833 words

DATELINE: MacDILL AIR FORCE BASE, Fla.


Tucked away in a remote bunker here, the headquarters staff of the new Rapid
Deployment Force has been preparing for that day when it may have to fly to the
Middle East or some other crisis spot in a bold thrust to deter Soviet or other
incursions into areas vital to American interests.

So far, the deployment force has not been ordered into the fray between Iraq and
Iran, because President Carter has said that the United States intends to remain
neutral except for keeping the Strait of Hormuz open.

But even if the President wanted to intervene with ground troops, the deployment
force would be hard put to assemble a combat-ready unit of the right size or to
find enough transport to sustain it in the field.

Rucksacks Ready to Go

If the signal for deployment to a crisis area comes from the President and the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. P.X. Kelley of the Marine Corps, the force's
commander, and his staff will grab their gear, climb onto planes and take off.

While on the ground, they work inside the windowless white blockhouse
half-buried at the end of a runway here. Their cramped cubicles hold packed
olive drab footlockers and rucksacks piled in corners ready to be picked up.
Next to the ramp leading to the airfield is an armory with their personal
weapons under the watchful eye of a Navy gunner's mate.

Outside what is known as the Mole Hole, the bunker's name when it was a ready
room for bomber crews, two small hangars house communications gear, equipment
vans and jeeps to be hauled onto planes that taxi up to the headquarters.

About 65 of the 260-man staff of the deployment force, including many of the
senior officers, have qualified as parachutists in case they need to jump into
their destination.

Role of Carter Statement

The deployment force, while far from new in concept, is the latest project of
the United States to improve the readiness of the nation's armed forces to
respond to crises abroad. In planning for more than a year, it was injected with
life when President Carter asserted last January that the United States would
defend its vital interests in the Persian Gulf region with military force if
necessary.

Since the deployment force formally came into operation on March 1, it has
aroused considerable skepticism. Critics such as John M.  Collins, the chief
military analyst for the Congressional Research Service, have contended that it
cannot move rapidly, has little to deploy and therefore lacks genuine force.
Former Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger has made the same point, noting
that the units in the deployment force are the same as those designated to
reinforce units in Europe and for other missions.

Moreover, the mission of the deployment force, which is to directly confront the
Russians or other potential aggressors with American military power, has aroused
concern that the United States could be dragged into another Vietnam, or worse.

The fundamental strategy of the deployment force is the pre-emptive move,
getting to an area of possible conflict with enough troops and weapons to give a
potential aggressor pause before he attacks.

''Once you get a force into an area that is not occupied by the other guy,''
General Kelley said last spring, ''then you have changed the whole calculus of
the crisis and he must react to you, and not you to him.''

But that strategy requires an early Presidential decision that would surely
entail serious political and military risks.  The deployment force is a long way
from full power. Secretary of Defense Harold Brown has said that it may take $5
billion a year for five years to build up the force, to equip it with transport
and to improve bases to which it may gain access.

Advice From a General

Gen. Volney F. Warner, commander of the national Readiness Command of which the
deployment force is a part, has said that the force could not ''go to the Middle
East right now and defeat a Soviet force equivalent to what they have in
Afghanistan'' - about 80,000 troops.

But General Kelley said that ''we know our capabilities and limitations better
than anyone, and my best advice to any potential adversary is not to twist my
tail too hard.'' He said that, ''given a degree of warning time, I can put a
very credible force on the ground, in place in the Persian Gulf, in a reasonable
period of time.'' He added that he would leave the definitions of ''credible''
and ''reasonable'' to the imagination.

The general also asserted that, despite the newness of the Rapid Deployment
Force, ''I have enough confidence in my assessment to be the first man off the
first aircraft'' if the force is ordered into action.

Officers here and in Washington talk of deploying the new force to a variety of
places where the United States has no forces today. But a few minutes of candid
conversation in either place makes clear that the Middle East is almost the only
place on anybody's mind.

Pentagon planners have so far envisioned at least four missions for the
deployment force: - Deterring a Soviet invasion of Iran or Saudi Arabia from the
Soviet Union itself or from Afghanistan.  - Repelling an incursion from a
smaller nation, such as Iraq, into the oil-producing nations around the Persian
Gulf. Keeping open the Strait of Hormuz in the current Iranian-Iraqi conflict
appears to be uppermost in the minds of Western leaders whose nations rely on
the vast amounts of oil that pass through the strait each day.

- Seizing the oil fields if saboteurs or terrorists threaten to strangle
supplies to the Western industrial nations or Japan.  - Helping a friendly
nation to maintain or restore internal order at the request of that nation's
Government.  The deployment force, which consists only of a headquarters until
it is ordered into action, would draw from a reservoir of well over 200,000 men,
plus 100,000 reservists, to assemble a task force tailored to the mission
assigned.

The Pentagon has designated three Army divisions, the 82d Airborne, the 101st
Airborne (Air Assault) and the 24th Infantry (Mechanized), plus a Marine
division and its accompanying air wing as the main ground forces. Two Ranger
battalions and two Special Forces Groups would also be available.

Several tactical fighter squadrons have been given priority missions with the
force, as has a squadron of B-52 bombers for conventional, not nuclear,
missions.

Warships in Arabian Sea

Units from the Air Force's Military Airlift Command and from the Navy's cargo
fleet have been put on the list, as have supporting elements such as engineers,
signal and medical units.

At Dobbins Air Force Base in Georgia the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation has been
converting a small number of C-130 transport planes, apparently for service in
the Middle East, fitting them with special equipment to enable them to take off
and land from the short and rugged runways typically found in the region.

Specific Navy warships have not been designated, as those nearest the scene of a
crisis would be the most likely to be assigned. The Navy currently has a
flotilla of 20 to 25 warships led by two aircraft carriers in the Arabian Sea.

General Kelley's staff has been drawn from all four services, a rarity in field
commands. The deputy commander is Maj. Gen. Robert C. Taylor, an Air Force
fighter pilot, and the chief of staff is Brig.  Gen. Carl W. Stiner, an Army
paratrooper. The top noncommissioned officer is Sgt. Maj. David L. Clark, a
veteran of 31 years' service and 4,800 parachute jumps with Army airborne,
Special Forces and Ranger units.

While General Kelley has advocated ''an ecumenical approach,'' many officers
here concede that they have had difficulty in working with officers from other
services, despite a willingness to pull together. They have had trouble
overcoming 20 years of habits growing out of doing things in the way of their
own services.

That extends into the complicated questions of dealing with the potential
components of the deployment force. General Kelley's headquarters will have no
control over a single soldier until the Pentagon puts an operation into motion
and transfers authority.

Extensive Training Exercises

Until then, the general and his staff must rely primarily on persuasion to get
each service to prepare its designated forces.  Senior officers here maintain
informal contacts with their own services to get things done.

The deployment force has undergone several extensive training exercises, some
for the headquarters staff, others for component units. In November, the
headquarters plans to lead an airlift of 1,400 soldiers to Egypt in the force's
first overseas exercise.

The training, and combat operations, are the responsibility of Col. Gerald H.
Bethke of the Army. A month after his headquarters was set up, the staff took
part in a weeklong war game at Fort Bragg, N.C., where they simulated the
deployment of a large force. ''We learned then how much we had to learn,'' said
an officer who was there.

Among the many questions to be resolved was the management of air space where
fighters and attack planes from the Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps were all
flying. Similarly, the coordination of Army and Marine air defense, along with
that of a host nation, had to be sorted out.

In the field, the 82d Airborne has flown from North Carolina to Florida to drop
2,400 paratroopers in the biggest jump in recent years. The 24th Mechanized
moved tanks and other heavy vehicles from Fort Stewart, Ga., to nearby Savannah
to load them onto ships, discovering that stevedoring skills had been lost.

'Better Have Big Bucks'

The Air Force has held special maneuvers at Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada.
Overseas, it has operated sophisticated control aircraft from fields in Egypt
and has dispatched a squadron of F-4 Phantoms to train alongside the Egyptian
Air Force. The Navy has gained the most experience in the region with long
cruises in the Indian Ocean.

Officers here said the components would need much more training, but as one
cautioned, ''If you want to go out and play in the desert for a couple of weeks,
you'd better have some big bucks.''

It is roughly 8,000 miles from Tampa to the sands of the Persian Gulf region, as
the crow flies, and the responsibility for planning the transport and logistics
to move men, weapons and supplies there lies with Col. Richard E. Stephenson, an
Army transport officer.

Officers here and in the Pentagon consider that task, while not impossible, to
be what several called a ''nightmare.'' But some officers have asserted that the
Russians would also have difficulties.

The logistics buildup needed to sustain an American force in the Persian Gulf
would, in the eyes of officers here and in Washington, require the call-up of
100,000 reservists to man that long supply train. Congress has been asked to
give the President that authority.

Contingencies Are Secret

Capt. Paul D. Butcher of the Navy is in charge of planning the tactical
employment of the force. Military officers habitually decline to discuss
contingency planning; the details are secret. But they could include a plan to
block the Soviet Union from invading Iran or to help Saudi Arabia repel an Iraqi
sweep toward the Saudi oil fields.

The deployment force's intelligence section, under the command of Col. Franklin
D. Roberts of the Air Force, has been assessing military threats in the Middle
East, trying to determine potential targets, accummulating piles of information
on terrain, roads and sources of water.

The deployment force's senior communications officer is Col. Henry B. McNider
3d, from the Army's signal corps. He has a particularly difficult task because
the deployment force must take all its communications equipment with it, unlike
the commands in Europe and Asia, where much of it is in place.

Colonel McNider's work is further complicated by the different equipment and
methods each service uses to communicate. He has been looking for ways for the
various components to talk to each other, to talk to General Kelley's
headquarters and for headquarters to talk to Washington.

General Kelley said earlier this year that, while the deployment force had not
been involved in the mission into Iran to rescue the American hostages, it had
learned much from what other officers have said was an imaginative
communications network developed then.

Rating Unit Strength

The head of the manpower section here, Col. Ronald E. Gardner of the Air Force,
is responsible for monitoring the strengths of the component units. The 82d
Airborne, for instance, is nearly full strength and is rated by the Army as
being combat ready, with only minor deficiencies. But the 101st Airborne and the
24th Infantry have been rated not combat ready because of deficiencies in
manpower, training and logistics.

The basic strategy of the Rapid Deployment Force - inserting a force to give the
opposing commander pause to reflect and then to bow out before hostilities begin
- is based on twin assumptions that stand on shaky ground: that there will be
time and transport to get a sufficient force into place.

Pentagon planners of the pre-emptive strategy say that the deployment force will
need at least a month's warning to be able to move a force large enough to have
some chance of dissuading an aggressor. They assert that American intelligence,
which predicted the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan well before it happened,
is capable of providing that warning.

The big question, then, is not military but political: whether a President will
have the will to order a pre-emptive move and the skill to persuade Congress and
the public to support it. History would seem to be against him.

While the War Powers Resolution would apparently permit a President to dispatch
the deployment force without consulting Congress, that would go against the
American tradition under which United States ground forces have been ordered
into conflict only in response to an enemy attack.

Getting There First

The new strategy of getting there first and laying a tripwire would, in effect,
be calling the bluff of the potential aggressor.  That could be extremely risky,
especially if the Soviet Union was the adversary. It would be the Cuban missile
crisis on the ground, with two armies eyeball to eyeball.

That pre-emptive strategy contains the makings of a war wider and more intense
than Vietnam.  While any commitment of the deployment force around the Persian
Gulf might deter the Russians there, the Soviet Union could turn up the pressure
around Berlin or encourage the North Koreans to do the same with South Korea.
But American forces, meantime, would be tied down in the Persian Gulf.

Any insertion of a deployment force also raises the risk, as senior officials in
the Pentagon have suggested, of nuclear war. The Russians might resort to
tactical nuclear weapons if the Americans succeed in getting a credible
conventional force into place first; the Americans might turn to them if that
force is in danger of being overrun.

Where that would lead is anybody's guess. United States aircraft carriers would
be vulnerable to nuclear weapons, and many strategists foresee a swift
escalation into a major nuclear exchange.

Problem of Sustaining Effort

Thus skeptics such as Mr. Collins of the Congressional Research Service contend
that the deployment force might be useful against a second-rate power but would
not have the strength to stand up to the Soviet Union in its own backyard.

The second questionable assumption is whether there is sufficient transport to
get a deployment force anywhere on time and sustain it once there.

General Warner, head of the Readiness Command, has said that a war game exercise
showed it would take 169 days to get the entire Rapid Deployment Force into the
Middle East with all its equipment and support units.

''Too long,'' he said. He contended that the force should be able to place
two-thirds of its combat units in the region within 20 days. To do that, he
said, the fleet of C-5 and C-141 transports would have to be doubled.

General Warner has estimated that the deployment force could be sustained in the
Middle East for 30 days, maybe 60, with what it has now. That requires ships,
since 96 to 98 percent of the supplies would go by sea. But the American
merchant marine and the Navy's attack cargo fleet have deteriorated since the
end of the Vietnam War.

Unlike American forces in Europe and Asia, a deployment force in the Middle East
would not have a network of bases to support it. But that has begun to change.

Egypt has steadily, if quietly, become a window through which American forces
can flow further into the Middle East, and the United States has negotiated
tentative agreements with Oman, Kenya and Somalia for access to bases there.

In addition, Pentagon planners are looking at a proposal to spend $1 billion to
enlarge the American base on the tiny British island of Diego Garcia in the
Indian Ocean.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Transport Plane

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REP. MCCLOSKEY, A PAST ADVERSARY OF REAGAN, GIVES HIS ENDORSEMENT

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 440 words

DATELINE: SAN JOSE, Calif., Sept. 25


Representative Paul N. McCloskey Jr., the liberal Republican who once ran for
President as an antiwar candidate, today endorsed his old political enemy,
Ronald Reagan, on the ground that Mr. Reagan is a lesser threat to peace than
President Carter.

Mr. McCloskey also said his endorsement reflected his judgment that the
candidacy of John B. Anderson, because it potentially could cause the election
to be decided by the House of Representatives, is a threat to orderly government
and to the usual method of choosing a President.

''If John Anderson had a reasonable chance, I would have a far more difficult
problem,'' Mr. McCloskey said of the independent Republican from Illinois who is
battling Mr. Reagan for the lead in polls in this area of California.

Mr. Reagan and Mr. McCloskey met in an awkward scene at the airport here after
Reagan aides wheeled Mr. McCloskey's 1971 Volkswagen onto the tarmac. The
Congressman pasted a Reagan-Bush sticker onto the automobile's bumper, then
saluted the sticker in military fashion.

Posing for Photographers

After shaking Mr. Reagan's hand, he paced about for several minutes, sometimes
rejoining the Republican Presidential nominee at the bidding of photographers,
then drifting away again. Reagan aides silenced a mariachi band so that Mr.
McCloskey could speak to reporters.

''I have just ended 10 years of hostility since the Governor said 10 years ago I
ought to represent the San Andreas Fault and I said he should raise his tax-free
cattle there,'' said Mr. McCloskey, who challenged President Nixon for the
Republican nomination in 1972 as an expression of opposition to the Vietnam War.

Mr. McCloskey said he was endorsing Mr. Reagan today ''because I think the
consistency of a Reagan foreign policy would be far less dangerous than the
continued inconsistency of Carter.''

However, Mr. McCloskey, whose endorsement was almost devoid of praise for Mr.
Reagan, added, ''I've never pretended that I agree with Governor Reagan on
abortion, women's rights and the 'noble cause' of the Vietnam War.''

Some Common Ground

But in a meeting earlier today at the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco, Mr.
McCloskey and Mr. Reagan apparently found common ground on the removal of profit
restrictions on defense contractors in the so-called Silicon Valley, the
manufacturing area in this state that is said to contain the world's highest
concentration of hightechnology industries. In a speech at the Western Electric
Corporation headquarters in Sunnyvale, Mr. Reagan approved Mr.  McCloskey's
attempt to revoke the Vinson-Trammell Act, which contains such profit
restrictions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Ronald and Nancy Reagan

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 26, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GARWOOD'S TRIAL;
by Deborah Davis

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The court-martial of Pfc. Robert Garwood, the former prisoner of war accused of
collaborating with the North Vietnamese, is likely to be be followed closely by
the legal and psychiatric communities, for it may raise fundamental questions
about collaboration, which is endemic to wartime.

Almost to a man, American military prisoners of war, no matter how great their
will to resist their captors, in the Korean and Vietnam Wars were broken and
forced to collaborate to some degree. This has disturbed our military: It wants
its Code of Conduct to give its people strong incentive to withstand torture and
other pressure to collaborate - including, in Communists' prisons, efforts to
indoctrinate and convert them - but it does not want to hold them to an inhuman
standard.

Early in the Vietnam War, the standard was rigid, but psychiatrists found that
prisoners suffered incapacitating guilt if they broke even once. By the late
1960's, the military came implicitly to recognize acceptable degrees of
collaboration, and, because of the unpopularity of the war, pursued an
unofficial policy of not prosecuting the collaborator who made propaganda
statements: His action was simply too common.

Private Garwood, whose court-martial is to begin Monday at the Marines' Camp
Lejeune, N. C., is unique. He is being prosecuted because he is said to have
collaborated far beyond the demands of his captors. He is charged with urging
the defection of American troops and with wearing the uniform of the enemy,
carrying enemy arms, interrogating P.O.W.'s, indoctrinating them, and acting as
a camp guard. He is pleading not guilty by reason of insanity, claiming that his
behavior resulted from physical abuse and mental stress.  (His mental stability
indeed is in question: Early this month, he was arrested for alleged child
molesting, and that trial is to take place after the court-martial has ended.)

The assumption in psychiatry, according to experts, is that the disintegration
of the ego is a condition for collaboration; that coercion creates a weakened
state of mind. During the Korean War, this phenomenon was called
''brainwashing''; it is now called ''coercive persuasion.'' Both military and
civilian law have long accepted insanity and duress as defenses, but coercive
persuasion, a more sophisticated concept, has yet to be incorporated into legal
doctrine. This case may break new ground because Private Garwood's two
attorneys, specialists in legal psychiatry, have laid the foundation in their
preliminary motions to establish coercive persuasion as a theory of military
law. Such a defense would be different from the defense of duress, for it has to
do not merely with obeying orders out of fear but also with a profound change in
one's thought patterns. Coercive persuasion would be insanity by reason of
coercion.

One reason for believing that Private Garwood was the victim of coercive
persuasion is that when he surfaced in Hanoi in 1979, 14 years after his capture
by the Vietcong and six years after the war had ended and P.O.W.'s were
returned, he announced that he was a loyal American who had worked against his
Government and with the antiwar movement. This statement echoed the line of his
North Vietnamese captors. The questions of why he did not return with the others
and why he came back when he did will be answered when the defense presents its
evidence. The military assumes that he remained voluntarily. If this is true,
then it is likely that he returned because he was disillusioned with the
Vietnamese revolution and became as alienated from that society as he had been
from ours.

Although his political conversion certainly does not explain the extent of his
apparent identification with his captors, as described in the charges against
him, it does raise the question of whether collaboration might sometimes be
justified. The Vietnam War was widely considered illegal and immoral; those who
took a moral position against it can be compared to German anti-Fascists in
World War II who collaborated with the Allies against Berlin. The Nuremberg
trials later affirmed the principle that individuals must evaluate laws against
a higher morality - as the antiwar activists, including some P.O.W.'s, claimed
they did during the Vietnam War. But still, the coercion in Vietnamese prison
camps was intensive whether or not Hanoi's cause was just.

As law moves further into the realm of the mind, and, as one of Private
Garwood's attorneys has said, we ''open our minds to the court,'' matters of
life and death and morality, which are obscure in any war, become even more
ambiguous.

This trial, necessary to the military for discipline and order, means something
else to the rest of us. We may ask: Would it have been easier for us if Private
Garwood had died? What did he accomplish by surviving and returning to confront
us with his ordeal, and forcing us to sit in judgment upon him?
Deborah Davis, who writes on politics, is working on a book about collaboration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 27, 1980, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SHORTAGES AND INEFFICIENCIES PLAGUE INDUSTRIAL BASE OF THE U.S.  MILITARY

BYLINE: By WINSTON WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2753 words


The problem of aging and inefficient industrial plants, which has cost American
industry much of its competitive advantage in the world marketplace, is
affecting defense-related factories as well, raising deep concern about the
nation's ability to respond quickly to a military emergency.

In many ways, the deterioration of the military's industrial base has exceeded
the decline in the economy's commercial sector, military experts say. And, they
say, because of recurring shortages of materials and skilled manpower in
critical trades, military production is facing what some call limited ''surge
capability'' - the ability to gear up production quickly.

How much slack exists in the military production system has become a highly
charged political issue as Congress seeks to increase military budgets and
Republicans adhere to the military-spending plank in their party platform. But
this year's recession has freed enough production capacity to take some of the
urgency out of the situation.

25,000 Companies Involved

''I'm afraid that this time when we push down on the old gas pedal, that
powerful eight-cylinder response we've always received may not be there,'' said
Gen. Alton D. Slay of the Air Force Systems Command.

The military's industrial base is made up of more than 25,000 maufacturers and
materials suppliers, plus Government facilities like munitions shops, shipyards
and materials stockpiles. Under the Defense Production Act of 1950 and the
Defense Industrial Reserve Act of 1973, the Defense Department is supposed to
make sure that this network is capable of meeting military production needs in
any national emergency.

Gearing up to assemble the aircraft required for the Vietnam War or recreating
the stream of tanks that poured out of Detroit in World War II would take
considerably longer, maybe a year longer, than the 18 months to 24 months that
has long been assumed in United States military plans, some critics contend.

''If nothing earthshaking happens, and we build our capability gradually,
everthing would be fine,'' said Lawrence J. Korb, director of national security
policy studies for the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative Washington
research group. ''But in an allout emergency it would take us three years to
crank up completely.''

Carter Administration spokesmen, while conceding that bottlenecks frequently
develop, say that current plans to expand the military procurement budget from
$35.8 billion in the fiscal year 1980 to $64.1 billion in the fiscal year 1985
should bring about whatever cure the system needs. And the military's industrial
base should be able to swallow and digest the added spending ''without a
hiccup,'' said Dale W. Church, Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for acquisition
policy.

Indeed, the emphasis on more military spending is already bringing forth signs
of increased preparedness. Shipyard workers in Portsmouth, Va., are working
overtime to bring out of mothballs vessels that have been laid up for years. The
Northrop Corporation is ambitiously expanding capacity at its electronics plant
outside of Chicago. The General Electric Company has announced plans to build a
new engine plant, and the Aluminum Company of America is planning to expand its
forging capacity.

Disarmament proponents outside the Government, contending that an adequate
priority system already exists to speed the production of arms in an emergency,
say the military-industrial complex is simply using alarmist tactics to regain
some of the influence and the business it has lost in recent years.

There is little disagreement, however, that the United States' military
production capability is not what it used to be. Sixty percent of the equipment
used to turn out military hardware is more than 20 years old, according to
Pentagon statistics, as against 34 percent in that age bracket for all of
American industry.

Drop in Number of Contractors

Thousands of subcontactors have either dropped military work or gone out of
business in the last 10 years, contractors say. Waiting periods for some
critical parts and materials stretch for dozens of months. And the making of
military goods is more dependent than ever on the importation of scarce raw
materials, such as chromium, titanium, manganese and platinum.

The slow pace of investment in military production facilities in recent years,
particularly for conventional weapons, is frequently cited as the main cause of
the present state of affairs. And, predictably, the Defense Department and
military contractors blame each other.

''Modernization is where you get your real surge capability,'' said Thomas V.
Jones, chairman of Northrop, a major aerospace company.  ''The defense industry
has the capacity to do more work, but we don't have the capability to do it more
efficiently. Under the system we have now, we're trying to force new technology
and manufacturing techniques into old plants and equipment.''

Mr. Jones cites Government ownership of much of the military production
equipment as the reason for the lack of more up-to-date equipment. He estimates
that 50 percent of the equipment of the top 20 military contractors is owned by
the Department of Defense.

No Fund for Modernization

For example, the two heavy-forging plants in the country, operated by Alcoa and
the Wyman-Gordon Company, were purchased by the Defense Department in the Korean
War and are still owned by the Government.

Moreover, the Pentagon no longer has its own modernization fund, he said, and
there is little incentive in contracts for companies to build their own
capacity.

Rapidly changing military budgets also inhibit investment, Mr.  Jones said.
''The up-again, down-again defense budgets, the cancellations, the
hand-tailoring of the budgets each year - these are the main offenders,'' he
said.

Military men see the situation a bit differently. ''There's good technology
available, but industry has been dragging its feet acquiring it. They need to
invest in more smart new processes,'' said Brig. Gen. Joseph Connally, director
of acquisition policy for the Air Force. He said the situation had persisted in
spite of Federal financing of military-related research and development for
private corporations.

By most accounts the decline in production readiness began in the early 1970's,
when the Vietnam War was winding down. In fact, according to Mr. Korb of the
American Enterprise Institute, investment in military hardware began its slump
in the conflict in Vietnam.

Decline in Shipbuilding

For example, said Mr. Korb, the United States shipbuilding program declined
dramatically from 45 ships a year before the Vietnam years to eight ships a year
in the Vietnam period. He traces the decline in investment in military hardware
to the need to spend more of the military budget on operations and maintenance
during the war.

After the war, he said, operating costs rose sharply because of the rapidly
rising price of oil. Military retirement increased, and the volunteer army came
into existence. These shifts put new upward pressure on military operating
expenses when overall military spending remained relatively static, according to
Mr. Korb. This resulted, he said, in less than 27 percent of the military budget
being spent for hardware in the fiscal year 1976, as aginst 45 percent in 1966.

''We've been through 10 years of underfunding investment,'' said Mr. Korb. ''The
result is that the United States's ability to work its will in the world
militarily has diminished.''

Military analysts who subscribe to this view contend that the deemphasis on
military procurement and the frequent changes in the military budget after the
Vietnam War set the stage for a shrinking military industrial base.

After the Iranian revolution and Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, many
military strategists worried that United States military production would have
to displace commercial production to turn out enough arms for a conventional
war.

Pickup ADD ARSENAL at subhed: QUESTIONS ON AMMUNITION

Questions on Ammunition

That period highlighted some of the realities of military production. Navy and
Air Force jets were sitting on the ground for lack of engines. It would take at
least a year to increase the production rate on the Air Force's sophisticated
F-15 fighter. There were questions about whether the Army would be able to get
ammunition quickly enough to sustain it beyond a few weeks.

Manpower was seen as another headache. Only one new machinist, needed to produce
ships and planes, was coming out of the apprenticeship programs for every four
that retired. Engineers and computer programmers for the aerospace and
electronics industries were in short supply.

At the same time, hundreds of small companies that made castings and forgings
for military use were no longer available. The ranks of these metalworking
companies had been depleted after the environmental authorities pressed them to
install expensive equipment to limits smokestack emissions. Many that remained
decided to concentrate on less demanding and more profitable commercial
business.

During the crises of last winter, commercial airline construction was booming
and demand was strong in other sectors of the economy that compete with the
military contractors for materials and manpower. The automobile industry,
retooling to produce smaller cars, was buying from many of the same suppliers
who service the military industries. And growing commercial uses for
semiconductors, used by the military in radar and communications systems, taxed
that industry.

Despite the Federal law giving priority to military orders, military contractors
had to wait for parts and materials for extraordinarily long periods. Delivery
times for some titanium forgings stretched beyond two years. Some makers of
semiconductors offered delivery a year after the order date. And landing gears
had to be ordered as much as three to four years ahead of time.

Seeking a 'Game Plan'

The situation eased somewhat because of this year's recession. But many experts
on the military say that the only way to guarantee that military needs are not
crowded out in the next boom time is to plan military procurement several years
in advance, telegraphing needs to contractors.

''If defense contractors know what the game plan is going to be, we can prepare
ourselves,'' said Phillip Vassallo, procurement vice president for the Grumman
Corporation. ''Some of those lead times extend over the life of an entire
administration. What we need is multiyear ordering.''

The naval shipbuilding program is often cited as a major cause of procurement
uncertainty. Navy officials say that the number of ships to be built in the next
five years has changed four times in as many years, going from 67 in five years
in the budget for the fiscal year 1979 to 96 in five years in the 1981 budget.

But those who favor reductions in the military budget question the need for
awarding more contracts to beef up the military's industrial base.

''What happened to all the planes and ships we've built since the last war?''
asks Seymour Mellman, a disarmament specialist and a professor of industrial
engineering at Columbia University.  ''Military hardware doesn't evaporate; it
doesn't melt away. If they're saying that we can't fight World War III, that's
correct. But who's planning to fight World War II again?''

Some Waiting Times Shorter

Opponents of increased military spending say that the present system can handle
all the United States's conventional arms needs.  They cite rapidly falling
delivery times for some industrial materials as proof that no urgent action is
needed.

These waiting times have been shortening since the beginning of the year,
several aerospace companies report. The Boeing Company, which ordered supplies
aggressively three years ago to support its commercial airliner business and
caused a near-panic for aerospace materials in the process, cut production
sharply in the second quarter; it expects production to fall even further next
year, easing the materials strain more.

In any event, they say, the Department of Defense could use its power under the
military priority system to speed the flow of critical materials. The department
had to use that priority recently at Pratt and Whitney, the division of United
Technologies that makes jet engines. A long strike at a bearing company and a
forging supplier had slowed the delivery of engines for the F-15 and F-16 jets
to a trickle. Delivery accelerated after the Air Force twisted arms at the three
companies and at Boeing, which had also ordered a lot of eninges from Pratt.

Some of the capacity problems are also working themselves out under the present
budget projections. Alcoa recently announced a $35 million investment to expand
its aluminum forging capacity. And titanium producers, Timet and the R.M.I.
Company, have announced intentions to expand. Northrop is building more capacity
to make electronics systems that go into the B-52 bomber and the F-15 fighter.

A weakening economy also pointed to a solution for one of the Navy's readiness
problems. The Navy is currently negotiating with Sea-Land Inc., the shipping
company, to acquire eight surplus container ships for the Rapid Deployment
Force. Sea-Land is replacing the highspeed ships because they burn too much oil.


Role of Commercial Work

Professor Mellman, who has special-ized in studying shifts from a wartime to the
peacetime economy, said that many military contractors were demanding more
Government work because they had been frustrated in their search for profitable
commercial work. He contended that military contractors had had trouble
converting to commercial work because they had grown inefficient and
noncompetitive.

Some attempts at conversion to commercial work have embarrassed military
contractors. Rohr Industries, the aerospace giant, experimented with building
mass transit equipment but withdrew from that business after it was slapped by
San Francisco's Bay Area Rapid Transit with a mulitmillion-dollar damage suit
for defective cars.

In some instances military contractors and some military men are saying it would
be imprudent and a waste of stockholders' and taxpayers' money to build
production capacity for the relatively infrequent periods when military spending
is heavy and commercial demand is at its peak.

''Shipbuilding is naturally a roller coaster industry,'' said Rear Adm. Edward
J. Otth, a Navy procurement expert. ''When we have a war we jack it up as fast
as we can and in peacetime we let it fall. The country can't afford to keep it
running at top speed.''

However, the Carter Administration acknowledges that the concern over industrial
preparedness has raised disturbing questions and created a sense of urgency. And
President Carter has a committee looking into problems connected with a military
production surge.

The General Services Administration is trying to bolster the stockpile of
critical materials, and Government researchers are working on substitute
materials for minerals in short supply domestically. Still more researchers are
working on industrial techniques that advance the state of the art in casting
and forging.

The Defense Department is considering mutiyear purchases, larger profit margins
to military contractors, new incentives for contractors to stimulate capital
investment and new ways of adding short-supply items to the Pentagon's
inventory.

''There's a whole new range of technology availaable to us,'' said Mr. Church of
the Defense Department. ''We need to use it for wholesale capital replacement in
the defense industries.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Virginia Trumbull Robinson Is Married To Rodney P. Frelinghuysen, Freeholder

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 69, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 304 words


Virginia Trumbull Robinson, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Henry S.  Robinson Jr. of
West Hartford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Rodney Procter
Frelinghuysen, son of Mr. and Mrs. Peter H.B.  Frelinghuysen of Morristown, N.J.

The Right Rev. Anson Phelps Stokes Jr., retired Episcopal Bishop of
Massachusetts, who is the uncle and godfather of the bridegroom, performed the
ceremony in St. John's Episcopal Church. He was assisted by the rector, the Rev.
Allan House O'Neil.

Constance Brainard Robinson 2d, sister of the bride, was maid of honor.
Frederick Frelinghuysen was his brother's best man.  The bride was, until
recently, an art instructor at the Renbrook School in West Hartford. She was
graduated from Miss Porter's School and Sarah Lawrence College. Her father is a
partner in the Hartford law firm of Robinson, Robinson & Cole.

The bride is a granddaughter of the late Henry S. Robinson, who was president of
the Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company, and of the late Morgan B.
Brainard, who was chairman of the board of the Aetna Life Insurance Company,
both in Hartford.

Mr. Frelinghuysen is director of the Morris County Board of Chosen Freeholders
and is completing his second term as Freeholder. He was graduated from St.
Mark's School and from Hobart College and served in Vietnam with the Army. He
later did graduate work in American history at Trinity College in Hartford.

Mr. Frelinghuysen's father, a lawyer, is former Representative from New Jersey's
Fifth Congressional District, where he served for 22 years. The bridegroom is a
grandson of the late Rodney Procter of Palm Beach, Fla., and of the late Peter
H.B. Frelinghuysen of Morristown. His grandfathers were private investors in New
York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of bride

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
ADVISE YIELDS TO CONSENT IN NUCLEAR FUEL VOTE

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1113 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It was a squeaky victory, and therefore especially gratifying to senior Carter
Administration officials who had lobbied the Senate mercilessly for days. By a
margin of two votes, the Senate approved last week the sale of 38 tons of
enriched uranium to India, shipments authorized by President Carter last June.

Only the week before, the House of Representatives had voted 298 to 98 to reject
the shipments, but disapproval by both chambers was required to block the sale.
The Senate therefore spared Mr. Carter a foreign policy reversal that could have
damaged his re-election campaign.

It was not the first time Congress had come to his rescue on a foreign policy
issue. Despite the predictions of political analysts, Mr. Carter won, for
example, Senate ratification of his Panama Canal treaties and Congressional
acquiescence in ending the embargo on weapons shipments to Turkey and sale of
F-14 jets to Saudi Arabia.

Today's Congress has more than ample powers to block Presidential initiatives.
In the wake of the Vietnam war, Congress enacted legislation designed to
increase its role in foreign policy. Despite the augmentation of its supervisory
powers, however, Congress has rarely succeeded in direct challenges to the
President's pre-eminence in foreign policy.

''Nothing concentrates the mind of Congress,'' said J. Brian Atwood, Assistant
Secretary of State for Congressional Relations, ''like the awareness that
they'll be responsible for the results of their actions. In cases like these,''
he added, ''the Senate's vote has direct results; our job is to make the
Senators aware of the consequences of their actions.''

Mr. Atwood and others, however, caution that Congress's unwillingness in many
instances to overrule President Carter should not be equated with lack of
influence in foreign policy formulation.  Legislation granting Congress veto
power over weapons sales and nuclear fuel shipments has had a deterrent effect
on the executive.  Initiatives likely to spark firestorms on Capitol Hill are
sometimes quietly shelved or amended before submission. In the case of nuclear
fuel shipments to India, Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie conceded to the
Foreign Relations Committee that if the Senate approved the shipments, India
would be required to accept safeguards it has so far resisted to qualify for
future supplies.

Several analysts noted that the character of the Indian fuel shipments helps
explain both the closeness of the Senate vote and the House's overwhelming
rejection of the measure. For one thing, the issue seemed to pit competing
foreign policy objectives against each other: the Administration's desire to
enhance relations with India after the Soviet drive into Afghanistan, and its
policy of limiting the spread of nuclear weapons.

The Senate, a Pressure Point

The Administration argued that rejecting the shipments would damage
nonproliferation efforts, since it would effectively free India from existing
safeguards on the Tarapur atomic reactor, which the United States has been
pledged to supply since 1963. Most House members, however, continued to regard
the vote as a referendum on the nation's antiproliferation policy. This view,
coupled with disapproval of Indian ties to the Soviet Union and antipathy
towards Indira Gandhi's leadership, led House members to reject the shipments
overwhelmingly.

The Administration wisely decided to concentrate its lobbying in the Senate,
where there are fewer players, and where a former Senator and current Secretary
of State's powers of persuasion could best be used with an ingrained
institutional respect for the President's mandate in foreign affairs.
''Institutionally, the Senate tends to manifest greater respect than the House
for the President's leadership role in foreign policy,'' said William Bader,
staff director of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. ''Unless they strongly
and clearly believe that his policy is wrong, most are reluctant to undermine
his negotiating ability.''

In addition, considerable lobbying, or what Senators call ''communication,''
took place during the vote. Senator Frank Church, chairman of the foreign
relations panel who led supporters of the sale, and Senator John Glenn, Democrat
of Ohio, who led the opposition, lobbied their colleagues for support. In the
final instance, Senator Church's argument prevailed. Given that this was such a
''close question,'' and that disapproval would have weakened his diplomatic
hand, Senator Church argued, ''Isn't the President entitled to the benefit of
the doubt?''

The vote deeply divided Republicans as well as Democrats. The Republican
leadership supported the President; several of the Senate's more prominent
Republicans warned about creating further danger of instability in Southwest
Asia at a time of Soviet expansionism. But many younger Republicans sided with
Mr. Glenn in opposing Mr. Carter.

''There was a degree of cooperation of history in this vote,'' said Senator
Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana. ''Those of us who hadn't been through
disputes over India tended to vote against the shipment; those who have been
around for a while tended to support the President.''

Many Republicans argue that the G.O.P. has been too slow to challenge the
Democratic majority on foreign policy and other issues. And in the case of the
SALT treaty, even Senator Howard Baker, the Republican minority leader, who
sided with the President on Tarapur, has declared that bipartisanship in foreign
policy is a dead letter.

Some political analysts believe that the emergence of the ''new right'' and the
more assertive members of the Republican minority could strain the President's
ability to carry out his foreign policy goals.

However, as Senator Church's remarks suggest, giving the President the benefit
of the doubt is still a respectable position on Capitol Hill.

As the United States enters a more complicated era in international relations, a
new balance may well be struck between Congressional prerogatives and executive
flexibility in foreign affairs. As the India votes indicate, the days of the
imperial Presidency are not likely to be repeated, but neither is Congress
likely to underrate the difficulty of the President's task in creating and
carrying out foreign policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of control room at Tarapur reactor

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
POLITICAL TIGERS;
Political Tigers

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 256 words


We read last week that the Bengal tiger is no longer on the endangered species
list, thanks to India's conservation efforts. That put us in a reverie about the
extinction of the Tammany tiger, which led to a remembrance of William Blake's
big cat.

That thought burned brightly for a while until we recalled a recent interview
Deng Xiaoping had with Oriana Fallaci. The Chinese leader acknowledged that
Peking's ''counter-attack in self-defense'' against Vietnam hadn't gone too well
but, he said, China reserved the right to ''spank the tiger'' and ''give them
another lesson.''

Mr. Deng, of course, is the man who epitomized pragmatism by saying he didn't
care if the cat was black or white, so long as it caught mice. In his talk with
Miss Fallaci he threw in another earthy verdict: those who think a third world
war can be avoided are just shutting their eyes, ''they swallow the toad.''

He bristled at being compared with Nikita Khrushchev, saying such a comparison
was ''a stupidity.'' Yet Khrushchev's earthiness could easily match Deng's. It
was Khrushchev who spoke of a time that would never come as when ''shrimps learn
to whistle.'' And when questioned once about party rule, he replied with a
remark that Jimmy Carter could now appreciate: ''Why ... found another party?
That would be like letting someone put a flea in your shirt.''

And so from reverie back to the real world, where votes are stalked and stripes
are won from atop the donkey and the elephant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ONE-ISSUE VOTING IS OK;
by Dan Herr

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 922 words


Political sins go in and out of fashion; from time to time new ones crop up and
old ones are refurbished. These days it would be hard to find a sin more
spectacularly spotlighted, more vehemently attacked, than ''single-issue
voting.'' From the outraged polemics thundering about us, you might think that
the greatest evil confronting civilization is not Communism, not racism, not
secularism, not even inflation - but rather that old devil, single-issue voting.

Whoever is responsible for first putting those three words in conjuction
deserves to go down in history alongside the immortal wordsmiths who gave us
''planned parenthood,'' ''liberation theology,'' ''pro-life movement,''
''socialized medicine,'' and other similar catch phrases calculated to stop
debate before it begins, or at least to obfuscate the issue so that calm and
rational discussion becomes difficult.

Single-issue voting, as almost everyone should know by now, means judging and
voting for or against a candidate on the basis of one issue rather than many.
Although certainly not new, single-issue voting came into prominence again when
abortion became a political issue. Opponents of abortion urged, sometimes with
success, that politicians in any way favoring pro-abortion legislation should be
defeated at the polls. Vulnerable politicians as well as pro-abortion leaders
quickly reacted and the fight has been on ever since. Most liberals, Catholics
and otherwise, have tended to agree that singleissue voting is wrong, no matter
how they personally feel about abortion. Editors and columnists of all but the
most conservative publications have warned of possible danger to the Republic
and have decried a mentality that could produce such an undemocratic viewpoint.
Recently more fire was added to the controversy when Phillis Schlafly admitted
that she judged politicians on their attitude toward the Equal Rights Amendment.

I am aware that I risk losing my liberal license and possibly even being stoned
to death when I wander into my usual liberal haunts, but I would like to gently
suggest that single-issue voting has been bumrapped and that, despite what you
may have heard and read, a good case can be made for it no matter your political
ideology or your judgment on abortion.

In the 1940's, I interviewed Roy Wilkins of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People for a Saturday Evening Post article. During the
interview, Mr. Wilkins excused himself to take an important phone call which I
could not help but overhear. The caller, a New York State liberal leader, was
organizing a campaign to defeat Congressman Hamilton Fish, the father of the
present Congressman, undoubtedly the most hated (by liberals, that is)
Republican in the state because of his ''reactionary'' views and voting record.
In answer to the plea that the NAACP join the crusade, Wilkins regretfully
declined, explaining that he was aware of the arguments against Fish,
sympathized with the motives of the crusaders, but could not go along with them
because Fish had been fairer to Negroes than most white politicians. The lot of
the Negro was so distressing, Wilkins could not oppose one of the few friends
the Negro had in public life, even though the Congressman might be wrong on
every other question. For Wilkins the battle for racial justice overrode other
considerations. After centuries of discrimination, can blacks be blamed if they
view political parties and politicians primarily from the perspective of civil
rights?

In the 30's, would it have been wrong for a German Jew to vote against the Nazis
- had it been possible - for the sole reason that Hitler hated and threatened to
exterminate the Jewish people? Many American Jews, unable to forget the
holocaust, believe that the continued existence of Israel is critical (not only
for the present and future of the Jewish people but for the peace of the world)
and obviously vote accordingly. During the Vietnam debacle, many Americans -
including some of those who now are most vociferous about single-issue voting -
were convinced that peace made every other issue seem trivial. It is not hard to
imagine a crisis when voters have to decide between doves and hawks in an effort
to choose the lesser of evils: atomic warfare or loss of sovereignty.

Single-issue voting has become a nasty liberal shibboleth - many liberals being
determined proponents of abortion. They find it easier and more effective to
condemn single-issue voting than to become involved in discussing the question.

In other words, I argue that single-issue voting is a perfectly acceptable and
even laudable principle provided the issue involved is of paramount importance.
Sometimes single-issue voting can be shameful, other times imperative. But when
we disagree on its application, let's not condemn what has been and should
continue to be an effective political reaction to a crucial, basic question.

Copyright c 1980 Claretian Publications
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Dan Herr is president of the Thomas More Association. A longer version of this
article will appear in the November issue of U.S.  Catholic magazine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME VIEWS OF ALI-HOLMES FIGHT:SENTIMENT FAVORS ALI

SECTION: Section 5; Page 2, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1458 words


Thursday night in Las Vegas, Nev., Muhammad Ali - 38 years old and idle from
boxing for two years - will attempt to become the first man to win four
heavyweight championships when he challenges Larry Holmes, the World Boxing
Council's undefeated champion.

Holmes, 30 years old, is Ali's one-time sparring partner. He has knocked out
seven straight opponents since capturing the W.B.C. title from Ken Norton June
9, 1978. Still, even during Ali's retirement, Holmes has fought in Ali's shadow,
has been denied the respect and recognition he says he deserves.

Angelo Dundee, Ali's trainer for 19 years, has called Holmes a ''mere
earthling'' when compared with the poet, prognosticator and pugilist who has
hovered over boxing for 20 years. With the bout approaching, The New York Times
solicited opinions from the following people, all less expert than Dundee but
most just as committed to Ali.

GEORGE STEINBRENNER, principal owner of the Yankees - Larry Holmes is going to
win, but he's my pick and not necessarily my choice.  Strictly because of what
he's meant for boxing, I hope for Ali, but if everything goes the way it should
go, I don't think he can overcome the weight or age differential. Look at him.
He's a man who single-handedly brought a sport back to life. He's done more for
boxing than any man and maybe as much as any man in any sport. Boxing was a dead
issue until Muhammad Ali came around and gave it life, flair, attractiveness. He
made boxing. He's responsible for the huge gates, like John Wayne was for the
movies. So many people should thank him for what they're getting today. I'd like
him to win and retire as the only four-time champion, then get the hell out
before he hurts himself.

RONA JAFFE, novelist - I don't read the papers when I'm writing a book. What's
going on? His old sparring partner? I like Ali. I don't want him fighting. I
hate it when he fights these guys and gets hit.  Muhammad Ali should run for
President and Carter and Reagan should fight that sparring partner.

DAVID HALBERSTAM, journalist - Ali is always the sentimental favorite with me
because he is the only high-ranking American who gave up his position in protest
of the Vietnam War. I am committed to him for the rest of his career. I remain
faithful to him despite his tooconsiderable association with Howard Cosell.

THE INCREDIBLE HULK (Lou Ferrigno) - Ali will win because of his magic. Holmes
is a better fighter. Holmes is younger. But Holmes is too caught up in the
magic, and even he doesn't think he can win it.  It will be a good fight, but it
will be a better fight for Ali because he has Holmes so thoroughly hulked-out.

WARNER WOLF, sportscaster - Ali will win because Holmes will punch himself out.
I don't buy the idea that at 38 Ali is too old. Jersey Joe Walcott was 37 1/2
when he won the heavyweight championship.  Archie Moore was 39 when he won the
light-heavyweight championship, and he held the title for years after that. As
far as Ali's layoff goes, except for one, two and three-round exhibition
matches, Joe Louis did not have a fight during a four-year period, June 1942 to
June 1946, and Louis came back and knocked out Billy Conn in their rematch. Look
at it this way, Ali hasn't taken a punch or been damaged in two years. And
Holmes did not look that great in his last five fights against Weaver, Shavers,
Zanon, Leroy Jones and Ledoux.

SENATOR JACOB JAVITS - I identify with Ali. He knows how to fight because of his
experience and should be able to do to Holmes as I hope to do on Election Day.
You've got to go with age and experience.

DAVE SCHWARTZ, Owner of Rent-A-Wreck car-rental franchises - It's the easiest
fight of all time to pick, a total no-thinker. Ali has no chance at all. I'd bet
my life on it. You can't stay away two years and come back. Joe Louis came back
and got killed. Jack Johnson came back and got killed. Ali is definitely my hero
in life, but anyone he would fight that's halfway decent, he'd lose to. He had
to do everything in his power to win the second Leon Spinks fight, and Holmes is
a hundred times better than Spinks, a thousand times better, and Ali is two
years older and two years fatter. He's just going in for the bucks, that's all.
For $8 million, I'd get in there, too. I'm a positive thinker and I don't want
to think about him getting hurt. He's a tough guy; he can take it, but I'd
rather see him go out with one shot than get pummeled.

MAYOR KOCH - So long as Muhammad Ali is in the ring, I'm his supporter. I'm
going to be betting on him when he's 60.  LUCIANO PAVAROTTI, Metropolitan Opera
tenor - I have not heard of Larry Holmes because you have this divided
championship in your country. I am so old that I began with Joe Louis and Jersey
Joe Walcott and Ray Sugar Robinson (I know that sounds funny, but that's what he
was called in Italy). And, of course, I know about Muhammad Ali. I know about
all the champions.

PLACIDO DOMINGO, Metropolitan Opera tenor - I have been called by many the
heavyweight opera star of the world; therefore Muhammad Ali and I have something
in common, except for the fact that when he's successful, the other guy in the
ring is on the floor, and when I'm successful everyone is on their feet. I think
Ali will regain the title for a record fourth time because he has always had the
ability to put his fist where his mouth is. When necessary, he has always been
able to outlast the bad times and had the ability to bounce back when everyone
else would have remained defeated. That has made him a truly great athlete.

JANET GUTHRIE, race-car driver - I haven't the foggiest idea who Ali is
fighting, so I wouldn't want to make a selection, but there are a number of
things to say about Ali. He is more than just a fighter. He's a person who made
a significant impact on our time and was a hero for blacks. From personal
experience, I would say he engages one's sympathies because, at his age and with
all he's accomplished, he shows how terribly hard it is to give up something
that one loves.

SY SYMS, owner of Syms discount clothing stores - I followed boxing from the
days of Joe Louis and Benny Leonard, though some interest was lost in the 50's
and 60's. My personal opinion is that Muhammad Ali is going to be a winner. I
understand he's an underdog, but the fact that he has lost 20 or 25 pounds is in
his favor. This will be his fourth time coming back and his fourth time as
champion, and I think he's going to do it.

CARL SAGAN, astronomer and author - Ali took an extremely courageous stand at
the time of the Vietnam War, and I certainly admired that. I'm also all for
people who are not supposed to be doing things and are doing them, people who
are past their so-called prime. On the other hand, I'd hate to see him injured.

GEORGE GALLUP, pollster - I'm a sports fan, but I really don't know enough about
it. I would have to study the situation, the fighters and their previous
records, to make a prediction.

WILLIS REED, former center and coach of the Knicks - My favorite is Ali. In my
opinion, he's the best fighter ever. For a guy his size to be able to move the
way he does, and to lose four years out of his career and do what he's done, I
have to respect him. He has pride and belief in certain things. He stood up as a
concientious objector and lost a lot of good years of his fight life. I think
he's fighting a very good fighter in Holmes, and, if he does this, there will be
no question in anybody's mind about his being the all-time greatest. If he
survives, it would be phenomenal. I just hope that then he'll give it up because
he's at the point where he could possibly get himself hurt.

GARY TRUDEAU, creator of Doonesbury - I haven't gone on the record about
anything in years, and this hardly seems like the occasion to break my vow of
silence.

LEROY NEIMAN, sports artist -I've known both of these guys their whole careers,
and I hate to alienate one or the other, but I'll take Ali. A great older
fighter in shape - and he's only 38, not 45 - fighting a good younger fighter,
the great older fighter should win.  When the occasion is big, the man who can
measure up to the occasion usually wins, as Duran did in Montreal. Ali is an
occasion man. He gets better when a lot of people are watching him.

GERALD WASSERBERG, professor of geochemistry at Cal Tech in Pasadena - What
fight?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WINDS OF CHANGE ON MORNINGSIDE HEIGHTS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5544 words


Edward B. Fiske is education editor of The Times. By Edward B. Fiske olumbia
University has always thought of itself primarily as a national, indeed an
international, institution, but to a large degree its fortunes, good and bad,
have been shaped by its physical presence in New York City. Largely because it
lies only a taxi ride away from the headquarters of the national media, it was a
virtual symbol of the student unrest of the 1960's. Like the city, it suffered
through Johnny Carson's jokes about muggers in Central Park and breathed a
collective sigh of relief when he moved West. And both the university and the
city underwent financial crises in the 70's that represented some of the worst
moments of their respective histories.

This afternoon, Michael I. Sovern, 48, will be inaugurated as the 17th president
of the university, succeeding William J. McGill, and the prevailing mood at
Morningside Heights is that Columbia, in the 80's, will begin to re-emerge as
imposing national landmark it once was. This notion, too, is tied to feelings
about New York. ''You've got to admit that Mike is lucky,'' says Benno C.
Schmidt Jr., a colleague on the law-school faculty. ''He became dean of the law
school at the beginning of a decade of unparalleled demand for legal education.
Now he's becoming president at a time when the city is becoming the place of
choice for a lot of young academics and their spouses of very high ability. It's
not the usual university company town.'' Mr. Sovern puts it somewhat
differently: ''New York City is now what Paris was in the 20's - the art capital
and, by the standards of any other major capital, a cheap place to live.''

But for all of this growing optimism, the university must solve some monumental
problems before the old Columbia lion roars again with its full power and
resonance. Many of these problems are similar to those now facing the 50 or so
major research universities across the United States. Like the auto makers and
other large corporations, the major research universities are at a point where
they must ''reindustrialize'' -updating both their equipment and their human
resources - to remain competitive. Now that Federal research funds are no longer
flowing as profusely as in the past, they must find new sources of capital to
finance this modernization.

Columbia's own troubles stem, in part, from the student disruptions of the
recent past, but the difficulties also have had their origins in a long legacy
of weak administration. Through most of the 1970's, Columbia was widely regarded
as the worst-managed university in the Ivy League. From 1967 to 1979, the
university ran up accumulated deficits of $87.2 million, of which $49.7
FIRST JUMP
million was taken from endowment funds. (Colleges and universities normally try
to leave endowment funds untouched so as not to reduce the income they produce.)
It took William McGill, who took over in 1970, nearly his entire decade on the
job to gain control over most of the managerial and financial problems. He has
left it to Mr.  Sovern to wrestle with the challenge of academic
reindustrialization.  Perhaps foremost in the vast array of urgent tasks now
facing America's major research universities is the need to take a close look at
their undergraduates and the quality of undergraduate life.  Columbia's problems
here are at once worse and less severe than elsewhere.

Universities are rediscovering their undergraduates now because, for one thing,
their graduate-student enrollment is declining with the worsening prospects for
college teaching and the shrinking of Federal fellowships. ''Faculty members are
learning that their future well-being depends as much on how attractive they
will be to undergraduates as it used to be on how attactive they were to
graduate students,'' Robert M. Rosenzweig, vice president for public affairs of
Stanford University, says. Another reason for the new emphasis being placed on
undergraduates is that they tend to develop stronger loyalties than graduate
students and are more likely to make financial contributions later in life. Law
schools don't field football teams.

Columbia College - with 2,700 students, it is the smallest of the Ivy League
undergraduate colleges - is part of one of the few universities where senior
faculty members never really ceased to take pride in the fact that they teach
undergraduates. But the administration has not always shown the same enthusiasm.
Nicholas Murray Butler, the strong-willed president whose views and personality
dominated Columbia from 1902 to 1945, frankly disliked undergraduate education,
believing that four years of it promoted moral weakness by postponing the day
when students would go out and earn a living. William McGill used to relish
periodic ''Bull with Bill'' sessions with students in the dormitories, but his
primary interests were graduate and professional students, not undergraduates
and the liberal arts.

For whatever reason, Columbia has neglected undergraduate amenities to a degree
that would have been unthinkable at, say, Princeton or Yale. The dormitories are
run down, and Ferris Booth Hall, the student center, is a dreary, uninviting
place. But the university has now begun to renovate the dormitories one by one -
including John Jay, which was built 45 years ago as a ''temporary'' structure
-and it is putting in a student cafe.

Ironically, a factor frequently cited in the past as a drawback to Columbia
undergraduate life is the one now seen, as Benno Schmidt pointed out, to be an
advantage - the urban setting. Lawrence J.  Momo, the associate director of
admissions, said, ''The turnaround began in 1976, when the Democrats first came
here for their convention. There was also Operation Sail. The city looked good,
and the exporting of the 'I Love New York' campaign by the state Chamber of
Commerce helped, and so does having 'Saturday Night Live' here. A lot of
high-school students watch that.''

University officials also claim, on the basis of crime statistics that the big
institutions share with each other on a confidential basis, that Columbia
actually has one of the safest of the Ivy League campuses. Columbia's
financial-aid office, an increasingly crucial part of any undergraduate
structure, is regarded as firstrate.

Coeducation is an unresolved problem. Columbia has been in a running battle with
Barnard College, the women's institution across the street, over how independent
Barnard is or should be. The two institutions have cross-registration, but
Columbia students, during the first year or so, are required to enroll in
courses that Barnard students do not have to take. So in fact, during that time,
there is little co-education - which is a source of complaint among freshmen.
Barnard students were given suites on one floor of Carman Hall, the freshman
dorm know as the Cinderblock Hotel, but further attempts to integrate housing
were blocked when Jacquelyn A. Mattfeld, the recently ousted president of
Barnard, took the view that letting in men would, as she put it, ''violate''
Barnard's freshman dormitory.

The academic quality of the students remains high - 62 percent of last year's
freshmen were in the top 10th of their high-school class, the same percent as in
1970 -though substantial numbers are at Columbia only because they did not make
it into Harvard, Yale or Princeton. Some of these become converts once they
arrive. Darius Sollowhud, for example, a 19-year-old sophomore from Irvington,
N.J., was turned down at Dartmouth and Cornell and came to Columbia to build up
his grade-point average so that he could transfer. ''But I fell in love with the
place,'' he commented as he sat in the John Jay dining hall. ''New York City is
a unique place where people will pay exorbitant rates for what would be slums
elsewhere - but there's never a boring moment.'' Mike Calabrese, another
19-year-old sophomore, from Newark, said that the academic atmosphere inspired
him. ''You look up at the names on the buildings - Virgil and all - and you feel
in a kind of humble sense that you are part of a great tradition of learning and
thought. You get a great sense of privilege.'' Such positive reactions as these
have no doubt led to Columbia's applications having risen consistently since
1976, reversing a downward trend.

Columbia has been spared the need to join other research universities in
returning to a basic, more traditional liberal-arts undergraduate curriculum,
because its general-education offerings, anchored by the famous two-term course
in contemporary civilization, remained unchanged for the most part during the
60's, when Harvard and other universities were succumbing to student demands for
more freedom and a cafeteria approach to learning.  If the curriculum remains
sound, the quality of the arts and sciences faculty as well as the facilities at
Columbia has been hit by a barrage of self-criticism.

Nicholas Murray Butler, who made no bones about his infatuation with the
graduate-oriented German research university, thought of Columbia as an
institution that would be superb in every field. With giants such as Richard
Hofstadter in history, Franz L. Neumann in political science and Robert K.
Merton and Paul F. Lazarsfeld in sociology, Columbia managed to live up to this
ideal well into the 60's.

This is no longer possible, if only because of increased competition. ''Forty
years ago, Columbia was generally perceived to be one of the very few
distinguished universities in the United States,'' observed the Marcus Report, a
remarkably candid analysis of the arts and science departments issued last
spring by a commission made up of 19 faculty members. ''Today it is one of a
larger number of universities in the first rank.'' In 1951, Columbia awarded one
out of every eight doctoral degrees in the humanities and social sciences in the
country. By 1976, its share had fallen to less than one in 40.

In some departments, standards dropped. In the social sciences, the Marcus
Commission acknowledged, ''we have fallen. The evidence is unambiguous, and
candor compels us to acknowledge that we no longer occupy a positon of distinct
pre-eminence.'' Columbia still has its ''stars, its nationally and
internationally prominent scholars,'' the study continued, ''but the cadre of
the supremely talented has become thin.'' Specifically, the report stated that
Columbia has failed to keep pace with the quantitative research that now
dominates most of the social sciences. ''As a result, relatively few social
scientists at Columbia seem to be on the leading edge of quantitative and
computer-based research.'' It added that the linguistics department has failed
to keep pace with the dazzling changes in that area. The English department,
though still strong, has seen the number of Ph.D.'s drop from 60 to 25 a year,
and now has ''fewer faculty members with high public visibility in the tradition
of Brander Matthews, Carl and Mark Van Doren, Joseph Wood Krutch and Lionel
Trilling.''
SECOND JUMP

The report reserved its most trenchant criticism for the language departments,
with the exception of French. The German department, it said, mirrors the
''parochial'' orientation of the field as a whole, and its comments on the
Italian department were brutal: ''...  apparently lacking intellectual energy
and initiative, it seems content to play a quiet role on the margins of the
humanities.'' Since the report came out, the anthropology department, bitterly
divided by personal and academic squabbles, has been placed in a kind of
academic ''receivership'' until a committee of senior academics can figure out
what to do with it.

By contrast, the Marcus Commission found the French department ''staffed by an
exceptional team of younger individuals'' and rivaled only by Johns Hopkins and
Yale. Columbia's math and science departments also remain among the best in the
country, as are the professional schools, such as those of law, business and
medicine. It must be said, too, that the very fact Columbia could bring itself
to publish such a document as the Marcus Report is a tribute to its underlying
strength and is evidence of its determination to reestablish its place as a
premier academic institution.

The university has been attempting to shore up the faculty, in part, by seeking
out academic ''stars'' instead of relying on the traditional but slower method
of promoting from the ranks. Robert Wasserstrom, an assistant professor of
anthropology, speaks for much of the untenured faculty when he charges that
Columbia overused the ''revolving door,'' hiring teachers in the buyer's market
of the last decade. ''People were hired at lower ranks and then let go under the
assumption that Columbia was doing someone a favor to let them come and teach
here for five to eight years. As a result, department after department is heavy
at the top and light at the bottom - with nothing in the middle. Columbia is
missing the people in the 35- to 50-year-old range who are just hitting their
stride.''

A basic recommendation of the Marcus Report was that Columbia, which has long
had a far higher percentage of its faculty resources committed to the humanities
(about half) than any other research university, should shift some of that
emphasis toward the sciences better to reflect the realities of the market
place. The idea has been met with general campus acceptance, in part because the
report itself bore the name of Steven Marcus of the English department, who is
perhaps the university's most distinguished humanist. Noting that no university
can continue to dominate all fields, the commission called for a policy of
selective excellence, urging Columbia to ''do only what it can do
superlatively.''

The new president was asked in an interview what he plans to do about the Marcus
Report, but he did not tip his hand. ''We'll be having a series of meetings with
the faculty,'' he said, ''and then we'll make our decisions.'' In a sense, it is
not hard to understand what happened to Columbia. At the height of the student
unrest in 1968, vice president David B.  Truman said that the issue was
''whether the university will be conducted in an orderly manner or whether it
will be torn apart.'' He was not uttering hyperbole. Every morning, Andrew W.
Cordier, the dean of the School of International Affairs, who succeeded the
embattered Grayson L. Kirk in 1968 as president, would assemble his top
administrators at 8 in the paneled trustees' room of Low Library for what came
to be known as the ''Dawn Patrol.'' A top financial aid might be assigned to
stand outside an occupied building and make a list of who went in and out. The
goal, simply, was to figure out how to get through the day.

The institution was plunged into fiscal and administrative chaos.  W. Bruce
Bassett, whom Mr. McGill brought in early on as vice president for fiscal
management, says the situation had become so bad that Columbia was losing $1.5
million a year simply because it could not even keep up with requests for
reimbursements on Federally backed research. And when Columbia-Presbyterian
Medical Center sent the university a $1 million bill for building an extension
to the nurses' residence, no one could find any record of who had authorized the
project.

The university had first gone into serious debt in 1966-67, and by 1970, when
Mr. McGill took over, it had roared through $32 million of deficits. Budgeting
was a nightmare. Around Christmas, the administration would decide on a salary
increase for the faculty; then, sometime in the spring, independently set the
tuition level.  One of Mr. Bassetts's priorities was to begin estimating income
before making decisions on expenditures. But Columbia used up $55 million more
before the budget was finally balanced in the last fiscal year. The trustees had
been agreeing to take money from endowment funds out of fear that drastic budget
cuts would exacerbate the unrest among the faculty and lead to a wholesale
exodus. ''The one thing uppermost in our minds was to maintain the academic
excellence of Columbia,'' recalled Arthur B. Krim, the current chairman of the
board of trustees. ''Otherwise, we would be destroying what the university stood
for.'' He emphasized, too, that despite the financial drain the overall size of
the endowment continued to grow because of new gifts.

One of the things that delayed Mr. McGill's five-year plan to balance the budget
was the 1974 Arab oil embargo, which added $5 million to the fuel bill. After
eventually ironing out the budgetary mess -the current operating budget of $340
million is now in balance - Mr. McGill turned his sights to administrative
problems.

The university had traditionally been run as a kind of federation of little
duchies. ''We flowered under mismanagement,'' commented the historian Henry
Graff about the old days of the 40's and early 50's. But as the need grew to
deal with Washington and other external forces, the lack of central authority
took its toll. The university was not well served by Dwight D. Eisenhower, whose
principal achievement as Columbia's president before going off to become
President of the United States was to use his enormous international prestige -
and this is what it took - to force city officials to cut off traffic on 116th
Street between Broadway and Amsterdam Avenue.

Mr. McGill's first attempts to form an effective new team were not successful.
Some of his first appointees couldn't stand each other - the whole academic side
of Low Library barely talked to the business side. But, eventually, he did build
a solid group whose members included Anthony D. Knerr, a former vice chancellor
of City University who had helped his alma mater, Yale, clear up its own
financial mess, and Michael Sovern, who was made provost. Accounting and
budgeting systems were computerized and further improved and fund-raising
programs were expanded; on recommendation of a group of deans of the various
schools, for example, a system was initiated that gives them more incentive to
raise outside funds on their own.  As if Columbia's own troubles have not been
enough, it now shares severe problems with the nation's other major
universities. Much attention is being given to the fact that American industry
has been living off its past, one marked by cheap energy and plentiful natural
resources. The academic equivalent of this is the gush of Federal funds that
began shortly after World War II and continued up through the late 1960's.
During that time, Federal support for university-based research rose to $2
billion and came to represent 70 percent of the support for such work. Most of
this went to the sciences, but funds for the social sciences and humanities were
also plentiful.

Cutbacks began under President Johnson, who needed the funds to finance the war
in Vietnam, and continued under the Nixon Administration, which was suspicious
of universities to begin with.  The trend was intensified by student radicals,
who protested that collaboration with the Defense Department was immoral.

Since 1968, Federal investment in university research has remained fairly
constant in real dollars, but this is clearly inadequate from the unversities'
viewpoint, given the realities brought on by inflation and the rapid pace of
technological and scientific change.  ''In the sciences and engineering, the
best universities are operating with increasingly obsolete research
facilities,'' observed Robert Rosenzweig of Stanford, who is directing a study
of the subject for the Association of American Univerities. ''Much of the
equipment came with the buildings, which means that it is 15 or 20 years old.
Moreover, it is no longer fashionable to put money into equipment and
instruments. It is supposed to go to people.''
THIRD JUMP

New equipment in areas such as high-energy physics has become so expensive that
any single insitution cannot afford it, so the trend is toward consortia of
university and independent research centers such as the Brookhaven Laboratories.
Five such consortia, for example, are now bidding for the right to build a
management institute for a satellite telescope that will virtually define the
next 25 years of astrophysics. But the problems can also be seen in less
romantic fields. Biology and chemistry have reached the point where they are
heavily dependent on techniques developed by the physicists. ''It sounds
brutal,'' said Steven Muller, the president of Johns Hopkins, ''but we may have
reached the point where no biology department can be considered first-rate if it
does not have an electron microscope.'' An electron microscope costs about
$100,000.

Libraries are another area where Columbia and other major universities must
''reindustrialize.'' Columbia now puts $10 million a year into its system of 26
libraries, but the costs not only of acquiring scholarly books at as much as $85
apiece but also of storing them in space as precious as that on Morningside
Heights is forcing a new style of operation. The university is investing in a
computerized card index and working with 21 other major research libraries
across the country to find ways of sharing expenses and assigning areas of
concentration.  Columbia and the other big research universities also face what
they call the human-resources problem - that is, trying to hold onto enough
top-flight graduate students and faculty members. Thomas Bartlett of the
Association of American Universities notes that, contrary to popular belief, the
United States is not awash with Ph.D.'s driving taxicabs. ''That's true if you
are talking about French literature - but not if you mean clinical investigators
in medicine, engineering or other areas. Most of the fields relating to energy
are shortage areas for people.'' In 1978-79, American universities turned out
326 Ph.D.'s in computer science. But the demand is for 1,300 annually.

One reason for the shortage is that, in fields like engineering and computer
science, where new graduates going into industry can often match their
professors' salaries, it is difficult to retain graduate students, much less
faculty members. ''The master's graduate is not likely to go on for a doctorate,
and those who do can name their price,'' said Mr. Sovern. ''So you worry about
developing first-class faculties to train these people. There is the risk that
industry will eat its own young by buying out the very people you need to keep
the flow going. It is a very serious problem for everybody.'' In the humanities,
the discouraging college-teaching situation has dissuaded some of the best
candidates from starting out on the difficult road to a doctorate.  For
universities as well as industry, the need to ''reindustrialize'' means that
they must seek massive new infusions of capital. Virtually every elite private
university has conducted a major development drive in the last few years.
Stanford raised $304 million, and Yale reported raising a whopping $374 million.
Harvard is setting out to raise $250 million, and Columbia is planning a drive
for $300 million to $400 million.

But traditional sources, such as alumni, are no longer adequate for the demands
of the 1980's. With Federal funds no longer growing and private philanthropy no
longer able to carry the burden it once did, the major research universities are
turning to the one likely source on the horizon: the major corporations.

There is a certain irony here, given the scorn that was leveled at large
corporations during the 60's. Recently, for example, chemical corporations met
with a group of chemists and chemical engineers to work out new ways of
cooperation. The site was the Midland, Mich., headquarters of Dow Chemical, the
hated manufactureres of napalm during the Vietnam War. Corporations have often
given money to universities as gestures of good will. Columbia, for instance, is
getting $650,000 over five years from I.B.M. for development of a new
computer-science department. Recently, however, universities and corporations
have begun joint research ventures in which they will share in the long-range
profits. Exxon has joined Massachusetts Institute of Technology for basic
research in the area of combustion, and Harvard has major contracts with
Monsanto. The practice does raise ethical questions of whether the purity of
academic research cannot be compromised by commercial exploitation. If the paths
of the pursuit of knowledge and pursuit of profit don't always coincide, which
path will be taken? The universities have not really answered the question.
Harold Shapiro, the new president of the University of Michigan, notes that
corporations are often rightly reluctant to publish their research, but
''universities are open institutions where the results are there for anyone to
see.''

Columbia has not yet moved heavily into this area, but Michael Sovern says that
he is exploring the possibility. ''What you're seeing is the
institutionalization of individual genius,'' he says.  ''FM radio was invented
by Columbia by Edwin H. Armstrong, but the patents and profits were his -not
Columbia's.'' Mr. Sovern also raises the possibility of taking some consulting
business away from places like the Rand Corporation. ''We might say to a
professor that we'll guarantee him the $50,000 he might make above and beyond
his regular salary if he will agree to answer the questions that come to us from
the outside,'' he said.

Unlike some of his new colleagues, Mr. Sovern believes that the universities'
ultimate source of new capital is the Federal Government. The belief is based on
the notion that it is in the Government's own economic self-interest to help
promote essential long-term research. The United States has in the past tended
to put most of its research money into projects related to national defense. By
contrast, Japan, Germany and other major industrial nations have had a policy of
sharing research and development costs with industry in commercially applicable
fields such as computer technology, steel and mass transportation. In recent
years, especially since the Nixon Administration, there has been a tendency to
''target'' research in areas where one can expect quick results. And industry
has compounded the resulting problems, often rapidly replacing its own chief
executives, judging them by their short-term achievements. With the United
States facing increasingly stiff competition in international trade, the
adequacy of this approach must be questioned.

The Association of American Universities is vigorously supporting legislation in
Congress that would provide increased tax incentives to corporations that
promote basic research. The Carter Administration has shown indications that it
understands the importance of helping subsidize basic research, and Federal
policy has begun shifting slightly. But such a change itself poses new
challenges. Columbia is in the process of investing $450,000 in a new accounting
system to meet requirements designed to insure that funds granted for specific
programs do not end up subsidizing general academic purposes. This is fine,
except that the procedures designed to measure indirect costs in an industrial
setting are not readily applicable to an academic one. The classic case is that
of the surgeon performing an operation before a group of future physicians in a
medical school. How much of what he and his colleagues do is direct medical
care, how much teaching and how much medical research? Robert Rosenzweig of
Stanford argues that the new requirements will create ''a generation of liars''
on university faculties. ''People will attest to what they are required to
attest to without knowing or caring whether it is true,'' he says. ''It's a
spurious kind of accountability.''

Another problem is the erratic nature of Federal priorities.  ''Five years ago
Washington was offering incentives to medical schools,'' said Mr. Sovern. ''Now
we're told that there's an expected surplus in physicians and so we're going to
concentrate on energy and defense. But you don't just trot out 25 percent more
medical researchers. In terms of the new priorities, we are in good shape.  We
have a nuclear-engineering department and an energy-research center, and we will
obviously seek to participate. But we're not geared to a multimillion-dollar
level of operation, and, once we have adapted to the energy commitment two years
from now, will somebody then decide, 'Well, that's enough for energy?' ''
Michael Sovern, the person who is being called upon to lead Columbia into the
new ''reindustrialization'' era, is a friendly, outgoing academic with an
informal manner and keen wit. A full professor at 28, the youngest in the modern
history of the university, Mr. Sovern has the kind of legal mind that, as his
colleague on the law faculty Walter Gellhorn puts it, can ''grasp the other
fellow's point of view without losing grip on his own.'' His field of
scholarship is labor law, and he earned a national reputation as a mediator who
helped settle several New York City transit strikes. But he is also that rarity
in academia, a scholar who proved, as Columbia provost and law-school dean, that
he is a first-rate administrator and finance man - a combination that is
increasingly crucial for universities.

William McGill, his precedessor, was a ''crisis manager - brash,
confrontational, supremely self-confident,'' observed Chris Wellenz.  ''He was
the man to pull Columbia out of the abyss. His job was to quell the student
revolt, streamline the school, modernize it and bring it out of the
administrative dark ages. He did this. Sovern's task is to fine-tune it, to run
it as smoothly, quietly and efficiently as a lawyer of his abilities undoubtedly
can. McGill was exhilarated by conflict and thrived on face-to-face
confrontation.  Sovern is a mediator, conciliator and listener - qualities which
undoubtedly stem from his experience in labor law. Sovern seems very much to be
the embodiment of the modern Columbia, the more coolly professional
institution.''

Perhaps most important, Michael Sovern seems to operate easily on many levels.
His wife, Joan, a sculptor, observes, ''We can be at some fancy gathering to
which people have scrambled madly to get invited, and if the food isn't that
good we will leave early and go out for an ice-cream cone. Mike is just as happy
in either setting.'' Partly as a result of his mediation efforts over the last
decade, Mr. Sovern is well acquainted with centers of power both in City Hall
and in Washington. The latter will be important, because he will have to share
the role of public spokesman for higher education. ''Bill (McGill) made a
conscious priority choice that he would not spend time holding up Columbia's
weight on lobbying,'' said one senior administrator. ''Some of the other Ivy
League presidents resented this, but that's the way it was. This will have to
change.''

Lots of things will have to change at Columbia in the coming decade, but, for
the first time in a long time, there seems to be optimism that most of the
changes will be for the better, and the consensus is that Michael Sovern is the
right person to bring them about.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Michael Sovern

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A FRENCHMAN SAYS NO TO MARX

BYLINE: By WERNER J. DANNHAUSER; Werner J. Dannhauser is professor of government
at Cornell University and author of ''Nietzsche's View of Socrates.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words


THE MASTER THINKERS By Andre Glucksmann.  Translated by Brian Pearce.  313 pp.
New York: Harper & Row. $16.95.

FOR the past few years the most sensational news on France's intellectual scene,
which is hardly ever without a current sensation, has been made by a group of
young men known as the ''new philosophers'' by virtue of their vehement
repudiation of the Marxism they had once found enthralling. They received
recognition for forthrightly facing the connection between Communist theory and
the Gulag Archipelago, and their reputation for intellectual integrity was
enhanced by their steadfast refusal to exchange a love of the Right for the Left
they had abandoned. Bernard-Henri Levy's ''Barbarism With a Human Face'' was the
first product of this new trend to be made available to the considerable number
of Americans who are constant admirers of every turn of French thought. Now
Andre Glucksmann, one of the founding fathers of the ''new philosophy,'' makes
his appearance in English, complementing Mr. Levy's polemic with an attempt to
provide the philosophical matrix and justification for the latest Parisian
vogue.

Unfortunately, the volume does not travel all that well across the sea,
notwithstanding its skillful translation. It begins by contrasting the perfidies
of the Master Thinkers with the earthy, moderate humaneness of Rabelais, who is
little read on these shores, and it concludes with a disquisition on the
intricate sequence of events after the French Revolution of 1789, a historical
period about which most Americans are regrettably ignorant.

Nevertheless, the book's main message comes across loud and clear to the
attentive reader; it is a convoluted work but not an especially subtle one.
According to Mr. Glucksmann, the Master Thinkers are the enemies as well as
destroyers of human freedom. The core of this nefarious group includes Fichte,
Hegel, Marx and Nietzsche, though such figures as Descartes, as an ominous
predecessor, and Althusser, as a dangerous apologist, also come in for their
share of blame.

For those who wonder what such diverse thinkers could possibly have in common,
Mr. Glucksmann draws up a lengthy indictment, articulating a cluster of
similarities that connect them. Hell-bent on dogmatic certainty, they find the
Socratic profession of ignorance ''impossible.'' As determined universalists
they are all either conscious (Fichte and Marx) or unconscious (Hegel and
Nietzsche) anti-Semites; Jews, forever particularistic and radically different
from the mainstream, present a stumbling block to all total solutions to the
human problem as such.

It is their insistence on solving all difficulties, on tidying up the whole
world, that makes the Master Thinkers sinister. Of course, their dream of doing
so by the sheer power of positive thinking - ''to conceive is to dominate'' is
one of the book's refrains - might seem to render them ridiculous, but they knew
how to turn their dreams into deeds by hoodwinking the world into acting out
their wildest visions. All of them sought to rectify whatever was wrong in the
world - a great deal. To usher in their brave new worlds they relied on an
awesomely efficient science and an awesomely omnipotent state. According to Mr.
Glucksmann, even the severe critics of the state among them, such as Marx and
Nietzsche, are secret statists.

All of them imposed, or tried to impose, their individual wills on the world,
and when reality proved to be rather more recalcitrant than they had expected,
they all became philosophers of the future.  Each went through the ritual of
denouncing his predecessors; each extolled creativity; each found the existence
of God an affront to his ego, for each insisted on playing God. ''When God died,
he had been replaced long before by a double.''

Because of these affinities, Nietzsche proves to be the most typical of the
Master Thinkers (though Marx might be the most hideously successful). By
proclaiming the death of God from the rooftops and describing philosophy as the
most spiritualized form of the will to power, Nietzsche was merely letting the
cat out of the bag, making public the secret thrust and motive force of the
thinking of all the others.

Much of the above analysis compels assent and some of it compels admiration. At
his best Mr. Glucksmann forces one to reconsider the most cherished foundations
of modernity - such as the collapse of the traditional distinction between
theory and practice -and question them in a sober, sobering spirit. Moreover he
encourages a revived discussion of abiding issues that have for too long been
presumed to be settled, for example, the extent to which we can be the masters
and possessors of nature.

Yet this is also a deeply flawed book, in part because it is so uneven. Mr.
Glucksmann can be dazzling on Marx, even when he is being unfair, but he is
usually no more than superficial on Hegel and Nietzsche. Always clever, he is
often too clever by half, and his tacit insistence on being more sagacious than
any philosopher he discusses becomes ever more irritating.

In the last analysis, Mr. Glucksmann is undone by his own unwarranted arrogance.
He comes to delude himself into thinking that he is judging modernity from an
Olympian vantage point he has simply failed to attain. Looking at recent history
from an altogether illusory height, he refuses to see any difference between
American misdeeds in Vietnam and what happened at Auschwitz. Paradoxically, he
comes close to exonerating everyone by finding all equally guilty. Thus Germany
can in no serious way be held responsible for the problematic course of its
intellectual history, since ''the world of today is 'Germany,' '' and even
Nazism seems little more than modernity writ large.

Painting with so broad a brush, Mr. Glucksmann ironically demonstrates that he
has within himself more than a few of the traits of the very Master Thinkers he
deplores. An enemy of the apocalyptic strain in modern thought, he is constantly
issuing apocalyptic pronouncements. More brilliant than profound, his style
resembles that of 19th-century men of letters. And, like Nietzsche, he seems
constantly tempted to philosophize with a hammer, even when a scalpel would be
more appropriate.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOUGH CHARACTERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words


BERLIN BLIND By Alan Scholefield.  196 pp. New York: William Morrow & Co. $8.95.

THE BLUE GUITAR By Nicholas Hasluck.  206 pp. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston. $11.95.
DAY OF WRATH By William J. Coughlin.  346 pp. New York: Delacorte Press. $9.95.


By JEFFREY BURKE

IVEN the ubiquity of Nazi Germany in thrillers, Alan Scholefield deserves at
least as much credit for reworking such material to good effect as he does for
supplying an excellent addition to the genre. To avenge the murder of his
pregnant wife, John Spencer, a successful British businessman, tracks a group of
terrorists to their leader in presentday Berlin, Bruno Guttman. In a gem of
complication, Mr.  Scholefield establishes historical and psychological ties
between Spencer and Bruno, while the narrative shifts back and forth between
Spencer's wartime memories and his desperate hunt. Aiding the hunter and
abetting an already complex plot is a young woman who may be a journalist, a
police agent, a member of Bruno's gang or something else again.

Such a brief summary does not do justice to the narrative detail Mr. Scholefield
crowds into his novel. To cite a few of the numerous self-contained vignettes:
Spencer as a teen-ager with a Black Shirt father in wartime London; his brief
tenure as a 16-year-old P.O.W.  who writes letters for the illiterate and fights
off a randy bunkmate; and a horrible scene in which Spencer and an old woman are
trapped under the rubble of a bombed building, their cries for help answered
alternately by a ravenous wolf escaped from a zoo and Bruno, who happens along
while scavenging for gold teeth and rings.

One troublesome point deserves mention. Running throughout ''Berlin Blind'' is
the implication, mostly tacit but at times explicit, that his wife's death
represents some deserved punishment for Spencer's nominal disloyalty to England
during the war. On the surface, that belief is psychologically valid for a man
torn by the immediate trauma. But Spencer and Mr.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Jeffrey Burke is a freelance writer living in New York.
Scholefield seem to derive a disproportionately large burden of guilt from the
desperate action of a frightened 16-year-old. The point, however, unlike the
author's achievement, is minor.

*

During several days in the 34th year of his life in Australia, Dyson Garrick
loses his mistress, steals money from his wife, runs afoul of a bureaucratic
harpy, confronts a $15,000 debt, gets drunk and drives recklessly, bails a
stranger out of jail and makes a fool of himself in front of his business
acquaintances. A self-styled ''promoter and developer,'' Garrick starts out as
an older Duddy Kravitz and ends as a younger Willy Loman, and that skillful
evolution of character, combined with a sort of De Vriesian frenzy, elevates
''The Blue Guitar'' above the vast and average plain.

Garrick takes on projects, lending them his resourcefulness and brash,
fast-talking enthusiasm. His current effort involves financing the production of
a guitar that cleverly plays cassette-recorded music when fingered and strummed.
A boon for the talentless, for group sing-alongs and for any homely get-together
that needs enlivening - or so thinks Garrick. In short, a sure thing. In fact,
as backers back off and one small crisis follows another in his hectic life,
Garrick clings to what is at best a limited-market gimmick and yet the only
thing he's sure of - his implausible blue guitar. When it finally falls short of
his expectations, he has to compromise his integrity just to stay afloat: to pay
off his debt and look to the next project, the next sure thing.

Nicholas Hasluck, an Australian writer whose first novel was ''Quarantine,''
tells a lively story while sustaining an undertone of growing desperation. He
invests Garrick with more than enough energy and optimism to prevent his being
trampled by adversity - he is no mere victim - but just enough to prevent him
from ever taking a much-needed look at himself. As the man with the blue guitar
- to second the title's allusion to the Wallace Stevens poem - Garrick does not
see things as they are. Mr. Hasluck's character study is entertaining and
insightful.

*

As a Federal judge and a former prosecuting attorney in Detroit, William J.
Coughlin brings practical experience to a novel centered on corruption in a
big-city criminal court system. And when that novel concerns a plot by the
''World Liberation Army'' to hold 11 judges hostage in order to free two
comrades from prison and fly off in a B-52 bomber to Colonel Fasid of Samwand
(''who will give asylum to anyone who can bring in a war plane or anything else
he can use in his African army''), it is obvious that Mr. Coughlin is up on his
newspaper headlines.

Within its plausible contemporary story, ''Day of Wrath'' lurches from one
recognizable situation and character to the next, comforting with familiarity
rather than surprising or shocking. The technique serves to render the crucial
scenes - in which the fate of hostages and revolutionaries hangs on the
interplay of a timid burglar and a young lawyer who thinks he's back in the
caves of Vietnam - far more effective than the first 200 pages would have led
one to hope.

Mr. Coughlin favors punchy chapter endings such as ''She put out her cigarette
and gave herself to him,'' or, more subtly, ''She bit his neck. 'I am no Boy
Scout, Mr. Gilbert, which you will now find out for yourself.' '' Automotive
analogies are not neglected: ''His life, he decided, was like traveling on a
freeway,'' and, three pages later, ''It was like being in a traffic accident and
having your leg broken.'' Finally, two insightful moments: ''It mattered little
if you were white or black; if you had no money, the city was your cage, and you
could never get out,'' and ''He needed relief: relief from a hostile world where
men were animals. ...'' At least they bespeak a consistent world view.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIMINAL BEHAVIOR

BYLINE: By STANLEY ELLIN; Stanley Ellin's most recent book is ''The Specialty of
the House and Other Stories, 1948-1978.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1434 words


THE TENTH COMMANDMENT By Lawrence Sanders.  385 pp. New York: G.P. Putnam's
Sons. $12.95.

JACK THE RIPPER By Richard Gordon.  278 pp. New York: Atheneum. $9.95.

ATHABASCA By Alistair MacLean.  326 pp. New York: Doubleday & Co. $11.95.

MAYNARD'S HOUSE By Herman Raucher.  240 pp. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons.
$10.95.

AMONG my favorite generalities is the one that occasionally surfaces at literary
cheese and wine bashes which has it that the British like their crime novels
long, the French like them short, and Americans just like them.

Indeed, there may be some truth to this. If so, reasons for it instantly leap to
mind: The British have been influenced by their Victorian giants to respect
bulky volumes; the French, living by the aphorism that it is better to light a
10-watt bulb than curse the darkness, would have a concern for their eyesight;
and Americans may simply determine their reading preferences by the duration of
the air flight to be undertaken - a quickie for the New York to Chicago hop, a
longer text for N.Y. to L.A.

Such homespun theorizing invites us to consider Lawrence Sanders's latest novel
of crime and detection, ''The Tenth Commandment,'' a hefty text of almost 400
pages, every single one of which can be read with pleasure. Set in Manhattan, a
territory Mr. Sanders evidently knows and cherishes, the story is outstanding in
characterization, straight-faced humor and mastery of style.

If there is anything some readers may cavil at here - and they would have to be
thin-lipped and costive to do it - it is that there is very little mystery for
our hero to unravel. The title of the book itself gives much of it away, and the
villain is identifiable well in advance of the denouement. But more than
counterbalancing this is the variety of the characters, each of whom springs to
life on delivering his or her entrance line and then remains memorable to the
final curtain. Even their names, in the Dickensian fashion, are memorable. Thus,
in following investigator Joshua Bigg - all 5 feet 3 3/8 inches of him - through
his adventures, we encounter the luscious Yetta Apetoff, the late lamented Sol
Kipper and his glamorous widow Tippi, the missing Professor Yale Stonehouse and
daughter Glynis, the troubled Oriental building manager Clarence Ng, the
public-spirited Reverend Godfrey Knurr, and a host of others who delectably
flavor Dickens with Doonesbury.

Joshua himself, unlike those folk who are rumored to compensate for a lack of
height by a heated aggressiveness, has come to accept his stature with
equanimity; he is, in fact, almost Quakerly in spirit. The story opens in a
leisurely way with a description of how he luckily happened to become chief
investigator for a prosperous New York law firm. Almost immediately he is
involved in an investigation of why a cherished friend of Mr. Tabachnick, senior
partner of the firm, has committed suicide without known cause simultaneously
with the mysterious disappearance of an esteemed client of Mr. Teitlebaum, a
slightly lesser partner. We are then happily ambling through a web of
complications in search of motives and methods.

There is also romance along the way, providing its own inevitable complications
- short male, tall female - and a charming and instructive romance it is. All in
all, what we have here is the right novel for the reader of any size whatsoever.

* This does not quite apply to Richard Gordon's ''Jack the Ripper,'' which,
devilishly clever in making us feel at home in London of 1888, suggests that
what gives the case an enduring fascination is the series of eviscerations
connected with it. Richard Gordon is, of course, that British M.D. who wrote
those lighthearted novels about a callow young doctor on his way up in his
profession. In this startling change of pace our author makes plain that he is a
man who knows his surgical techniques.

He also knows his Victorian London, from panders and prostitutes to social
nabobs and Royal Family, all demonstrably only too human.  Again we have a long
novel on hand, only this time length militates against the narrative device,
which is more suitable for the shortstory treatment Thomas Burke gave the Ripper
in his classic ''Hands of Mr. Ottermole.'' But here, in apparently showing all
there is to show at length and in depth from the viewpoint of the characters, it
plays unfair with the reader. And in protagnist Bertie Randolph, anesthetist and
bon vivant, through whom we follow much of the action, we have, not the Oscar
Wildean figure the author intended, but a road company Wilde with a penchant
for, as S.J. Perelman once put it, coining epigrams shaped like a cheese
blintze.

Of course, since it lately seems impossible to keep Sigmund Freud out of any
novel dealing with late-Victorian crime, he appears here too, conveniently
provided with the hindsight authors need to work this terrain. The final tally
adds up to a sometimes effective, often disappointing, book; but, no question
about it, if eviscerations are your thing, this book will be too.

* On the other hand, if the extraction of oil from the tar sands of Alaska is
what turns you on, Alistair Mac-Lean's ''Athabasca'' will not only explain the
operation but will leave you so chilled that you'll find yourself stamping your
feet while reading.

But, I'm sorry to report, aside from the old master's handling of the mise en
scene he is not at his best here. Much of the reason may be that Dermott and
Mackenzie - the pair of investigators Mr. MacLean has set in pursuit of
extortionists who are behind the plot against the oil company - are sketchily
and unappealingly drawn, and the people they deal with are cardboard cutouts.

This makes the first half of the story heavy going, and it is only when it
passes midpoint that, given a shot of adrenalin in the form of an abduction, it
becomes interesting. Here Dermott, no longer playing Humphrey Bogart, but wholly
human and in trouble, invites the sympathy a story like this needs to provide it
with tension. So we wind up in fine style, but only after a plodding start.

* Reading Herman Raucher's ''Maynard's House'' is an unsettling experience. The
book deals with the supernatural and in quality is miles above the occult sludge
recently pouring from publishing houses. It is a journey of exploration into
Austin Fletcher, newly returned Vietnam veteran who has inherited the strange
house of his dead Army buddy, Maynard Whittier, and has now arrived in the wilds
of Maine to occupy it. Witchcraft is at play here; past, present and future
dissolve into one another. And Austin, struggling against disorientation, must
come to test the reality of the supernatural.

All this is set within the framework of a strange romance - a sort of Down East
''Green Mansions'' - where Ara, a beautiful and barely nubile local girl,
becomes the magnetic force in Austin's life, whether for good or bad he can't
tell. There are evocations of Kipling's ''Brushwood Boy'' too in the way the
dreams of man and girl interact. The girl is plainly fey; the man is driven to
possess her at all costs. The consequences are both confounding and touching.

Well-written and eschewing strobe light effects, ''Maynard's House'' sets out to
explore the supernatural, not exploit it, and that is a rare event these days.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

E.L. DOCTOROW:'I SAW A SIGN'

BYLINE: By, VICTOR S. NAVASKY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1904 words


THE first time I heard of E.L. Doctorow was in 1964 when a friend of mine, then
working at the Dial Press, told me they had hired a new editor in chief who had
written a novel, a Western that was made into a movie with Henry Fonda.

The new editor was E.L. Doctorow, the novel was ''Welcome to Hard Times,'' which
turned out to be not so much a Western as a play against the genre. ''When you
use a genre you are playing against the music already in the reader's head,''
Mr. Doctorow explains, ''and you can get some nice effects that way.'' The
movie, he says, ''is the second worst movie ever made.'' (If you ask, he'll tell
you that the worst is ''Swamp Fire,'' with Johnny Weissmuller.)

His second novel, ''Big as Life,'' played against the science fiction genre and,
Mr. Doctorow is quick to concede, lost. ''That wasn't as good music,'' he says.
''There are some good things in that book, but it didn't work. Norman Mailer
(whom he served as editor while at Dial) once told me I didn't go far enough in
that book, and I think he's right. I overcontrolled it.'' That, at least, is
what Mr. Doctorow says now. At the time, he was enough of a writer to believe in
his book and enough of an editor to see that his publisher, Simon & Schuster,
didn't, which led him to change publishers.

Working as a Dial editor by day and a Random House author by night, he spent the
next six months writing 150 pages of the first version of what became ''The Book
of Daniel,'' the novel inspired by what happened to Julius and Ethel Rosenberg.
The trouble was he didn't like what he had written, which was a straight
chronological narrative, and began to wonder whether he was a writer at all.

''I was desolate. I was finished. I actually gave up,'' he says.  ''I sat down
at the typewriter recklessly and irresponsibly, full of rage and frustration and
despair, and just to do something, almost in mockery of the pretense of writing,
I began to type something. I didn't even know what it was. What it was of course
was the book I had been looking for, struggling for. I was writing in a voice
that I subsequently realized was the voice of Daniel, the couple's son. To do
the book from his point of view rather than my own - that was the discovery that
came out of my despair. Not I, but Daniel, would write this book. And the act of
writing would be part of the story.''

After ''Daniel'' came the best-selling ''Ragtime,'' and again, to hear Mr.
Doctorow tell it, he was sitting at his typewriter in his house in New Rochelle,
which was built in 1906, staring at either the wall or the blank page when
inspiration struck. ''I live in a house built in 1906,'' he wrote, and while
that did not stay the first line in the novel, he was off and typing.

Comes now ''Loon Lake.'' When interviewers ask Mr. Doctorow where he got the
idea for the novel he says, with a straight face, that he was driving one Sunday
in the Adirondacks and saw a sign which said ''Loon Lake,'' and that was it.
''You've got to let things happen to you to write.''

Recently, he addressed a group of librarians and confidentially shared with them
one of his favorite stories - an experience in his journalism class at the Bronx
High School of Science that he claimed was ''crucial'' to his development as a
writer.

''The journalism teacher gave us the assignment of
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Victor S. Navasky is the editor of The Nation and the author of the forthcoming
''Naming Names.''
doing an interview. I was a conscientious boy, so I turned in an interview with
the stage doorman at Carnegie Hall - and he had a really interesting life
history. He was a refugee, an old man who had gotten out of Germany just ahead
of Hitler. And he wore this old blue serge jacket and brown baggy pants, and he
spoke with a strong accent. He lived alone on very little money, and he brought
his lunch to work in a paper bag with a thermos of tea. His life had been
shattered, but he had spirit, and as it turned out he was very knowledgeable
about music. He knew the entire classical repertory. He knew all the musicians
who played at Carnegie and over the years had become a fixture in the place, and
all the great recitalists, Horowitz, Rubinstein, Jascha Heifetz, knew him and
called him by his first name, Carl. And the journalism teacher said, 'This is
the best interview I've ever read in all my years teaching this class. I want to
run it in the school paper. What we'll do is send one of the photography kids
downtown to take a picture of this guy.' And I squirmed around a bit and finally
had to confess that it couldn't be done. He wouldn't let his picture be taken.
'What do you mean?' the teacher said. 'I mean there is no Carl the doorman,' I
said. 'I made him up.' ''

Personally I don't believe a word of it. Mr. Doctorow's account of his life as a
journalism student sounds like a metaphor to me, whose truth is intended to be
poetic rather than literal. And his description of the genesis of his books has
the sound of the apple which fell on Newton's head - nice mythology but of
limited value as a guide to the complexities of the creative process, especially
one which has yielded such carefully designed works as ''Daniel,'' ''Ragtime''
and now ''Loon Lake.''

My own theory is that Mr. Doctorow talks about his books the way he does partly
to disabuse those who praise ''Daniel'' for dramatizing the impact of a
historically momentous episode or who believe that the distinctive contribution
of ''Ragtime'' was to introduce historically verifiable characters into fiction.
''The principle which interests me,'' he says, ''is that reality isn't something
outside. It's something we compose every moment. The presumption of the
interpenetration of fact and fiction is that it is what everybody does -
lawyers, social scientists, policemen. So why should it be denied to
novelists?'' His point is well taken, but it does not diminish my own suspicion
that he brings to his interviews (even with friends like me) and lectures on his
own writing habits the same presumptions that he brings to his novels, namely
that a
mix of fact and fiction, the objective and the subjec-tive, is the best way for
us all to discover what we have to say.

Another clue to Mr. Doctorow's vocabulary may be found in his undergraduate
years at Kenyon College, a bastion of the new criticism (he studied with the
poet/ critic John Crowe Ransom), which holds that the text rather than the
author's intention is the proper focus of the serious literary critic. Thus when
he talks of the themes in ''Loon Lake'' he is careful to introduce or close his
comments with such phrases as ''anyway, that's my theory'' or ''as I see it.''
Mr.  Doctorow makes it quite clear that, as far as he is concerned, his theories
about his books are no more qualified than anyone else's. He is, in the words of
a mutual friend, a walking refutation of the intentional fallacy.

It is therefore ironic that unsympathetic critics accuse Mr.  Doctorow of
writing ''political'' novels. ''It seems to me more of a comment on our time
than on anything I have written that a novel that contains concern for our
society is seen to be unusual,'' he says. '' 'Moby-Dick' is a political novel.
'The Scarlet Letter' is a political novel. Dostoyevsky and Conrad wrote
political novels, although when they are taught, little attention is paid to,
say, Conrad's conservative politics. But to think that I'm writing to advance a
political program misses the point. To call a novel political today is to label
it, and to label it is to refuse to deal with what it does. My premise is that
the language of politics can't accommodate the complexity of fiction, which as a
mode of thought is intuitive, metaphysical, mythic.

''Joe Heller wrote 'Catch-22,' and when it was published some critics said it's
an unfair view of the war - World War II wasn't like that, we were fighting the
fascists. Then along came Vietnam, which turned out to be the war he was writing
about. Those who would judge a novel by its alleged politics want to set up a
Commissar in the Republic of Letters. They are members of what I call the
loveit-or-leave-it school of criticism, making political judgments in the guise
of esthetic objectivity.''

One critic recently made the mistake of automatically attributing to author
Doctorow a particular political perception of narrator Daniel. As it happens,
the politics of author Doctorow, at least as he describes them, consist of a
fairly primitive sense of outrage against injustice, and one of the injustices
he probably has a right to be outraged by is precisely this sort of confusion,
given his highly tuned sensitivity to the uses of narrative voice. ''What was
new about 'Ragtime,' '' he insists, ''was not that it used historically
verifiable people. To me the unusual thing was to have narrative distance. To
create something not as intimate as fiction nor as remote as history, but a
voice that was mock historical - pedantic.''

''In 'Daniel,' '' Mr. Doctorow says, ''the narrator declares himself at the
outset. In 'Loon Lake' the narrator throws his voice, and the reader has to
figure out who and what he is. The convention of the consistent, identifiable
narrative is one of the last conventions that can be assaulted, and I think it
has now been torpedoed. For the first time, I've made something work without the
basic compact between narrator and reader, and technically I'm pleased at being
able to maintain a conventional story despite giving up that security.''

When ''Ragtime'' first appeared, Mr. Doctorow was quoted as saying that he
wanted his work to be accessible to vast new constituencies, he wanted gas
station attendants to read it. Now that he has written a novel that
intentionally lacks conventional narrative exposition, how does he square this
with the aspiration that
led one British journalist to dub him ''the Balzac of the petrol tanks''?

''There's always someone around to tell you what you shouldn't be doing. You
shouldn't be using historical characters. You shouldn't focus on the child labor
laws. You shouldn't shift voices. In 'Daniel' the narrator jumped around in time
and tense. Here you don't know who's talking so that's one more convention out
the window. That gives me pleasure, and I think it might give pleasure to
readers, too. Don't underestimate them. People are smart, and they are not
strangers to discontinuity. There's an immense amount of energy attached to
breaking up your narrative and leaping into different voices, times, skins, and
making the book happen and then letting the reader take care of himself. It's a
kind of narrative akin to television - discontinuous and mind-blowing.''

What, I asked, would have happened if instead of passing a sign which said Loon
Lake, you passed a sign which said Lake Placid?  ''I did pass the sign,'' he
said, ''but I didn't notice it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of E.L. Doctorow

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1980, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

by Martha G. Wilson

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 19, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 700 words


NEW JERSEY GUIDE

TALKS AT THE HERMITAGE

The Hermitage, the pre-Revolutionary stone manor house in Ho-Ho-Kus where
Theodosia Prevost entertained such people as George Washington, James Madison,
the Marquis de Lafayette and Aaron Burr (whom she married there), is a fitting
site for a series of talks on the repair and restoration of historic buildings.

The Friends of the Hermitage, a private, nonprofit group that sponsored the
renovation of the state-owned landmark house several years ago, has scheduled
the first of three talks for 3:30 P.M.  today. Theodore Prudon, an architect and
lecturer in the Historic Preservation Program at Columbia University, will
discuss ''How Much Do You Peel Away?''

Other talks will be ''Historic Districts: Plusses and Pitfalls,'' by Charles
Wyatt, principal planner of Jersey City, on Oct. 26, and ''Getting Acquainted
With Victorian Architecture and Being Comfortable With It,'' by Martin
Rosenblum, a restoration architect and lecturer on the upkeep and repair of
Victorian structures, on Nov. 23.

Admission to the series is $10, for a single talk, $5. Refreshments ''in the
manner of the period'' are served, so reservations are necessary.

The Hermitage itself is open for viewing every Wednesday from 1 to 4 P.M., and
guided tours are given on the first and third Wednesdays of each month.
Admission is by donation and is tax-deductible.

The Hermitage is at 335 North Franklin Turnpike in Ho-Ho-Kus.  Information or
reservations: (201) 445-8311 between 9 A.M. and 4 P.M.

HOLOCAUST AFTERMATH

''The Effects of the Holocaust on Survivors and Their Children'' will be the
subject of a talk to be given by Dr. William G.  Niederland next Sunday at
Temple Emanu-El in Westfield. Dr.  Niederland, a resident of Englewood, is
professor emeritus of psychiatry at the State University of New York and a past
president of the Psychoanalytic Association of New York.

The talk, which is sponsored by the Jewish Family Service Agency of Central New
Jersey and the temple's Social Action Committee, is scheduled for 11 A.M. and
will be followed by a brunch. Admission is $3 for adults and $1 for students and
the elderly.

The temple is at 756 East Broad Street. Information: (201) 352-8375.

NOW HEAR THIS

About a year ago, four sopranos who had become friends while singing in the
choir at St. Bartholomew's Church in New York City decided to form a group, ''I
Quattro Sovrani.'' But before making their formal debut at Carnegie Recital Hall
on Oct. 11, the four will present a concert Friday night in the Parish House of
St. Peter's Episcopal Church in Morristown.

The four sopranos - Kay Baumgartner, Ann Donaldson, Deborah Griffin and Virginia
Lowery - will do some ensemble singing, but will basically offer individual
pieces ''to illustrate the richness and diversity to be found in the song
literature for soprano voice.''

The program, which gets under way at 8 P.M., includes arias, songs and lieder by
early Italian composers, Faure, Schumann, Barber, Donizetti, Rossini, Strauss,
Poulenc and Copland.

There is no admission to the concert, but donations are welcome.  The church is
on Route 24, at Miller Road. Information: (201) 538-0555.

NEW BRUNSWICK-FEST

More than 100 booths and exhibitions will crowd a two-block area in downtown New
Brunswick today as volunteers serve an expected 25,000 people at the city's
seventh annual Octoberfest.

Held on Church and Paterson Streets, the festival begins at noon.  It will
feature ethnic foods from Hungary, Vietnam, Greece, Poland and various other
countries. Scores of area artisans will demonstrate their skills and special
events will abound in what is being billed as the best street festival New
Brunswick has yet produced.

Music will be provided by groups as diverse as the Chamber Singers of Douglass
College to Crosstar, a trio featuring a blend of classical rock, funk-oriented
jazz and Brazilian rhythms.  Martha G. Wilson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              375 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

China Says Vietnam Is Reducing Food Rations During a Shortage

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 112 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Sept. 28


Vietnam is suffering from a food shortage and the Hanoi Government has reduced
food rations and increased grain requisitions, China's official New China News
Agency said today.

Quoting reports from Hanoi, the agency said farmers in Vietnam's major
rice-producing region, the Mekong Delta, have been reluctant to plant more rice
than their families need. The Communist Party Central Committee recently called
a meeting of party leaders of nine Mekong River provinces, asking them to step
up the requisitioning of grain for distribution around the country, the agency
said.

China and Vietnam fought a brief border war last year, and tensions remain high
between them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              376 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WOULD-BE ADVENTURERE ENJOY A WEEKEND OF 'WAR'

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words

DATELINE: COLUMBIA, Mo., Sept. 27


Bob Taylor was lecturing: ''Hit 'em in the pelvic area where there's high body
mass. It's the hardest part of the body to move out of the way.''

Then he cocked back the tire iron in his hand and drove it smoothly through a
piece of plywood 10 feet away. It was an even, powerful throw that left his body
crouched to pick up a bayonet, or a screwdriver or a carpenter's file or one of
the other pieces of metal lying near him on the ground.

''Ford makes the best tire iron for throwing,'' he told the group.  ''I carry
four of them in my car, and nobody hassles me.'' That was the ''power throwing''
part of today's demonstration at the Soldier of Fortune convention here this
weekend - three days of gunfire and war stories and reminiscing about days in
the bush, of cautionary tales about Communists and bureaucrats, and a chance for
about 400 men with camouflaged jungle fatigues, shoulder holsters and blood in
their eyes to taste the life of the professional adventurer.

''Up 'til now we didn't dare come out and do something like this,'' said an
Oklahoma Highway Patrol officer, who was not sure his superiors wanted him here
after all. ''I guess now it's O.K. With the way things are going, people are
starting to think about war again.''

Sponsored by Soldier of Fortune

The convention was sponsored by Soldier of Fortune magazine, ''the journal of
professional adventurers,'' which was started in Boulder, Colo., at the close of
the late adventure in Vietnam. The selfdescribed ''anti-Communist, pro-military
and pro-police'' publication is bought by some 170,000 professional adventurers,
and those who would just like to be, each month.

A three-gun combat shooting match for about 100 invited marksmen trying for
$10,000 in prizes was the principal event, but mostly the fun was being there,
around other men who like guns and uniforms, who enjoy shocking the less
adventurous with T-shirts that say ''Pray For War'' and ''Happiness Is A
Confirmed Kill.''

Keith Miller, a 25-year-old motorcycle mechanic from Mattoon, Ill., sat in his
new camouflage fatigues on a hill, watching. ''Vietnam came around at kind of a
bad time for us,'' he said. ''By the time we got out of school it was over.'' He
and a friend, Jack Ralston, are regular readers of Soldier of Fortune, and once
tried to get in touch with a recruiter of mercenaries for the bush war in
Rhodesia before that conflict, too, was ended.

''We just want to get some excitement in our lives,'' said Mr.  Ralston, a
welder. ''There ain't anything else but work and spend your money and go back to
work some more.''

At Jaunty Angles

Vietnam is just a happy memory to many of the men who showed up with faded
fatigues and well-worn canvas-webbed jungle boots, their berets from the Rangers
and the Special Forces and airborne units worn at jaunty angles. They dropped
names like Dak To and Dong Ha and the I Corps into easy banter about times past.

''I don't know what all the moaning about Vietnam was all about,'' said Milford
Tatrow, who fought in the Fox Two Five Marine company west of Danang. ''I mean,
there were good times and bad times, but for me the good times always outweigh
the rest. It was the best time of my life. I'm just mad that I didn't get to
stay long enough to finish my tour.''

He was sitting on the ground, keeping his knuckles pressed to the grass in front
of him to hold his balance. Mr. Tatrow has no legs.  They were blown off by a
mine on April 18, 1970, a ''traumatic amputation,'' in military language, while
he was on his last patrol in Vietnam. Now he hops around on his hands. He
doesn't wear the artificial legs that the Veterans Administration gave him; they
make him feel like a cripple.

Mr. Tatrow drove down from Kearsarge, Mich., just to be around the rattle of
gunfire down on the rifle range. ''I love to hear 'em open up,'' he said.

'Elemental Field Interrogation'

Up near the shooting range, vendors had spread out their wares, such as books on
''Surviving Doomsday,'' ''How to Defend Your Retreat - A Manual for Combat After
the Collapse'' and ''Techiques of Harassment.'' A bull-necked middle-aged man
with two silver chaplain's crosses on his camouflage uniform collar and a
swagger stick under his arm bought a copy of ''Elemental Field Interrogation,''
but he would not answer questions about it.

Rhodesia, before it was renamed Zimbabwe under a black majority government, held
a special place in the hearts of the adventurers, especially as a source of
employment for mercenaries. Now the focus seems to be on South Africa, and a
recent issue of Soldier of Fortune carried information on getting into
Afghanistan to fight, but it did not hold out any promise of success.

While there was talk about those limited mercenary opportunities, it seems
unlikely that American adventurers would be welcome in the world's other trouble
spots. There was hardly any talk about the war between Iran and Iraq, for
example, except to wonder what it would do to the price of gasoline. Besides,
fighting in a foreign army can cost an American his citizenship, and an
announcement in bold type in the conventioneer's information packet warned
against ''recruiting mercenaries or dealing in automatic weapons, explosives,
etc.''

Now, surviving an Armageddon in this country seems to be an emerging theme.
Soldier of Fortune has added a monthly feature that warns of an imminent
collapse of the United States under rising inflation, rampant crime and crushing
bureaucracy.

Something Is Wrong

''It doesn't take a genius to realize that something is wrong,'' Mel Tappan
writes in the current issue. ''You are paying $7,000 for a $3,000 car, $75,000
for a $25,000 cracker-box tract house, $200 for a no-frills service automatic
pistol and almost $20 for a box of .45 cartridges with which to load it.''

In another feature, Ken L. Pence describes how to shoot a hostagetaker so his
finger will not reflexively pull a trigger as he dies. The best shot is in the
mouth, severing the terrorist's medulla oblongata.

''Some of this stuff is a little crazy,'' said Ron Proudlock, a member of the
special weapons and tactics team in the Livonia, Mich., Police Department. It
made him a little uneasy when Robin Moore, author of ''The Green Berets'' and
other war stories, and the convention's keynote speaker last night, used racial
slurs and innuendoes in attacking President Carter's foreign policies. Mr.
Moore was especially critical of Mr. Carter's support of open elections that
resulted in black majority rule in Zimbabwe, where the author spent four years
researching his latest book.

Mr. Proudlock was not the only one bothered. Robert K. Brown, publisher of
Soldier of Fortune, ousted Mr. Moore from the gathering tonight, declaring that
his comments were ''offensive to good soldiers.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              377 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ALI:READY,WILLING,BUT IS HE ABLE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KATZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 2661 words

DATELINE: LAS VEGAS, Nev.  DADDY is supposed to be enjoying a rest day. But 2
1/2


year-old Laila and 4-year-old Hana are playing with their friends. The children,
all wearing red-nosed clown faces, are running around the living room of the
hotel suite. In another part of the suite, several members of Muhammad Ali's
entourage are trying to be heard over the television set. From Lana Shabazz's
kitchen, emanate not only the aromas of barbecued beef and shrimp curry, but the
sounds of people and utensils.

Somehow, sitting on the end of the couch, Muhammad Ali seems alone. Geniuses, he
understands, usually are.  ''Einstein was a lonely man,'' he says. ''Who could
play games with Einstein?'' Muhammad Ali, is back from the solitude of
retirement and the fun and games have returned. The self-proclaimed ''miracle
man'' is up to his old tricks. He has covered his gray hairs with the blue-black
dye he keeps in little bottles and has uncovered muscles hidden in recent years
by a flabby body.

From outward appearances, he looks good enough to beat Larry Holmes on Thursday
night and win a fourth heavyweight title.  And while looks may be deceiving, in
Ali's case they are also reinforcing. If Ali, at the age of 38, after two years
of retirement, five years past his last great fight, can come back successfully
against the finest heavyweight in the world, it will be only because Ali thinks
he can do it.

Angelo Dundee doesn't like what he sees when Ali spars, but the trainer says the
most important equipment in his fighter's gym is ''the mirror.''

So Ali looks in his mirror, still sees ''the Greatest,'' and then opens his
white terrycloth robe, pats his almost-flat stomach and proclaims to the world
''this is the first miracle.'' He scoffs at disbelievers who don't think he can
''prove to the world you can do what you want to do,'' doubters such as the
local bookmakers who have made Larry Holmes almost a 2-1 favorite.

''They forget who I am,'' the former champion says. ''I'm Muhammad Ali.''
Miracles don't come in bottles, and it will take more than mirrors to beat
Holmes. There are numerous signs that Ali's body, no matter how good it looks,
is no longer capable of combat. He is not in a beauty contest.

''He's just a shell,'' says Billy Prezant, a veteran trainer, after watching Ali
work. ''A beautiful shell, but there's nothing inside.  The legs are gone. I got
to make Holmes a thousand to one.''

''He's slower than Heinz ketchup,'' says Holmes.  ''You can't put Humpty Dumpty
together again,'' says Teddy Brenner, the former Madison Square Garden
matchmaker.  Ali is sparring with an amateur middleweight named Charles Carter.
He does not try to hit his smaller opponent, but he is not getting out of the
way of many punches, either. Practicing defense is the reason for this
excercise.

''He's getting hit too much,'' Drew (Bundini) Brown, Ali's longtime cornerman,
tells Dundee.  ''You shouldn't get hit that much by anybody,'' Dundee tells Ali.
Ali has been bobbing, weaving and crouching during the sparring session. He
calls this his ''new defense.'' His old defense was based on superb reflexes.
The reflexes are no longer superb.

Ali appears short-winded, breathing heavily even after rounds in which he does
little work. After an unusually hectic exchange, Dundee yells, ''Time,'' and
Freddie Brown, Holmes's assistant trainer who has been attending all the former
champion's workouts, looks at his watch and notes, ''They cut the round.''

Ali seldom works the heavy bag, which is where he got in shape to beat Leon
Spinks and win the title for the third time in his last fight, Sept. 15, 1978.

In his prime, Ali almost never was cut, but Marty Monroe, a sparring partner and
a good young heavyweight, drew blood from near the bridge of his nose. Ali's
punches are lighter than ever, thrown more now with his arms than his body. He
seems to have forgotten how to throw combinations.

''He looked good when he was getting the best of it,'' said Brown, after Ali was
in another rare exchange. ''He looked bad when he was getting the worst of it.''

In his last active years, Ali often fought for only 30 seconds a round. In
training, he has been down to 15 or 20 seconds, and when he goes into these
flurries, says Bill Slayton, the trainer for Monroe and Ken Norton, ''he never
moves his head, which means Larry will know where it is, and those powder-puff
punches won't be able to keep him away.''

But Slayton still gives Ali a chance. ''I think he works on getting his mind
prepared,'' he says. ''Sometimes your mind can make your body do things it
shouldn't be able to do.''

The question, of course, is why did Ali decide to come back. It certainly was
Ali's decision, no one else's. There was no grass-roots drive to draft him back
into the ring. His parents didn't want him to fight again; his wife, Veronica,
was against it, and so were most members of his large and costly entourage.

Ali's wife said he returned because of the ''boredom'' of retirement. ''He was
lonely,'' she said. ''He needed a challenge.'' The living room of Ali's suite is
crowded now as he says: ''I'm having a lot of fun this fight. It feels so good
going into the gym and seeing the reaction of the people.

''I like to prove people wrong. People like to be mystified. That's why they
believe in ghosts and miracles.'' Two weeks ago, a daredevil named Gary Wells
attempted to jump a 192-foot fountain on a motorcycle in front of the main
entrance to Caesars Palace. Both Ali and Holmes were already at the hotel, the
scene of the fight, but neither attended the highly publicized television event.

Holmes, a cool professional, said he knew Wells wouldn't make it.  The World
Boxing Council champion has fought at the hotel seven previous times. He also
knows motorcycles. Holmes said Wells had every right to attempt the jump, but he
did not want to be there to see him fail.

Ali was not interested in watching either. He told Wells, after meeting him
before the jump, ''Now that I see how nice you are, I can't watch you.'' Ali saw
in Wells a kindred spirit.

''Why is a man crazy for jumping that water?'' Ali is now saying.  ''He wants to
do something nobody has done before. Why does man want to go to the moon? Look
at that moon up there. Man has walked on that moon.

''What I'm doing is child's play compared to him. Holmes hitting me with his
hands in gloves. All I can do is get knocked out. I know I'm taking a risk, but
I have to do it.''

Ali's longtime physician, Dr. Ferdie Pacheco, warned him of kidney damage and
quit Ali's corner when the fighter would not retire in 1977. An anonymous
British neurologist, after studying Ali tapes over several years and noticing an
increased slur in his speaking, charged that the fighter undoubtedly had
suffered brain damage.

The Nevada State Athletic Commission, releasing only the highlights of the
medical report following Ali's three-day examination in July at the Mayo Clinic
in Rochester, Minn., denies both charges. Dr.  Donald Romeo, of the Nevada
commission who accepted the report and later examined Ali himself, said the Mayo
Clinic brain scan showed ''no trace of tumor or old clots'' and called the
brain-damage charge ''a bunch of bunk.'' He said there was never anything wrong
with Ali's kidneys. The fighter, he concluded, was in ''excellent'' shape.

Ali has refused to release the whole report, claiming privacy. ''I don't want
the whole world to know about my urine,'' he said.  Holmes says Ali had to come
back ''because he's broke.'' Money may be the least of Ali's reasons; it
certainly is the one he talks least about.

''Sure I could use the $8 million,'' he says. ''Who couldn't?'' It had been
estimated that in retirement, without most of his entourage, Ali's daily
expenses were about $10,000 a day. He recently gave a raise to his brother,
Rachman, from $50,000 a year to $75,000. Veronica Ali is fond of antiques. A
friend says there's a $20,000 couch in the Alis' Los Angeles home ''and Ali
can't even sit on it.''

Most of the estimated $50 million he earned in the ring went to taxes and
expenses such as the cuts to his manager, Herbert Muhammad. He and Veronica have
two children. He has two former wives and six other children to support. A lot
of his money is tied up in real estate.

Ali is ''talking big'' about the millions and millions of dollars an oil deal
with an Onassis would mean for his philanthropic World Organization for Respect,
Love and Dignity, which is called WORLD.

A 1933 movie featuring John Wayne and Gabby Hayes is on the television screen in
Ali's bedroom. Ali has one eye on the movie and another on Laila, his youngest
child. She is climbing on the training table where Ali, by the count of Lloyd
Wells, one of his assistant trainers, has performed more than 16,000 excercises
in preparation for Holmes.

''I'm talking about feeding millions of people, and you're asking how I'm going
to eat,'' he says. ''Ain't that silly? I'm not worried about myself. That's the
last thing I'm worried about. I made $50 million, and people think I'm broke. I
got eight children, and I don't want to publicize how rich I am for their sake.

''Why don't people ask how much money Frank Sinatra has? I never heard of John
Travolta or Paul Newman being broke. Why are white people always getting on Joe
Louis? Why don't they ask about all the smart white people with education,
lawyers and such -how'd they go broke?''

His bills here are tremendous. Howard Bingham, his official photographer and one
of the few members of the entourage who was with Ali in retirement, has been
keeping tabs on the hotel tabs. He says there are between 35 and 40 camp
followers being housed by Ali.  Many charge meals and phone calls to the his
room. Some days, Ali's room bill lists $400 for phone calls.

Bingham has placed on the television the video cassette of the June 7 lecture,
''The Intoxications of Life,'' that Ali delivered to Harvard's Class of 1975.
Ali watches himself and says, ''Very few boxers can do this.''

''The past is a dream,'' he lectures from the television set. ''The future is a
mist. The only thing clear to man is the present.'' The only thing clear about
Ali's future is that money should not be a problem. Bingham says Ali already has
a $50,000 appearance to make in Canada after the fight, a $100,000 deal in
London and contracts to make commercials for Toyota vehicles and Birdseye foods.
The fighter is also talking about becoming a traveling host for Caesars Palace,
entertaining V.I.P.'s for one day in places like Hong Kong, Buenos Aires, Paris
and Rome at $200,000 and expenses for each trip.

The movie and television industries constantly make acting offers to the most
famous man in the world, but Ali says he does not like the ''controls'' under
which actors must perform. He is his own director.

''I don't know which way to go,'' he says.  So he has returned to boxing and the
limelight he has shared since winning an Olympic gold medal in 1960. He has
given himself the challenge of trying to become the oldest man to win the
heavyweight title and, of course, the first to win it four times. Only Ali
thinks that somehow he can add to his already incredible record.

''You know how big I'll be in boxing annals after I'm old and dead?'' he shouts
at a news conference.  Ali must launch a propaganda campaign at himself. He must
convince himself that his mind and spirit can overcome the slower reflexes and
shorter wind of his body.

''I'm not 38 like other Americans,'' he says. ''I'm not a normal American. I'm a
Superman.'' Ali calls his two-year layoff a ''rest.'' When he says, ''I will
destroy Holmes,'' his former sparring partner smiles and says, ''He's just
psyching himself up.''

When Ali says, ''I have conquered the body,'' he means the mind.  When the body
could not run the golf course of the Dunes Hotel one morning, he said it was
Allah's will: ''I ran two miles and couldn't go on because of something
inside.''

''Allah just gives me a feeling,'' he says after a light workout.  ''I wanted to
go to the heavy bag.'' The punches he takes in sparring, he says, are to ''get
my neck tougher.'' He asks for faith that somehow he can pull off this amazing
upset: ''Don't be a fool and bet against me.''

His former rival, Ken Norton, says, ''Ali has a way of doing the impossible.''
But the man who has not fought in two years, who has knocked out only Jean
Pierre Coopman and Richard Dunn since his draining fight with Frazier in Manila,
has some doubts.

He admits that his chances on a scale of 100 are about 85.  ''I got to get beat
sometime,'' he says, suddenly becoming more subdued. ''I got to get old. I'm not
a Supreme Being.'' Lana Shabazz knows Ali is very human. While he maintains he
did not succumb to his grand temptation of ice cream since he opened training
camp April 3, she says, ''He ate some, but he didn't dwell on it - the fruit
took its place.''

Four days ago, Ali was seen in the hotel coffee shop eating a mound of ice
cream. When he finished, he grabbed his wife's plate and finished her ice cream,
too.

He recalls he weighed more than 250 pounds when he ''deliberately ate some
pancakes in the morning, drank a quart of milk, stuck out my stomach and said I
was making a comeback to sucker Holmes into the fight.'' But he looks as good
now as he looked in Manila and has lost 30 pounds in six months. Just how much
else he has lost will not be known until Thursday, but if his reflexes are gone,
as they often appear to be during sparring, even his experience will not help.

''When Sugar Ray Robinson tried a comeback,'' said Teddy Brenner, ''he thought
he could win just by standing back, pulling up his trunks and looking at his
opponent with disdain.''

In other words, Ali may not be able to think his way out of a tight spot.
''I'll know what to do,'' says Dundee when asked if he would stop a fight if he
saw Ali had no chance to win.

Rocky Marciano is stalking Jersey Joe Walcott on the television screen. From his
bed, Ali is timing jabs to be thrown at Marciano.  ''I see myself killing
Marciano the way he fights,'' says Ali.

He is watching a cassette of the ''Greatest Fighters'' and Marciano was named by
the Boxing Writers Association as the No. 3 heavyweight in history. Ali was No.
2 and Joe Louis No. 1.

''They got to go for Louis, me being a Muslim,'' says Ali.  Ali says standing up
to the Army during the Vietnam war years ''was like fighting 55 Holmeses'' and
there was a time when more people in this country wanted to see him lose than
win. The country and Ali have mellowed. His place in American history, as a
symbol of black pride and the anti-war protest, is as secure as is his place in
ring history.

''People forget,'' he says. ''You can't stay mad at your wife too long. The
Vietnam war, that's over. Watergate, President Kennedy's assassination, that's
history. People forget.

''My own children living with my first wife, I forget how they act sometime. The
older kids, they only see their mother, and then I think about all the security
I've paid up for them and I feel good.  All my kids will go to school. College
is all paid for. They'll get so many thousands a year for expenses for a while
and then they're on their own.

''As they get older, they'll have their own husbands and boy friends (only one
of his eight children is a boy) and maybe they'll realize what daddy went
through.''

He says if he beats Holmes he will rest eight or nine months - ''maybe 10 or
11.'' And then he talks about fighting five more years. But he also says he
wants to spend more time with Veronica.

''She likes to go horse riding,'' he says. ''I'm making myself like it because
she likes it.  ''The main thing I want to do is pace myself,'' he says. ''The
eight children, the oldest is 12, I want to start visiting them more.  ''I've
been living in a hotel all my life. I'm at the stage where I can really slow
down. I'll be in a position to stay in one spot.'' The mirror on the wall may be
telling him something.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo page C6 Photo

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              378 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EVANGELICALS PRESS POLITICAL ACTIVITIES

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 915 words

DATELINE: OKLAHOMA CITY, Sept. 26


In a large shopping mall, two bookstores give prominent display to ''Listen,
America,'' a political tract by the Rev. Jerry Falwell, the television
evangelist. At the Oklahoma State Fair, the ''modern living'' building is full
of booths offering Bibles and John Birch Society literature.

Fundamentalist churches, which have wide appeal in this area of the Sun Belt,
have traditionally stayed out of politics, but this year they have entered the
secular arena with a vengeance.

The churches are promoting political viewpoints ''even from the pulpit,'' said
Jeanette Bode, a Republican activist who was working in the party's booth at the
state fair. ''They want to get God back into government. God is very much a part
of this campaign.''

The fundamentalist churches have linked hands with political and economic forces
such as the American Conservative Union and the Conservative Caucus. The result
is a highly organized, highly conservative alliance that may help swing Oklahoma
and other Sun Belt states behind Ronald Reagan's Presidential bid.

Shifting Sentiment of Voters

Lately, however, a few storm clouds have been gathering here that could dampen
Mr. Reagan's campaign. As voters start focusing on the election, at least some
of those who had been leaning toward Mr.  Reagan are having second thoughts
about whether they want him as President.

Nadine Willis was visiting the state fair with her daughter and two
grandchildren, and she discussed the campaign over a fried chicken lunch. ''I
thought I really liked Reagan,'' said Mrs. Willis, the owner of an X-ray supply
business. ''But as time goes on, he just doesn't seem like a strong enough
man.''

''At first I was going for Reagan,'' said Ann Cross, who was selling fudge at
the fair. ''But the more I really got into some of his feelings, I found that I
didn't agree, or didn't like the way he put things. I was particularly upset
about his statement that Vietnam was a noble cause. I wouldn't want that feeling
reflected in the future.''

Still, Mr. Carter faces a tough fight to win Oklahoma. Registration here is 3 to
1 for the Democrats, but that masks a deeply conservative streak that runs
throughout the entire region. Moreover, traditional Democratic groups,
particularly labor unions, are quite weak here.

Economy Is Thriving

The Sun Belt is booming economically. Oklahoma City has an unemployment rate of
3.9 percent, the lowest in the country. But while the President gets blamed for
the recession in the Frost Belt, he gets little credit for prosperity here.

''I hate to tell you this,'' said Burldene Leininger, an official of the
Communication Workers of America, ''but our members are well established;
they're getting good salaries and they feel they are Republicans,''

In the midst of this prosperity, Carter policies have hurt two key Sun Belt
industries, oil exploration and wheat farming, and both groups are fighting back
through the political process. ''More and more,'' said Harold V. Hunter, the
Republican state chairman, ''these industries are aware that a stroke of the pen
in Washington can impact on their way of making a living.''

Among farmers, the resentment stems from Mr. Carter's embargo of wheat sales to
the Soviet Union.  ''In Oklahoma, wheat's the main economy,'' argued Ginger La
Croix, the wife of a government worker, ''and if the farmers are not treated
right, I wonder what would become of our country.''

Mr. Carter also lost support by championing the so-called windfall profits tax
on the oil industry.

National Defense an Issue

The belief that Mr. Carter has allowed American power to decline seems
particularly fervent in Oklahoma, where some large military installations are
located. Wayne Smith, a machine operator at Tinker Air Force Base, voiced a
common complaint: ''I sure don't approve of the way Carter has handled that
hostage situation. I hate to see a little old country like that bull us
around.''

The national defense issue is only one of the concerns voiced by conservative
groups that are making broad, long-range efforts to exert political influence in
this state and others in the region. For at least five years, these forces have
been organizing around a series of issues, from the proposed equal rights
amendment and the Panama Canal to prayer in schools and abortion. The result is
a vast network of conservative activists who can now be plugged into the Reagan
campaign.

Endorsement of Reagan

The Democrats are particularly concerned about the growing involvement of
evangelical churches in the political arena. Mr.  Falwell, the television
evangelist from Lynchburg, Va., recently endorsed Mr. Reagan's candidacy. Mr.
Falwell's Moral Majority movement has been credited with helping a number of
candidates, including Don Nickles, a State Senator who this month won Oklahoma's
Republican nomination for the United States Senate.

Democrats recently complained that at least one minister was violating equal
time provisions of Federal law by using his sermons, which were broadcast on a
local radio station, to support the Republicans. But the Democrats also
acknowledge the effectiveness of the action.

''People are being led by rhetoric, very smooth rhetoric, that says if you don't
agree with them, then you're not 'a true Christian,' '' said Obera Bergdall, the
Democratic state chairman. ''That's just not true, but some smart politicians
have keyed in on a very emotional and vulnerable area of human beings.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              379 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1980, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REFORM COALITION ENDORSES CARTER

BYLINE: By ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 13, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 336 words


The New Democratic Coalition of New York State, originally one of the staunchest
supporters of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, yesterday reluctantly endorsed
President Carter for re-election.

However, the vote, which overcame a move within coalition ranks to withhold
endorsement of any candidate, is not binding on coalition members. The coalition
is a liberal-reform organization that, according to its officers, includes
between 8,000 and 10,000 members concentrated in New York City and Nassau and
Westchester Counties.

Yesterday's endorsement of President Carter was ''more a psychological boost
than anything else,'' said Trudy Mason, Manhattan coordinator of the Carter
campaign.

President Carter drew 61.4 votes to 11 for the next most popular choice, Barry
Commoner, the Citizens Party candidate. John B.  Anderson, the independent
candidate, drew 5.6 votes. There were 17 votes for no endorsement.

'An Enthusiasm Problem'

All but four Democratic Party or public officials at the meeting endorsed Mr.
Carter, providing him with nearly a third of his votes.  The assembly of about
90 delegates at Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan appeared small in the
auditorium, the vastness of which also served to muffle the speeches drifting
over the largely passive audience.

''You have a serious enthusiasm problem here,'' said Assemblyman Richard N.
Gottfried of Manhattan, a member of the coalition since its founding in 1967 as
a vehicle for Vietnam War opposition. ''This is the most somnolent N.D.C.
convention I've ever been to, and I've probably been to about two dozen.''

Gail Bernstein Paris, a Democratic district leader from the Upper West Side, was
typical in her attitude. ''I'm voting for Carter but very unhappily,'' she said.
''There is a big difference between Carter and Reagan, and Anderson doesn't have
a chance.''

Mr. Commoner said the endorsement of President Carter resulted from
''Reagan-phobia'' - fear that a vote for anyone else but Mr.  Carter would in
effect help Mr. Reagan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              380 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIANS MAKE AN ARDUOUS TREK IN SEARCH OF RICE

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 566 words

DATELINE: SISOPHON DISTRICT, Cambodia, Sept. 28


Despite roads flooded at the height of the monsoon season and forest trails made
nearly impassable, a steady flow of hungry Cambodians is pouring into this Thai
border area where rice is distributed.

Unlike the flow of emaciated, often dying, people who crossed the border south
of here a year ago and brought an outpouring of international sympathy, the
present migration does not consist of walking skeletons. The tens of thousands
who flock around the distribution point at Nong Chang, across the border in
Thailand, are merely malnourished and hungry.

Those who crossed last year were ardent followers of the deposed Prime Minister,
Pol Pot, or people forced to live under his control.  Before reaching Thailand,
they had spent several months in foodless, malaria-infested border enclaves
where the Vietnamese invasion force had driven them.

Those streaming here now are people from Vietnamese-occupied Cambodia who have
run out of their staple food, rice, and have received little or no help from the
Phnom Penh Government.

The small numbers of Cambodians living in the former regime's enclaves are
regularly supplied with international relief food channeled to them by Thai
authorities.

The Cambodians in Vietnamese-controlled territory, who are waiting for their
rice to mature at the end of the year, are dependent on root crops and
distributions of international aid by the Phnom Penh Government.

Interviews with scores of people who reached here on foot or on oxcarts in
recent days indicate that Government distributions are largely made up of about
one pound per person each month of Sovietsupplied rice. The rations appear to be
more regular than the ones received earlier this year, but they are still
insufficient.

The food-seekers reported that sweet potatoes and other root crops made up the
bulk of their food. Meat generally appears to be absent from the diet of the
Cambodians. Fish, although plentiful in rice fields this season, must by caught
individually because of a lack of nets.

The 30,000 Cambodians encamped on this side of the border awaiting rice
represent many more people across the border. Each family sends either husband
or wife, with some of the children to draw extra rations, while the other
members stay home.

A woman from the distant province of Takeo, at the Vietnamese border, was here
with two of her sons, while her husband tended three other children and the
fields at home. The three travelers spent 15 days walking across Cambodia,
begging food in villages.

Why did she undertake the arduous trek from her home in Tram Kak?  The woman
looked surprised to be asked and said simply, ''Rice.'' Some of the children in
the encampment showed such symptoms of advanced malnutrition as bloated bellies
and light complexions.  The Cambodians said Vietnamese soldiers on jungle trails
demanded money. Members of a caravan of 20 excarts said they were stopped three
times and paid the equivalent of $5 in Thai currency per wagon on each occasion.

A 70-year-old woman with close-cropped gray hair, who had walked for four days
accompanied by three granddaughters, said that she had to return quickly to her
village in nearby Mongkol Borei District.  Her 74-year old husband is ill and
waiting, she said.

Glancing at her worn, bare feet stretched before her, she remarked matter of
factly, ''I am not sure I will have the strength to return.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              381 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Two U.S. Aides to Visit Vietnam This Week for Talks on Missing

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 126 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 29


Two United States officials will visit Vietnam this week for talks on the fate
of some 2,500 American servicemen missing and believed dead in that country, the
State Department said today.

A department spokesman, Jack Cannon, said that Lieut. Col. Paul Mather and James
Tully, both assigned to the United States Embassy in Thailand, would visit
Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, from Wednesday to Saturday.

It will be the first direct contact between technical representatives of the two
countries on the issue of Americans missing in action in Vietnam since a
Vietnamese delegation visited Honolulu two years ago. The United States has
assembled data on the missing servicemen at a facility in Honolulu known as the
Joint Casualty Resolution Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company


                              382 of 382 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 30, 1980, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Judge Rules Garwood's Plea Requires More Mental Tests

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 109 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C., Sept. 29


A military judge ruled today that Pfc. Robert Garwood of the Marine Corps must
undergo further psychiatric testing by three Government-selected psychiatrists
if he plans to use insanity as a defense against charges of desertion and
collaboration with the enemy as a prisoner of war in Vietnam.

Private Garwood's lawyers have said that he suffers from a mental condition that
prevented him from distinguishing between right and wrong while he was in
Vietnam. They said today that they would appeal the ruling of Col. R.E. Switzer
because there were indications that another round of examinations might lead the
34-year-old marine to commit suicide

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
