
                               1 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 1, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Notes On People;
Snepp Clears C.I.A. Hurdle With New Screenplay

BYLINE: By David Bird ad Albin Krebs

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


After his royalties were seized by court order for his book ''Decent Interval,''
Frank Snepp, a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst who wrote the book
without agency clearance, decided to use a different approach for his next
project.

He said in Washington yesterday that he wrote a screenplay called, ''In the Name
of National Security,'' a fictionalized account of his life from the fall of
Saigon to the Supreme Court decision on his book in 1980, and the C.I.A. has
given it clearance. The agency returned the script with no objection on the
final day of a 30-day review period, Mr. Snepp said.

Agency officials confirmed that the new Snepp work had been cleared under new
procedures designed, in large part, because of the former analyst's earlier
circumvention of secrecy agreements. Those agreements require all agency
employees, past or present, to submit for review and clearance all accounts
based on their C.I.A.  experiences.

Now that he's cleared the agency hurdle, Mr. Snepp said, he has another one to
face with his fictionalized script, heavily based on fact, on the fall of Saigon
and its aftermath. He still has to find a Hollywood producer to film it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Frank Snepp

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 1, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Notes On People;
THEATER ON THE HUDSON

BYLINE: By David Bird and Albin Krebs

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 188 words


''The war seemed to be a perfect place for drama,'' Thomas Bird said as the
Circle Line boat chugged out into the Hudson River, ''and I didn't want any
commercial writers or film makers making false statements for us. They weren't
telling our story.''

The boat ride Monday was a benefit party for the Veterans Ensemble Theater
Company, founded by Mr. Bird, once a rifleman in Vietnam.  More than 300 guests
paid $75 each to drink, eat and watch a segment of the group's forthcoming
production called, ''In Pursuit of Liberty,'' performed on the after deck of the
boat as it hovered near the Statue of Liberty.

The play, by Jonathan Polansky, is a fictionalized account of the 1971 takeover
of the statue by a group of Vietnam veterans seeking to bring that conflict to
an end. As the play unfolded, the actors, dressed in olive drab fatigues, looked
menacingly up at the floodlighted statue and one tossed a dead hand grenade. But
the sound did not travel well from the impromptu stage and while the story may
have been told, much of it remained unheard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRZEZINSKI PRAISES WHITE HOUSE, URGES REAGAN-BREZHNEV MEETING

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 30


The new Administration has shown enough toughness toward the Soviet Union to
warrant a meeting between President Reagan and Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet
leader, according to Zbigniew Brzezinski.

Mr. Brzezinski, national security adviser to President Carter, suggested in an
interview today that a ''low-key, consultative meeting would not be harmful.''
The summit meeting, he said, should be ''open-ended on the key issues dividing
us.''

Among these issues, Mr. Brzezinski said, are the contest to develop and deploy
strategic arms, ''the prejudicial consequences of the southward Soviet push to
the Persian Gulf'' and ''the mutual benefits of restraint.'' He indicated that
the meeting should not raise unreal expectations and ought to be more of a
discussion than an effort to seal agreements.

The time is ripe for a meeting, he said, ''if the Soviet Union realizes this
country is serious about defense and the Soviet Union understands it has been
fashioning an American-European-Japanese-Chinese alliance.''

'Needed to Be Said Forcefully'

Mr. Brzezinski, relaxed and in shirt sleeves, spoke at his downtown office in
the Georgetown Center for Strategic and International Studies, where he is
working on a book. He will return to Columbia University in the fall to teach
graduate courses, commuting from his home in McLean, Va.

The former adviser to a Democratic White House found little with which to
quarrel in the policies pursued by his successors. ''On the whole, the Reagan
Administration has been right in conveying to the Soviet Union with considerable
intensity the absence of restraint and reciprocity in Soviet conduct,'' he said.

''This needed to be said forcefully, and Reagan has done so.'' A missing
element, Mr. Brzezinski said, is ''a willingness to talk constructively about
arms control.'' He also said: ''I think well of Haig on the whole. He's been a
pretty good Secretary of State.''

Urged Arms Sales to China

His praise of Alexander M. Haig Jr. was a reminder that Mr.  Brzezinski had
frequently differed with his Democratic colleague, Cyrus R. Vance, when Mr.
Vance was Secretary of State.

One issue on which they split was the advisability of selling arms to China, a
policy announced by the new Administration and attacked by Mr. Vance as
''needlessly provocative'' and ''bear baiting.''

Mr. Brzezinski said he had not only sought to lift the embargo against such
sales to China but was also confident that the Carter Administration was moving
in this direction. He said he had won the backing of Harold Brown, who was then
Secretary of Defense.

''It is erroneous for the U.S. to boycott an essentially friendly country to
benefit an expansionist neighbor,'' Mr. Brzezinski said.  ''It is a gratuitous
gift to the Soviets, who have not shown excessive concern for our interests.''
He cited Soviet support for Ethiopia's wars in the Ogaden and Eritrea; backing
of Southern Yemen's forays into Yemen; support for Vietnam's installation of the
Heng Samrin Government in Cambodia, and, above all, the intervention in
Afghanistan, which he said ''threatens the Persian Gulf.''

Brzezinski Responds to Vance

Mr. Vance recently contended that the announced removal of the embargo destroyed
a lever that Washington could use to influence Soviet behavior. Mr. Brzezinski
said: ''It is not much of a chip if you publicly take the position you won't do
it and shouldn't do it.  It becomes a chip only if you indicate your willingness
to do it.''

He suggested that the type of weapons Washington was willing to supply, from the
less complex to the sophisticated, could still be used as a device to influence
Moscow.

The new policy, he said, is another step in the ''development of a shared
strategic understanding.'' He added: ''What has emerged in the last two years is
the beginning of an important strategic relationship. It must be sustained over
a long period of time and must be given more political context.'' To that end,
he urged that Mr. Reagan exchange visits with the new chairman of the Chinese
Communist Party, Hu Yaobang, and the country's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping,
the deputy party chairman.

Mr. Brzezinski would neither confirm nor deny that the Carter Administration had
begun this ''strategic relationship'' by setting up with Peking an electronic
intelligence-gathering station inside China to monitor Soviet missile tests.
Senior American officials have disclosed that such a station was opened in
western China last year.

Urges Soviet 'Restraint'

Mr. Brzezinski dismissed arguments that the growing military ties between Peking
and Washington would feed Soviet fears of encirclement. If the Soviet Union
moves toward the Persian Gulf and tries to detach Western Europe from the United
States, he said, the new ties become ''a major counterpoint.'' ''If they are
willing to exercise restraint, they have no reason to fear the American-Chinese
relationship will be actively exploited against them,'' he added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 2, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PARENTS, BOOKS AND OBSCENITIES

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 253 words


When ''365 Days'' was published in 1971, one reviewer said, ''The last chapter
of this book, published separately as 'The Burn Ward,' is already justly famous.
The rest of the book deserves to be.'' Ten years later, Dr. Ronald Glasser's
account of his year in Southeast Asia caring for wounded soldiers is the book of
the moment in Baileyville, Me. Acting on a parent's complaint, three of five
members of the school board voted to pull it from the high school's open
shelves. The reason: the book's four-letter words might harm the students.

Dr. Glasser went to Japan to look after the children of military families. But,
he wrote, ''I soon realized that the troopers they were pulling off those
medevac choppers were only children themselves,'' so he went to Vietnam. The
obscenities he recorded were the responses of those children to the obscenity
that was their war experience.

Because some Baileyville parents and students believe others have no right to
forbid them reading matter, a compromise was reached: ''365 Days'' is
temporarily on the reserved shelves until the school board can develop a policy
for handling books which some parents challenge as unfit reading.

Whether the ''offensive and abusive'' language in ''365 Days'' can actually harm
its readers would be hard to prove. But there is a thin line between informed
concern and indiscriminate censorship -and centuries of evidence to prove the
harm done by banning books.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SEES TEST OF TIES TO MOSCOW IN AFGHAN AND CAMBODIAN ISSUES

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 809 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 2


The Reagan Administration has decided to tell the Soviet Union that Moscow's
response to international proposals on Afghanistan and Cambodia will be used as
a test of future East-West relations, Administration officials said today.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. met late today with the Soviet
Ambassador, Anatoly F. Dobrynin. Dean Fischer, the State Department spokes-

The Czechoslovak Communist Party reportedly cited a ''counterrevolutionary''
threat to Poland and advised the Polish Central Committee to postpone a special
party congress that is due to start July 14 in Warsaw. Page A4.
man, declined to say what they talked about, but it was understood earlier that
Mr. Haig was prepared to tell Mr. Dobrynin that a constructive Soviet reaction
on Afghanistan and Cambodia could help improve the strained relations between
Washington and Moscow.

It was impossible, however, to confirm after the meeting that Mr.  Haig had in
fact conveyed that position to Mr. Dobrynin in their talks.

Mr. Haig, in a statement issued two days ago, said, ''These two issues are at
the very heart of the increase in international tension in recent years.''

Officials said that when Mr. Haig meets with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko
of the Soviet Union in the fall during the United Nations General Assembly
meeting in New York, the Afghan and Cambodian problems will be major items on
their agenda, along with the previously disclosed intention of beginning talks
on the reduction of medium-range missiles in Europe.

Willy Brandt, the former West German Chancellor, told a news conference in
Moscow today at the end of a visit there that the Kremlin was interested in a
political settlement that would lead to a withdrawal of Soviet troops from
Afghanistan. (Page A4.)

United States officials said the stress on the Afghan and Cambodian problems
stemmed from the Administration's conviction that these issues are the major
sources of tension in the world and require utmost Soviet cooperation to be
resolved.

The Soviet Union has about 85,000 troops in Afghanistan, engaged in fight-ing
Afghan insurgents. The Soviet inter-vention has caused concern in Pakistan and
other countries in the region.

The Cambodian problem has been caused by the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in
1978, which led to the overthrow of the Pol Pot regime and the installation of
the Heng Samrin Government, which is backed by Vietnam and the Soviet Union.

U.N. Plans Parley on Cambodia

The United Nations is to open a conference in New York on July 13 to resolve the
Cambodian situation, but the Soviet Union, Vietnam and their allies have
announced that they will not attend.

Mr. Haig, who will lead the American delegation to the two-day meeting, has
backed the three-part plan of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations for the
withdrawal of the 200,000 Vietnamese troops from Cambodia, the establishment of
a United Nations peacekeeping force and internationally supervised elections.

Mr. Haig, in his statement two days ago, said, alluding to the United Nations
conference on Cambodia and the Common Market proposal on Afghanistan:

''I wish to underline the profound importance and promise of two new diplomatic
initiatives.'' ''Let there be no doubt about where we stand,'' he said. ''The
Afghan and Kampuchean people must control their own destiny. The purpose of
negotiation is not to impose a solution from outside as the Vietnamese and
Soviets have attempted to do by force of arms.  Rather, we seek to achieve the
full withdrawal of Soviet and Vietnamese forces to eliminate outside
intervention and to restore the nonaligned and neutral status of these two
countries.''

''This serves the genuine security interests of all parties, including the
Soviet Union and Vietnam, and it is the only way to assure the long-range
stability of these troubled regions,'' Mr. Haig said.

Officials said the current focus on Cambodia and Afghanistan did not mean that
the Administration was any less concerned about such issues as Poland or El
Salvador, problems that have drawn considerable attention since the start of the
year.

They said Moscow was fully aware that Soviet military intervention in Poland
would put a freeze on East-West relations and probably rule out any future
negotiations on any subject.

The Administration is currently in the final stages of an overall policy study
on East-West relations, and the Afghan and Cambodian questions will be
highlighted in a speech on East-West relations that Mr. Haig is expected to
deliver sometime in the future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CZECH LETTER SAID TO ADVISE POLAND TO PUT OFF CONGRESS

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 755 words

DATELINE: WARSAW, July 2


The Czechoslovak Communist Party has told the Polish Central Committee that
''counterrevolutionary'' forces are taking over the Polish party and advised
putting off a party congress set to open in 12 days, Polish party sources said
today.

The statements, contained in a 10-page letter, distributed yesterday to Central
Committee members, were harsher than a similar warning from the Soviet party,
the sources said.

The Czechoslovak letter said both the Polish trade union and the party were
falling prey to anti-Communist forces.  Other letters have been received from
the Hungarian and Bulgarian parties in what the Poles regard as a campaign of
pressure to prevent the convening of the party congress, which is expected to
endorse a policy of liberalization.

Gromyko Due in Warsaw Today

The news about the Czechoslovak letter became known on the eve of a visit by
Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko of the Soviet Union. He is the first Soviet
leader to visit since Mikhail A. Suslov, the ideologist, came in April.

For the most part, Poland has been preoccupied with its economic problems. Today
the Government warned that the country was ''on the road to catastrophe'' and
disclosed figures showing the worst economic performance in the Soviet bloc at
any time.

Presenting the case for urgent economic remedies to Parliament, Zbigniew Madej,
a Deputy Prime Minister charged with planning, predicted a 15 percent drop this
year in national income, a measure of overall economic performance. Such a
decline had never been registered in the Soviet bloc.

Mr. Madej, newly appointed as chairman of the Planning Commission, said the 1981
budget and economic plan had been based on the assumption that production and
national income would at least equal last year's. Such is not the case, he said,
and revisions are needed.

He presented a short-term stabilization program that focused on seven areas.
They were intensified farm production, conservation of energy and a rise in coal
output, restoration of equlibrium to the market, budget cuts, investment
cutbacks, transfers of the labor force to sectors short of workers, and
increased exports.

''If we don't undertake this program, starting from today, from now,'' Mr. Madej
said, ''nothing can stop us from following the road to catastrophe, to a
breakdown of our economy with all the consequences resulting from that.''

Longer-term measures now being drawn up to modify the planned economy include
changes to make factories profit-oriented and selfregulating.

A major component of the emergency measures is an attempt to spur coal
production, the main export earner. After having reached a high point of 201
million tons in 1979, output is now running at 165 to 170 million tons a year.
Mr. Madej said the Government would honor its commitment for a five-day week in
the mines, but wanted a rearrangement of work schedules so that the mines could
be worked six days a week.

Meanwhile, government leaders from the 10 member countries of the Soviet-bloc
economic alliance opened a meeting in Sofia, Bulgaria, to coordinate trade and
development plans thrown awry by the Polish crisis. The alliance is made up of
the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary,
Mongolia, Poland, Rumania and Vietnam.

Bloc Premiers Are Consulting

The prime ministers of these countries will attempt to put together a five-year
program, already a year behind because of Polish disruptions in the complex
system of interlocking barter trade agreements.

Last year Poland failed to fulfill contracts amounting to $39.4 million in
supplying its Communist trade partners with coal, sulfur, coke, machines and
other products, according to the Polish press agency. The trend has worsened
this year, the agency said.

The failure has caused ripple effects in the economies of Poland's allies,
forced to scramble for costly replacements elsewhere, mostly from the West. In
response, some countries have held back deliveries of raw materials, further
worsening Poland's plight.

The Polish economy has been harmed by the labor disruptions that began a year
ago, but also by a huge borrowing program for industrial development and
consumer goods that rose to a debt of $27 billion to the West.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Deputy Minister Zbigniew Madej in Warsaw

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MILK FOR VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Elizabeth Becker

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When Vietnam invaded Cambodia and threw out the brutal Pol Pot regime two and
one-half years ago, the Carter Administration asked other countries to join in
imposing wide-ranging sanctions against Vietnam because it violated
international law. Now, rather than reducing sanctions, the Reagan
Administration has accelerated that campaign, actively lobbying other countries
and organizations to prevent any aid from reaching Hanoi, even milk that the
children of Vietnam need desperately.

Unlike the United States embargo on shipment of grain to the Soviet Union,
imposed after its invasion of Afghanistan, these sanctions have proved
successful. Vietnam is in dire need of food. While America has lifted the grain
embargo, it has placed new restrictions on aid for Vietnam. They are so thorough
that in May a church was refused a license to ship a donation of wheat flour to
the Vietnamese; last week, that decision was reversed, but only after lobbying
by Roman Catholic, Jewish, and Protestant charities.

A recent United Nations Childrens' Fund emergency appeal for milk for Vietnam's
children revealed how extreme the America sanctions campaign had become. The
Administration responded that Vietnam should spend money used to occupy Cambodia
to purchase milk.

Earlier, American allies such as Japan had agreed to suspend bilateral aid and
grants, whether developmental or humanitarian, until Vietnamese troops withdrew
from Cambodia; The World Bank dropped its program there, the International
Monetary Fund may follow suit.

When Unicef asked for emergency donations of powdered milk, as well as butter,
oil, and rolled oats, it turned to the European Economic Community. Two years
ago, the E.E.C. had suspended its food shipments as part of the global sanctions
campaign. This year, some E.E.C.  members suggested that an exception be made,
but America helped persuade the E.E.C. otherwise. ''We had no choice on that
one,'' an E.E.C. source explained.

Now, Vietnam's children, innocent of the politics of their elders, will suffer.
Late last year, T. Berry Brazelton, a Harvard pediatrician, traveled to
Indochina, where he discovered that the Cambodian children so recently subjected
to famine were faring far better than Vietnamese children. He made the rounds of
pediatric wards in both countries and found in Vietnam that ''the overwhelming
reason for the childrens' illnesses was malnutrition.'' He said: ''The health
system is good but they just don't have enough to eat.''

Dr. Duong Quynh Hoa of Ho Chi Minh City's Pediatric Hospital No. 2 found in an
unofficial survey that more than one-third of the children in that city's
nursery schools and day-care programs were malnourished. She needed the
information because her hospital once received the E.E.C. milk and she was
charged with finding a protein substitute. She is experimenting with beans.

According to a State Department internal memorandum, the Government recognizes
''the severe economic hardship of the Vietnamese people...including hardship
brought on by natural disaster,'' but still contends that Vietnam can help
itself by ''ending its diversion of resources from economic development to
military conquest.''

The natural disasters are a series of floods, typhoons, and spells of drought
that helped ruin past years' crops. The yield was low anyway, the result of
general discontent over the forced formation of agricultural cooperatives. These
problems have left Vietnam short at least 500,000 tons of grain, with no sign of
increased outside assistance.

The Soviet Union, which gives some $2 million in military aid to Vietnam every
day, recently cut back its food aid, citing the ill effects of the United States
grain embargo.

More than blocking food deliveries, the United States' sanctions campaign has
forced Vietnam to borrow heavily. Hanoi's debt-servicing bill alone is an
estimated $240 million, while its foreign-exchange reserves reportedly stand at
a low of $80 million. It is doubtful that Vietnam has the money to buy food.

And, while it has been suggested that powered-milk shipments for children would
somehow reach the military, a recent report of a United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization mission contends that aid to Vietnam is efficiently
distributed to the needy for whom it is intended.

The sanctions campaign has been pursued beyond the bounds of decent behavior and
contradicts the United States' traditional practice of aiding victims of
disaster, especially children, regardless of national affiliation.

How can the members of the European Economic Community devoted to regulating the
marketing of infant formula in hopes of reducing malnutrition worldwide
simultaneously ignore the appeal for the malnourished children of Vietnam? Milk
must be sent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Elizabeth Becker, who reported from Indochina for The Washington Post, is
writing a book about postwar Indochina.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 542 words


In Beirut, opening of east-west road is a major achievement A2
Uganda troops said to massacre 60 civilians in Catholic mission A3
Britain plans an advisory council from Ulster A4
Around the World A5

Government/Politics
Alabama black wins a retrial A7
Democrats seek election reform A10
F.A.A. postpones a plan to shut its New York office B3
State Senate approves $500 mil- lion bond issue for prisons B5

HOLIDAY WEEKEND
Independence Day is tomorrow.- Most Federal and municipal offices are closed
today; New York State of- fices are open. Following are holiday schedules:
Parking - Alternate-side regulations suspended today and tomorrow; all other
rules in effect.  Sanitation - Regular collections today; collections normally
made tomorrow will be made Sunday.  Federal offices - Closed today and tomorrow.
State offices - Open today.  Courts - Federal, state and local courts are closed
today.  Municipal offices - Closed today.  Post offices - Open today; closed
tomorrow; only special delivery and express mail delivered tomorrow.  Banks -
Open today.  Stock and commodity markets -Closed today.  Transportation - Buses
and subways on regular schedule today; on Sunday schedule tomorrow. L.I.R.R. and
Conrail-Harlem, Hudson and New Haven Divisions on regular schedule today;
holiday schedule tomorrow.  Libraries - Closed today and tomorrow.

Weekend
Weekender Guide C1
Where to go to celebrate the Fourth C1
Theater: Broadway C2

79th Street Boat Basin gets a theater C3
Screen: Rock double-bill at the Thalia C6

At the Movies C6
Music: Carlos Moseley plays piano at Lyndhurst C3

Women get their turn at jazz festival C14

Fans nervous about future of jazz recording C14
Art: Manhattan is subject in two photo shows C18

Auctions C18

Guston show at Whitney C19

Useful arts of Africa at Brook- lyn Museum C19
Books: New novel by Brian Moore reviewed C8

Publishing C9
TV Weekend C20

General
Around the Nation A6
Motive sought for 4 slayings in Hollywood Hills A6
Fruit fly infestation termed out of control on Coast A6
Taunting victim was seen earlier wandering in midtown B5

Health/Science
Rare cancer diagnosed in 41 homosexuals A20

Industry/Labor
Unemployment drops in New York City but rises in state A10

Education/Welfare
Its expansion years over, SUNY to deal with fiscal restraints B2

Style
The Evening Hours B4
Women discuss power and its use B4
Making White House social guests feel at home B4

Obituaries
George Voskovec, actor A11

Sports
Rodriguez still the blithe spirit of golf after 21 years on tour A12
Owners' request for delay in talks creates an air of optimism A13
Dave Anderson on Wimbledon A13
Ellenberger admits violation of N.C.A.A. regulations at trial A13

News Analysis
David K. Shipler assesses Israel's political situation A2

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18

Irresolute Israel The morning of June 27 Saving the savers Topics: guns and
butter Letters A18
Tom Wicker: ABM is not the an- swer A19
Flora Lewis: Mrs. Fenwick and the terrible silence A19
Peter Bart: the Mormon nation, an American dream A19
Richard Taylor: what a conserva- tive really is, and isn't A19
Elizabeth Becker: milk for Viet- nam A19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV Weekend;
FROM ROSTROPOVICH TO BEACH BOYS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words


THE holiday weekend has its share of appropriate music specials. At 9 P.M.
tomorrow on public television, Channel 13 will carry ''Capitol Fourth With the
National Symphony,'' scheduled to take place on the Capitol lawn in Washington.
With Mstislav Rostropovich conducting the National Symphony Orchestra, the
program will include everything from Irving Berlin's ''God Bless America'' to
John Philip Sousa's ''Stars and Stripes Forever,'' all leading up to a grand
finale of fireworks.

In a somewhat less traditional mode, Sunday at 9 P.M., WPIX-Channel 11 will
offer a ''Spirit of America Spectacular'' starring the Beach Boys in a live,
outdoor concert from Long Beach, Calif. The group will be celebrating its 20th
anniversary with the familiar hymns to California surfing and girls. Also
performing will be Rick Springfield, Pablo Cruise and Three Dog Night. The host
is Wolfman Jack.

On the sports scene, tennis dominates the weekend as live satellite coverage
focuses on the London suburb of Wimbledon. This oldest and classiest of all
tennis tournaments will be broadcast for a scheduled six hours on NBC-TV
tomorrow, beginning at 9 A.M. All eyes, of course, are likely to be on Sweden's
Bjorn Borg, who is seeking his sixth straight men's singles championship at
Wimbledon.

As the networks settle into their normal summer rerun patterns, the few
scattered pockets of programming interest tend to be monopolized by public
television. Channel 13 has hit upon the nifty ploy of rerunning productions so
old that they can be marketed as ''classics'' rather than repeats. The gimmick
applies not only to movies but also to documentaries. Tonight at 9, for
instance, a series devoted to old CBS News documentaries is offering the
awardwinning ''World of Charlie Company,'' made in 1970.

Produced by Russ Bensley, the documentary was made while John Laurence, the
correspondent, spent nearly three months with the American combat soldiers of
Company C (Charlie Company) in the jungles of Vietnam and Cambodia. Mr. Laurence
found, in the words of Bill Moyers, host for the current series, ''people doing
a distasteful job in a place they'd rather not be.'' At the time, barely two
months after the killings at Kent State, the war was winding down, heightening
the soldiers' sense of futility. When the program was shown in July of 1970, the
public response was so overwhelming that CBS repeated it three weeks later.

For the most part, its impact is undiminished. As a portrait of fighting men in
the field undergoing 12 months of physical torture, its reflections of
dedication and resentment, heroism and growing disobedience, are still
illuminating. The over-all situation takes on the dimensions of a grotesque
dream. References to life at home are invariably couched in the words ''back in
the world.'' Mr. Moyers adds some updated information on several of the soldiers
who figured prominently in the program.

This week's edition of Channel 13's Video-Film Review on Sunday at 11 P.M. is
devoted to ''Coney Island: Four Views.'' Produced by Barbara Ravis, with special
thanks to Norman Rosten, among others, the half hour celebrates ''the thrills
and chills, the fun and frolic of the bawdy, gaudy amusement park.''

In the first section, clips from a 1903 movie called ''Rube and Mandy at Coney
Island,'' an indefatigable couple's comic adventures are used to provide a tour
of camel rides, trained-dog acts and miniature trains and boats. Paula
Gladstone's ''The Dancing Soul of the Walking People,'' made in 1976, takes a
more poetic approach to the area as it explores the strange world of light and
shadow beneath the wooden slats of the boardwalk. Families eat, children play,
little boys create sandstorms as the soundtrack plays the once popular song
''Down by the Boardwalk.'' On their way home, a steady stream of beachgoers
leave their personality imprints on the film footage.

''Coney,'' a 1975 piece made by Frank and Caroline Mouris, uses a speeded-up
technique to compile a frantic collage of streets, beach, graffiti, amusement
rides and fireworks. And the 1948 ''Weegee's New York'' zeros in on the people,
recording the bodies slipping discreetly out of wet bathing suits and the faces
coping with lotions and cosmetics. We are left with a sunset and a city skyline
- and a very pleasant tribute to a very special place.

At 11:30 Sunday night, WNET's growing desperation for programming becomes
apparent with the introduction to the schedule of ''Kup's Show,'' a long-time
talk show coming out of Chicago. Kup is Irv Kupcinet, once a sportswriter for
The Chicago Sun-Times. In fact, his show has been carried for years in the New
York area on one of the UHF stations. Now, it will be getting a 25-week run on
Channel 13.

The premiere installment is not very encouraging. For the first half of the
hour, the subject is baseball, specifically the Wrigley family's sale of the
Chicago Cubs to The Chicago Tribune. Kup's guests are Mike Royko, columnist for
The Sun-Times, and Jack Brickhouse, the announcer known as ''the voice of the
Cubs.'' Mr.  Royko can be provocative: ''The Wrigleys in the past three decades
have pretty well proven that chewing gum is their business, not baseball.'' And
Mr. Brickhouse is a fountain of baseball names and statistics. But the subject,
rambling on too long, is parochial and limited.

The rest of the program tackles a decidedly more urgent subject - the probable
consequences of nuclear war - but in a lackadaisical manner. Herbert Scoville of
the Arms Control Association and Kosta Tsipis of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology explain that present nuclear weapons are 50 to 100 times more
powerful than the bomb exploded at Hiroshima and that, at the same time, new
technologies are making the weapons ''more usable.'' The situation is indeed
''extremely dangerous'' but the point is lost when the cameras show Kup barely
listening as he searches through his cards for the next question.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 3, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FALL SCHEDULE LISTED BY PBS

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 349 words


The fall schedule for the Public Broadcasting Service includes only two new
prime-time series - ''Enterprise'' and ''John Callaway Interviews.'' The
schedule, which no longer includes such staples as ''Bill Moyers' Journal'' and
''Evening at Symphony,'' reflects PBS's leaner financial situation.

In daytime, PBS offers for the first time a program of college courses that can
be taken for credit, and a trio of Saturday morning how-to programs.

''Enterprise,'' will focus on the world of business in 13 halfhour
documentaries. Weekly episodes include a look at an airline price war, the story
of a Massachusetts company that went bankrupt and an investigation of companies
competing in the field of telecomunications.

''John Callaway Interviews'' will feature seven hourlong interviews with such
guests as Mike Wallace, anchor of ''60 Minutes''; the writer John Cheever, the
composer Aaron Copland and the sportscaster Howard Cosell.

Nine Courses Offered

Developed by PBS, the new adult education program will offer nine college
courses to more than 100 participating public-television stations. Credit will
be available through registration with up to 500 college and universities.
Courses include ''American Goverment Survey,'' ''Understanding Human behavior,''
''Humanities through the Arts'' and ''Contemporary Health Issues.''

Saturday morning programming will be dominated by three new how-to series: ''The
Photo Show'' is designed for begining photographers, and ''The World of
Cooking'' will feature various international chefs preparing meals typical of a
region's cuisine. ''The Woodwright's Shop'' will look at the art of 19th-century
woodcrafting.

Among the specials scheduled are ''A House Divided: Denmark Vesey's Rebellion,''
the dramatization of a slave's experience in America; ''Frank: A Portrait of a
Vietnam Veteran,'' which deals with a soldier's psychic wounds, and ''The Hunter
and the Hunted,'' which focuses on the search for Nazi war criminals.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DISABLED GROUP CONQUERS MOUNT RAINIER, ICE AND ALL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 436 words

DATELINE: PARADISE, Wash., July 3


Five blind climbers joined by one man with an artificial leg, an epileptic and
two deaf adventurers were part of a group that completed a joyful climb today to
the summit of Mount Rainier.

The nine cheered and applauded as they unfurled flags and hugged each other in
their triumph over what they called the mistaken notion that the horizons of the
handicapped are limited.

But members of the group had to dodge falling ice at one point on the way down
the 14,410-foot mountain in an area where 11 other climbers died last month.

Chuck O'Brien, 35 years old, of Philadelphia, who lost his leg in the Vietnam
War, said the climb ''really tore up'' his artificial limb.

''But I'll make it,'' he said. ''My spirit is really up.''

'One for the Epileptics'

Richard Rose, 36, of Vancouver, Wash., strode onto the summit, exclaiming,
''There's one for the epileptics!''

On the way down to a camp at the 11,500-foot level, the group encountered
falling ice from the Ingraham Glacier.  One blind member of the rope team,
Justin McDevitt, 29, of Rosemont, Pa., said, ''I thought I was going to die. I
could hear it but could not see what was coming.''

Eleven handicapped climbers, seven guides and expedition officials and two
reporters began the climb Wednesday. Two of the handicapped persons turned back,
but those who made it to the top were a full day ahead of their Fourth of July
goal.

The first to reach the snow-covered mountaintop were Mr. O'Brien; Kirk Adams,
19, of Snohomish, Wash., who is blind; Alec Naiman, 27, of New York, who is
deaf, and one of the guides, Jim Whittaker, who was the first American to reach
Mount Everest's summit.

A Trip Across the Summit

Minutes later, the four joined hands with the rest of the climbers and guides
for a short trip across the summit to sign a logbook.  Their high-base camp is
near an 80-foot crevasse and a quarter mile from the spot where an icefall
buried 11 climbers June 21. That accident was considered unusual, and Mr.
Whittaker said this climb was relatively safe.

Also reaching the summit were three other blind persons, Sheila-Holzworth, 19,
of Des Moines; Frederick Noesner, 34, of Glenside, Pa., and Douglas Wakefield,
39, of Arlington, Va.

Paul Stefurak, 35, of Federal Way, Wash., the president of the Seattle
Recreation Club for the Deaf, also made it to the top.  The group planned to
resume the descent tomorrow to Paradise Lodge at the 5,400-foot level.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

80 ARRESTED IN PROTEST AT WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 493 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 3


Eighty demonstrators were arrested at the White House today as they staged a
sitdown protest against the Reagan Administration's budget cuts and United
States involvement in El Salvador.

Thirty-one of the protesters were arrested for refusing to leave the White House
lawn. Minutes later, dozens of other protesters blocked traffic on Pennsylvania
Avenue in front of the Presidential mansion by sitting in a circle, joining
hands and singing.

The city police said that they had arrested 49 persons for obstructing traffic.
All but 11 of the 80 persons who were arrested paid their fines within a few
hours and were released, the police said.

The actions brought to a close a campaign sponsored by two community action
organizations, the Community for Creative Nonviolence and the Jonah House.

More Than 200 Arrests

Dick Hartwig, a spokesman for the Secret Service, said that the 31 arrests on
the White House lawn brought to about 195 the total for the series of protests.
That did not include the 49 arrested later outside by city police. Earlier this
week, when the total was 154, another Secret Service spokesman, Laurie Davis,
said, ''It's the largest group-type arrest we have record of.''

Fifteen men, 14 women and two juveniles were seized by Secret Service agents in
the sitdown on the lawn, Mr. Hartwig said. He said that the demonstrators were
charged with ''failure to quit,'' or leave, the premises. Conviction on the
charge, a misdemeanor, is punishable by six months in jail and a $100 fine.

President Reagan was at home, but it was not known to what extent he was aware
of the demonstration taking place outside.  The group in today's sitdown on the
lawn had gained entry to the grounds by joining a regular White House tour, a
tactic used throughout the series of demonstrations.

Statement Is Read

After leaving the Presidential residence, they broke away from an assigned
pathway and sat down on the north lawn of the White House grounds, holding hands
and forming a large circle as they read a statement protesting United States
assistance to the El Salvador Government.

The protesters also displayed black-and-white photographs portraying alleged
atrocities committed by government troops and security forces in that
strife-torn Central American nation.

''We come here today bearing evidence of the sufferings of the Salvadoran
people,'' the statement said. ''The pictures we carry with us bear witness to
the fruits of U.S. military aid and assistance to the Salvadoran Government.''

Among those arrested for blocking Pennsylvania Avenue was Philip Berrigan, a
former Roman Catholic priest who was a leader of the protest against the Vietnam
War a decade ago. It was not immediately known whether he was among those who
were released.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Phillip Berrigan being led away from White
House demonstration

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN THE BOAT PEOPLE NEEDED REAL FRIENDS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


To the Editor:

A comment was made at the televised gathering of the Holocaust survivors: ''When
the Jews say 'never again,' it is a hope that such a calculated catastrophe
would never happen to any people on earth again.''

For months during the genocidal Boat People crisis of 1979, tens of thousands of
men, women and children drowned in the South China Sea. Passing ships ignored
their desperate pleas, nations pushed them back to sea, pirates raped them and
the world watched with folded arms.

But the Jewish people and organizations responded vigorously to our efforts to
save these victims. By their actions, I could feel the impact of their own
terrible experience and the sincerity of their conviction.

The indifference of the world was one of the most infuriating aspects of the
Holocaust and of the Boat People crisis. Perhaps the residual guilt felt by the
world for the former prompted it to become, eventually, more compassionate in
the latter case. As our Jewish brothers and sisters recount their experience
this week, I join them in their hope of ''Never Again.''
ROBERT WU President, New Jersey Chapter Organization of Chinese Americans,
Ridgewood, N.J., June 22, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 4, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SPY CASE AND TOOL INDUSTRY

BYLINE: By WINSTON WILLIAMS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 601 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, July 3


The arrest on espionage charges this week of Marian Zacharski, president of the
obscure Polish American Machinery Corporation in suburban Elk Grove Village,
Ill., has brought unwanted notoriety to the machine tool company, whose annual
revenues are $30 million. But expanding East-West trade relations may be dealt a
much harsher blow.

''We have thousands of calls from customers wanting to know what happened, and a
few have canceled orders,'' said Henry Slowinski, vice president of Polish
American, which is called Polamco. ''It's a difficult time for us,'' he added,
''but the charges are against Mr.  Zacharski, not against Polamco. This will
pass.''

Polamco is a marketing arm of a state-owned company in Poland called Metal
Export. Metal Export owns at least 86 percent of the company; Toolmex, a Natick,
Mass., tool distributor, owns the remaining share.

Organized in 1976 to capitalize on the trade that blossomed in the 1970's
between Eastern European countries and the United States, Polamco is one of 18
companies formed by the Polish Government to sell the country's products. Last
year these companies, many of them joint ventures of American investors and the
Poles, handled between 55 percent and 60 percent of the $434 million worth of
Polish products exported to this country.

Officials at the State and Commerce Departments say that the Soviet Union and
countries such as Cuba and Vietnam are forbidden to establish similar companies.
But, they say, Eastern-bloc countries - Hungary, Rumania and Czechoslovakia -
have used American-based companies as export arms. The foreign corporations are
subject only to the laws of the states in which they are incorporated and are
not governed by any Federal codes.

Mr. Zacharski's arrest, for allegedly paying $110,000 to a Hughes Aircraft
employee in exchange for classified documents describing American military and
radar systems, represents the first smudge on the reputations of these
companies.

'Can't Scrutinize Everyone'

''We have a policy of encouraging business and commercial contact between
ourselves and Eastern Europe,'' said a spokesman for the State Department's
Polish desk. ''In this atmosphere there's going to be a lot of coming and going.
You can't scrutinize everyone closely.  You can only do what's feasible.''

The State Department said it could increase its vigilance on visa applications.
Trade practices are usually reciprocal, however, and any tightening in the
United States could result in more red tape for Americans doing business with
Eastern-bloc countries.

Besides Polamco, the Polish joint ventures include Polfoods, an importer of hams
and meat and the largest of the Polish companies, and Melex, which was involved
a few years ago in a celebrated case concerning the dumping of golf carts. The
major Hungarian company of this type is Action-Tungsram, a manufacturer of light
bulbs and a joint venture of Hungary and Action Industries.

''When you have your own company here you can respond to the market better,''
said Mr. Slowinski, the Polamco vice president. ''We can take much better care
of our machines after the sale.''

Polamco employs 25 people at its headquarters in Elk Grove Village, a satellite
town of offices and residences in the shadow of O'Hare airport. Another 75 are
employed in its other domestic offices in Atlanta, Detroit, Philadelphia,
Titusville, Pa., Houston and Los Angeles. Most of the employees are in
marketing, repair and sales.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Marian Zacharski photo of Polamco nearChicago

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Longtime Hanoi Leader Heads New Presidency

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column Z; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 117 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 4


Truong Chinh, a founding member of the Vietnamese Communist Party who was a
rival of Ho Chi Minh for its leadership, was elected leader of Vietnam's new
collective presidency today.

The Hanoi radio announced that the National Assembly had elected Mr. Chinh, 73
years old, to head the five-member State Council, a body with wide powers that
replaces the figurehead post of president.

The other members are Nguyen Huu Tho, Le Thanh Nghi, Chu Huy Man and Xuan Thuy.
The Assembly also re-elected Pham Van Dong as Prime Minister.

Diplomats here believe the most powerful figure in the Vietnamese hierarchy
remains the Communist Party secretary, Le Duan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR A LAOTIAN, FRUSTRATION AND ESCAPE

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1210 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


In June 1975, when the Laotian Communists were sweeping aside the coalition
Government and taking over the country, a senior, nonpolitical official
explained to an American friend why he would not join the mounting tide of
people fleeing to Thailand across the Mekong River.

Six years later, in this city, his tone as calm and as sad as it was then, the
former official resumed that conversation, to explain why he was here, after
swimming across the Mekong. He had spent the intervening years in rigorous and
remote mountain camps, ostensibly to be reeducated for service to the new Laos,
and five months in Vientiane realizing that his services were not wanted.

Still not angry, still uncomplaining, the French-educated official, now 51 years
old, consented to have his story told only if his name was withheld. He
explained that he did not want his escape to be depicted and politically
exploited as an act of opposition.

Recalling the earlier conversation, the soft-spoken Laotian said he had stayed
when many of his friends fled because he believed that Laos, under whatever
government, would need the services of those who had been trained in the skills
needed to develop a country without industry or roads that are passable
throughout the year.

He Expected to Be Mistrusted

He said then that he knew he would have to pay a price for his decision. As a
member of the ''wrong'' social class, married to a Frenchwoman, he expected to
be mistrusted and to have to prove his good faith before being allowed to
contribute fully to the development of Laos.

But he said that as leader of a small movement of intellectuals who had fought
against the corruption of the old regime and the excessive power of certain
generals, he would betray his previous stand if he left with the onset of the
Communist regime.

A few weeks after the 1975 conversation, the official was summoned to attend a
''seminar,'' the Laotian euphemism for detention without charges or trial, and
with no limit to the term of confinement, of people distrusted by the Communist
Government. The equivalent designation in Vietnam, whose influence is dominant
in Laos, is ''reeducation.''

With a change of clothes, he left for the ''seminar,'' to be held in Vientiane
and to last a maximum of one month. But he was one of the first group chosen
''for further study'' in the mountains of Viengsay, in the northeastern border
region with Vietnam. He pointed out to a Communist official that he had been
about to enter hospital for a hemorrhoid operation but was reassured that he
would be back within a week and that medical facilities in Viengsay were
excellent.

'Not Punishment,' He Was Told

Without taking leave of his wife and two sons, the former official was flown to
the Plain of Jars, taken by helicopter to Viengsay and by truck for 60 miles
farther north to an old prison-camp site in the forest.

Together with about 600 other former civil servants, soldiers and policemen, he
began a routine that combined all the work required to sustain life among
inhospitable and primitive surroundings with basic political education.

''They told us this was not punishment,'' the former official said. ''They said
they themselves were always working on their political education. They wanted to
make Communists of us.''

''I tried to do what I could to understand their politics,'' he continued. ''I
knew that if I wanted to be allowed to work in their society, I would have to
understand this.''

'A New Patriotism'

The former official described the Communist supervisors and instructors in
sympathetic terms, as people who believed in what they were saying and in the
justice of what they were doing. He said they shared the hardships and
deprivations of their prisoners' lives and committed no brutalities.

Political instruction was rudimentary, with barely educated peasants teaching
men of advanced education what the former official described as ''a new
patriotism, in which the Communist Party demanded that all Laotians voluntarily
accept its authority over all aspects of their lives.'' He said the party was
depicted as infallible, and those who doubted it as swimming against the flow of
history.

Prisoners had to form cells of 10 men to discuss the political lessons, engage
in criticism of themselves and each other, and write again and again the story
of their lives in the light of the new teaching. ''My hope was that eventually
this Marxism-Leninism would take on a specific Laotian form and in this
adaptation would make it possible for all of us to construct our country,'' the
official explained.

His wife, a pediatrician, remained in Vientiane, awaiting his return and hoping,
by working at a hospital and teaching at the medical faculty, to speed his
liberation. In 1978, when France broke relations with Laos, the Laotian
authorities made it evident that they wanted her to leave. She rejoined their
sons at school in France.

Long Stretches Without News

Her letters and packages reached him only occasionally, and there were long
stretches when the couple were without news of each other.  Last January, the
former official was told that he was being ''reassigned to Vientiane.'' At a
farewell lunch, the political commissar told him he would be put to work in the
capital, at a lesser job and with lower pay than in the past. He arrived, eager
to go to work and assuming that he was now considered ''reeducated'' and
acceptable to the authorities.

His wife was allowed to visit him for two weeks.  ''I think I disappointed her
badly,'' he said. ''She thought that she would find me like a victim of Hitler's
concentration camps, bitter and above all eager to leave my country. Instead, I
told her I was waiting to be put to work and asked her to apply for a job that
would bring her back to Laos.''

The former official's most bitter disappointment came in his last months in
Laos, when he was free in Vientiane, with nothing to do but occasionally
translate for friends in ministries and bring his tennis game up to its old
form.

'We Had Been Forgotten'

He learned that the five and a half years of imprisonment that he believed had
been a preparation for being useful to Laos had been mere imprisonment. No one
in Vientiane knew what his capacities were, and no one intended to employ his
skills.

''For five and a half years, I saw an image of a Laos that was poor, lacking
everything, but led by people who would finally lead the Laotian people to a
prosperous and honorable future,'' he said sadly but without bitterness.

''I was wrong. We had been forgotten, and in Vientiane I found no creative
enthusiasm, nor any of the new solidarity we had heard about in the camp. Then I
thought of the sadness of my wife and children.''

Last month, six years to the month after his decision not to join the exodus,
the former official slid down the bank to the riverside and swam to Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The World in Summary;
HANDS ACROSS THE HIMALAYAS?

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim and Barbara Slavin

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 263 words


Jawaharlal Nehru's dream of friendship between the world's two most populous
countries has lain in ruins along the 2,500-mile China-India border since 1962,
when Mao Zedong's army rolled over India's claims to territories it inherited
from Britain. But last week in New Delhi, Mr. Nehru's daughter, Prime Minister
Indira Gandhi, and Chinese Foreign Minister Huang Hua began the long process of
rebuilding Sino-Indian relations. The first steps were modest: open negotiations
on the 50,000 square miles disputed between the two countries and annual
exchanges of cultural, scientific, technological and economic missions.

Geopolitical differences still divide the Asian giants. Since the 1960's they
have moved to opposite sides of the Soviet-American chasm. Washington and Peking
supply weapons to New Delhi's sometime enemy, Pakistan, while India, armed by
Moscow, says little about the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and has
diplomatic relations with the Vietnam-installed Government in Cambodia.
Nevertheless, India-China trade has risen to a substantial $100 million a year
and Mao's pragmatic heirs are seeking friends on every non-Soviet side.  As Mr.
Huang pointed out, they must contend with the ''turbulent, tense, complex and
volatile international situation of the '80's.''

In a good-will gesture, Mr. Huang added that Indian pilgrims can now visit sites
in Tibet that Hindus revere as the abode of Shiva, the god of destruction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANTI-AMERICANISM IN WEST GERMANY APPEARS IN MANY GUISES

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1262 words

DATELINE: BONN


A recent full-page advertisement in a West German national magazine (cost:
$11,898.73 at current rates) said, right in the first paragraph, that ''almost
nothing that is sold or used in our restaurants comes from America.'' Their
enterprise was German, the advertisers insisted, with German interests, German
management, German workers and German suppliers.

This insistently ''all-German'' restaurant chain was McDonald's.  Apparently
catching the scent of something rising fast over the golden arches, the West
German franchise-holders seemed to feel it was a good time to look a little less
American. Hadn't Vorwarts, the official newspaper of the Social Democratic
Party, run an article associating McDonald's with ''primitive American
nourishment,'' ''recreating U.S.A. hegemony'' and ''gastronomic conservatism?''

In a country of sometimes grinding earnestness, this would be just funny - and
for some Americans, an example of good German sense - if it didn't come at a
time of considerable questioning of the attitudes of West Germans and, to a
lesser extent, other northern Europeans, toward the United States. The tag-words
run together and blur - pacifism, neutralism, anti-Americanism; the definitions
and explanations often collide. But even so, something seems to be there.

Events of the last few weeks were instructive. At a Protestant conference in
Hamburg attended by perhaps 100,000 young participants, an accompanying ''peace
march'' portrayed Washington as the force behind world tensions and a new arms
race. The cover of Stern, the country's largest general interest magazine,
showed an American nuclear missile piercing the heart of a dove of peace. The
Social Democrats' youth wing criticized the party's national leadership for
permitting ''Americanization'' of the party. And the Suddeutsche Zeitung, a
leading liberal voice, said that anti-Americanism has become an abominable
fashion, ''transported by arrogance and selfjustification, and by the vehicle of
European fears and the so-called peace movement in ever wider circles.'' Some
West Germans who acknowledge the problem but prefer not to consider it a deep
one say all this would wash away if only Ronald Reagan would appear more
sympathetic to the third world, become angry with South Africa, reduce interest
rates, stop spending so much on arms, leave ''liberation movements'' alone and
begin speaking kindly of Leonid I. Brezhnev.

But other analysts suggest deeper, more lasting estrangement. They contend that
anti-Americanism or neutralism or pacifism is a reversion to anti-Western and
antimodernistic currents traditional in German society. The fear of atomic
energy, which is stitched into the current mood, and young Germans' lack of
interest in technology - technological schools cannot fill their classes -
appear to bear this out. Max Weber, the German political sociologist, distrusted
Anglo-Saxon materialism; the notion that Germany is a special entity between
East and West has been more of a constant in German thought of the past 150
years than any special admiration for or spiritual relationship with the United
States.
Passion About Missiles

The materialism and acculturation that many intellectuals find repulsive may be
a particularly West German kind, but it seems easier for them to thrust
responsibility for them onto the United States. One serious political theorist
read by university students, Peter Bender, believes that Europe - the word is
often employed by the left to avoid saying Germany - must protect itself
culturally against American civilization and must ''Europeanize'' the Soviet
Union so it can be spared ''Americanization.'' In his view, the Soviet
population is still pure, uncorrupted by consumerism. The Americans, of course,
are not.

Many West German leaders consider this drivel and point to opinion polls that,
depending on the phrasing of the questions, usually show support for the United
States. But the attitude of the intellectuals (the author Gunter Grass said last
year that America had lost in Vietnam its right to appeal to morals) has won an
expanding audience. A survey last summer reported that 49 percent of the Social
Democratic Party's members favored foreign policies steering between the United
States and the Soviet Union, rather than alongside the Americans. This attitude
may have something to do with Bonn's unwillingness during the last 10 years of
detente to judge Soviet behavior harshly. Although the Chancellor, Helmut
Schmidt, has been a bit more acerbic recently, a picture has been created of the
Russians as difficult, but basically reasonable, while the Americans have been
seen as living with the injustice, decomposition and confusion of Vietnam,
Watergate and the Carter Presidency.

The criticism has become more concrete with the United States portrayed as
attempting to force West Germany to confront the Soviet Union. First, there was
the call for sanctions after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, which was
resisted by Mr. Schmidt. The source of passion now is the stationing of new
medium-range United States nuclear missiles in West Germany.

Although it was Mr. Schmidt who pressed Washington to make the original missile
decision, a fact generally disregarded in the debate, the demonstrators and
peace-marchers see the proposed missiles as an American attempt to
''Europeanize'' a possible nuclear war with Moscow. The issue has been discussed
from many angles and has produced suggestions including that the missiles be
stationed on ships rather than in Europe. Each turn has produced new suggestions
that the United States is warlike and without integrity.  Last week, this notion
received unusual legitimization from Gunter Gaus, West Germany's former
representative in East Germany and a confidant of Willy Brandt, the Social
Democratic Party chairman.

''There is no doubt,'' Mr. Gaus said, ''that it is in the political interest of
the United States to establish the possibility of such military conflict with
the U.S.S.R. that would not directly affect U.S. territory. Restriction of the
argument in West Germany to military problems disguises the fact that the core
of the controversy consists of making nuclear military conflict (in Europe)
possible. If U.S. Pershing missiles were stationed in West Germany, although 50
percent of the West Germans do not agree to such an interpretation of the
meaning of NATO, West Germany would become an American province in the meaning
the term 'province' had in the Roman Empire.'' Mr. Gaus's use of numbers was
interesting, some observers noted, since his party had gained power with only
42.9 percent of the vote last fall.

Most American diplomats in Bonn believe that the missile controversy and the
anti-American tone are issues West Germans must resolve themselves. Some Germans
have already warned that, if the distrust is permitted to fester, the reaction
in Washington could be a new kind of American isolationism that says, ''The
Europeans don't care; why should we?'' The next time anyone has to be rescued in
Europe, suggested the Suddeutsche Zeitung, the Americans may not be available to
do it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of demonstrators opposing deployment of nuclear
missiles

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FEMINISM'S NEXT STEP

BYLINE: By Betty Friedan; This article is adapted from ''The Second Stage,'' by
Betty Friedan, to be published in October by Summit Books.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6163 words


The women's movement is over,'' said my friend, a usually confident executive,
who is also a wife and feminist. ''At least,'' she continued in a grim tone,
''it is in my shop. The men are making jokes about bimbos again, and the other
woman in the executive group and I just look at each other. It doesn't matter if
we get mad; they act as if we aren't there. When a new job opens up, all they
look for now is men. It's as if the word has gone out that we've lost our case;
there won't be any equal rights amendment after all, so they don't need to worry
anymore about lawsuits over sex discrimination, even though laws against it are
still on the books. They figure they can do what they want about women now - or
do nothing at all - like the old days.''

The women's movement in some form will never be over. But the rights that women
have struggled to win in the last decade are in deadly danger, with right-wing
groups in Congress determined to gut laws against sex discrimination and to
abolish legal abortion. We now have less than 365 days to pass the equal rights
amendment, which is both the symbol and the substance of women's rights. If
E.R.A. does not become part of the Constitution by June 30, 1982, it may not
come up again in this century.

And there are other signs that we have reached, not the beginning of the end,
but the end of the beginning.  Listening to my own daughter and others of her
generation, I sense something off, out of focus, going wrong. From the
daughters, working so hard at their new careers, determined not to be trapped as
their mothers were, expecting so much and taking for granted the opportunities
we fought for, I've begun to hear undertones of pain and puzzlement, almost a
bitterness that they hardly dare admit. As if, with all those opportunities that
we won for them, they are reluctant to speak out loud about certain other needs
some of us rebelled against - needs for love, security, men, children, family,
home.

I sense a frustration in women not so young, about those careers they're lucky
to have, facing agonizing conflicts over having children. Can they have it all?
How?

I sense a desperation in divorced women and men and an unspoken fear of divorce
in those still married, which is being twisted into a backlash against equal
rights that are more essential than ever for the divorced.

I sense a sullen impatience among some of those women who entered the work force
in unprecedented millions over the last 10 years, who are in fact earning 59
cents for every dollar men earn because the only jobs available to most women
are still in the low-paying clerical and service fields. Even among the few who
have broken through to the executive suite, I sense the exhilaration of trying
to be superwomen giving way to disillusionment with the tokens of power.

What is going wrong? Why this uneasy sense of battles won, only to be fought
again, of battles that should have been won and yet are not, of battles that
suddenly one does not really want to win, and the weariness of battle altogether
- how many feel it?

I, and other feminists, dread to discuss these troubling symptoms because the
women's movement has been the source and focus of so much of our energy,
strength and security for so long. We cannot conceive that it will not go on
forever the same way it has for nearly 20 years. But we cannot go on denying
these puzzling symptoms of distress. If they mean something is seriously wrong,
we had better find out and change direction yet again, before it is too late.

I believe it is over, the first stage. We must now move into the second stage of
the sex-role revolution, which the women's movement set off.

In that first stage, our aim was full participation, power and voice in the
mainstream - inside the party, the political process, the professions, the
business world. But we were diverted from our dream by a sexual politics that
cast man as enemy and seemed to repudiate the traditional values of the family.
In reaction against the feminine mystique, which defined women solely in terms
of their relation to men as wives, mothers and homemakers, we insidiously fell
into a feminist mystique, which denied that core of women's personhood that is
fulfilled through love, nurture, home. We seemed to create a polarization
between feminists and those women who still looked to the family for their very
identity, not only among the dwindling numbers who were still full-time
housewives, but also among women who do not get as much sense of worth or
security from their jobs as they get - or wish they could get - from being
someone's wife or mother. The very terms in which we fought for abortion, or
against rape, or in opposition to pornography seemed to express a hate for men
and a lack of reverence for childbearing that threatened those women profoundly.
That focus on sexual battles also took energy away from the fight for the equal
rights amendment and kept us from moving to restructure work and home so that
women could have real choices. We fought for equality in terms of male power,
without asking what equality really means between women and men.  I believe that
we have to break through our own feminist mystique now and move into the second
stage - no longer against, but with men. In the second stage we have to
transcend that polarization between feminism and the family. We have to free
ourselves from male power traps, understand the limits of women's power as a
separate interest group and grasp the possibility of generating a new kind of
power, which was the real promise of the women's movement. For the second stage
is not so much a fixed agenda as it is a process, a mode that will put a new
value on qualities once considered -and denigrated as - special to women,
feminine qualities that will be liberated in men as they share experiences like
child care. These qualities, used mainly in the private world of the family
until now, were previewed for the first time publicly in the women's movement;
now they will be used in a larger political sphere by both men and women.

We discovered the first-stage limits - and the potential - of women's power in
the last election. After the momentous passage of the equal rights amendment by
Congress in 1972 and approval by 35 of the 38 states needed to ratify a
Constitutional amendment, E.R.A. had become deadlocked in the 15 unratified
states.  Despite majority popular support, as shown by the polls, E.R.A. was
taken up as a target of right-wing political groups and became a focus for the
reactionary political wave that was beginning to sweep the country. Discussion
of it bogged down in hysterical claims that the amendment would eliminate
privacy in bathrooms, encourage homosexual marriage, put women in the trenches
and deprive housewives of their husbands' support.

What the equal rights amendment says is, ''Equality of rights under the law
shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or any state on account of
sex.'' What it would do is put half the population under the full protection of
the Constitution and the Bill of Rights for the first time, guaranteeing
inalienable equal opportunity for women in employment, education and other
spheres. It would also provide the basis for equality in social security,
marriage and divorce law, pensions and military service.

The Republicans, in fact, probably lost the votes of the single largest voting
bloc in this election as a result of the extreme stand they took on their
platform, repudiating the equal rights amendment, vowing to amend the
Constitution to outlaw abortion and pledging to appoint judges who concurred
with these views. It is noteworthy that there was a 16 percent difference
between the voting of women and men in the 1980 Presidential election. According
to a New York Times/CBS News Poll, Ronald Reagan defeated Jimmy Carter by an
overwhelming 54 to 37 percent among men, but only by 46 to 45 percent among
women.  The majority of women (52 percent) voted against Reagan - (45 percent
for Carter; 7 percent for Anderson). In the years since exit polls have been
taken, there has never been such a discrepancy between men's and women's voting.
In the previous Presidential election, the male and female percentages were
nearly identical. Further, women who were for the equal rights amendment voted
overwhelmingly against Reagan - 65 percent to 32 percent, or more than 2 to 1.
This women's rights bloc constituted 22 percent of the total vote, a larger bloc
than blacks (10 percent), Hispanics (2 percent) and Jews (5 percent) combined,
or even than blue-collar workers (17 percent). Women who opposed the E.R.A.
constituted only 15 percent of the vote and they supported Reagan even more
avidly than men -66 percent compared with 29 percent for Carter.

For women as for men, inflation was an overriding issue in the election.
Nevertheless, for the majority of women to have voted against Reagan, equality
had to be a primary concern. Polltakers could not understand why there was a
difference between the voting of women and men. They could not pin it to the
specific issues of E.R.A. and abortion, only to a general impression that
''Carter would be better for women.''

But, in the four years of his Presidency, Carter had delivered only one new
state - Indiana - beyond the 34 that had ratified E.R.A.  before his election.
And he had also opposed Federal funds for poor women's abortions (''There are
many things in life that are not fair,'' he declared in 1977). Nine months
before the election, the board of the National Organization for Women resolved:
''Anybody but Carter.'' The women's rights groups united to defy Carter's own
commandos at the Democratic convention and won a stronger support of E.R.A. and
women's right to choose in the Democratic platform. But Carter himself did not
understand the weapon this gave him. Only at the very end, some of the fine
feminists and shrewd female politicians in the Carter Administration - Eleanor
Holmes Norton, the chairman of the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, and Anne Wexler, the President's assistant - enlisted the help of
feminist leaders, making a commitment to mobilize the full machinery of the
White House for E.R.A. and child care, next time. Too little, too late.

If the Democrats had spent the same amount of energy courting women on the
issues of equal rights as they spent courting blacks and Jews and other
minorities - not only during the campaign, but during Jimmy Carter's four years
in the White House - we might have had the equal rights amendment, and the
women's movement might have mobilized, in earnest, to re-elect Carter. As it
turned out, we mobilized, in belated panic, to defeat Reagan -and contained our
disgust with Carter. But our help was not seriously sought -nor deserved.

But the question must be asked: Is the kind of power generated or implicit in
the women's movement truly expressed in single-issue, special-interest politics?

There is a discrepancy between the power of the women's movement as an
instrument for fundamental change in the consciousness of and about women and
their role in society and the deadlocks and failures of the organized political
movement on these single issues. Of course, it could be argued that the equal
rights amendment is more than a single issue. Surely, half the population is
more than a special-interest group. But no matter. As the movement focused its
energies on those issues, it borrowed, at least in part, the dominant, masculine
technique of abstracting one issue from the total context and becoming locked
into a win-lose, zero-sum confrontation. There was always a conflict between the
women'sorganization leaders who merely wanted to raise money and hire male
lobbyists and those feminists who wanted to mobilize the unprecedented power of
the women's movement, using the actual energies of all the women out there who
had ''changed their lives.'' n the other hand, in fighting for the equal rights
amendment over the past 10 years, women have grown, discovered unsuspected
strengths and skills and developed a consensus extending from traditional
establishment groups like the Junior League and the Y.W.C.A., the Girl Scouts,
the League of Women Voters, Roman Catholic nuns, Jewish and Protestant
churchwomen, union, business and professional women, to the new women's caucuses
in every field, as well as newly organized black and Chicano groups, students
and farm women, and the proliferating mainstream to ''radical'' feminist
organizations. This consensus is infinitely broader than any special-interest
group of men. In fact, the movement for women's equal rights has won the support
not only of the majority of men, as reflected in polls, but specific political
support, finally, from labor leaders and civilrights and other special-interest
groups. As Eleanor C. Smeal, the president of the National Organization for
Women (NOW), has said, ''Not a moment of it was wasted, even if we never win.''

It will take a miracle of political wisdom and survival skills for women to save
the equal rights amendment by June 30, 1982. The women's movement has made such
miracles happen before. The great march on Washington by thousands of women in
the hot summer of 1979 made their real passion for equality clear enough to
Congress to achieve extension of the traditional seven-year deadline for
ratification of Constitutional amendments.

For a miracle like that, in the current reactionary political climate, the
leaders of every woman's organization -from NOW. and the League of Women Voters
to the most career-oriented professional woman's caucuses and nonpolitical
college sororities - would have to put aside their separate agendas. They would
have to give not only lip-service priority to E.R.A., but they would have to
summon an emergency mobilization of their members, their staffs and their own
treasuries, even mortgaging their buildings, to put all possible woman power
into states like Virginia, Georgia, Oklahoma, North Carolina, as well as
Illinois, Missouri and Florida, dividing the command of different states among
the different organizations, or agreeing to follow a combined command.

Republican politicians from President Reagan down would have to be made to
understand that their responsibility for killing the equal rights amendment
might be the margin for defeat for Republicans in 1984. And Democratic
politicians would have to understand that our voting bloc - now larger than the
traditional ethnic and blue-collar base - could be their only hope for power
again in this century, but only if they mobilize their still considerable
political muscle, expertise and flagging courage for equal rights for women as
masterfully as they did to bring about the 96-0 defeat for cuts in old-age
Social Security in the Senate.

And the seemingly apathetic ''me'' generation of students would have to be
aroused, as they haven't been since the Vietnam War, the daughters to pay their
dues and insure the opportunities they now take for granted, the sons to insure
their own new dreams for more fulfilling lives. The women who have had
assertiveness training and learned to dress for success would have to apply the
hard skills and money from their own careers to insure that the doors the
women's movement forced open don't close on them. The women afraid of divorce
would have to see equal rights as the best insurance for themselves and their
families against financial disaster.

Recently, a well-dressed woman in her 40's, facing a crisis in her own 25-year
marriage, told me of her despair at the inability of women leaders to ''get
their act together'' and truly mobilize to meet the crisis of E.R.A.

''They're not sure even now whether to ask women to go to Virginia or Georgia or
Oklahoma. They say we might rock the boat,'' she said.  ''Don't they realize we
have to rock the boat now. Who handed them or even President Reagan the right to
give up our daughters' possibility to live lives of hope and equality for the
rest of this century? It's not a matter of the specific details of the change
E.R.A. will make in the laws of this state or that. If we lose the E.R.A., the
rights we all take for granted now will be up to the whim of the individual
judge again or the boss or husband. We won't have real control over our own
lives without equal rights in the Constitution.'' That woman had gotten her own
suburban friends, who had never been near a NOW meeting or consciousness-raising
group, to pool their money to hire a top professional political consultant to
assess the chances of passing E.R.A. in the time left. One teen-ager contributed
$800 she had raised baby-sitting for E.R.A. More valuable than the study itself
- which showed that passage of E.R.A. was still politically possible -was the
urgency of these women. If only that could be made visible.

That energy is out there, waiting for leadership. And the fact is, the most
recent national poll conducted by Yankelovich, Skelly and White in May 1981,
confirming the conservative mood of the nation in support of Reagan on economic
issues, recorded a substantial 61 percent majority for passage of E.R.A as
compared with 30 percent against.

Finally, I think we have to face the fact that on June 30, 1982, we may lose the
battle to get equal rights for women into the Constitution - and consider the
real consequences. Many women whose own power in the executive suite or
political arena arose from the women's movement for equality in a sense they
have forgotten or never acknowledged in their own careers - will most surely
lose that power. Women who were persuaded that E.R.A. was against the family,
and that all they needed was a man to take care of them the rest of their lives,
will have reason to fear financial disaster in divorce.  Leaders of
special-interest groups - men or women whose concerns are for the rights of
homosexuals, blacks, Jews, children, the aged, - may realize too late that
defeat of the E.R.A., which protects the rights of half the nation, may doom the
already threatened rights of much smaller interest groups.

If we had not been diverted by sexual politics, we might not now be watching the
dismantling of affirmative-action programs against sex discrimination in
education and employment by conservative extremists in the Senate. The defeat of
the Senators on the Moral Majority hit list (Birch Bayh, Frank Church, John C.
Culver, George S. McGovern) cannot be attributed solely to disgust with Carter
or to Reagan's coattails. The women's movement has to assume some
responsibility. We underestimated the threat and did not mobilize ourselves in
all-out defense of the men who were explicitly targeted for defeat by the
National Conservative Political Action Committee supposedly because they
supported equal rights for women, the right to abortion and homosexual rights.

Is a distorted sexual politics at work if the women's movement did not rise to
the support of these men with the same passion as, for instance, it supported
Bella Abzug or Elizabeth Holtzman in their Senate races? Is a distorted sexual
politics responsible for the lumping of these three issues together in such an
inflammable, sexually charged package? It is all very well for leaders of the
women's movement today to insist, correctly, that the equal rights amendment has
nothing to do with either abortion or homosexuality - in fact, it has nothing to
do with sexual behavior at all. But the sexual politics that dis-torted the
sense of priorities of the women's movement during the 1970's made it easy for
the so-called Moral Majority to lump E.R.A. with homosexual rights and abortion
into one explosive package of licentious, family-threatening sex.  here is no
doubt that the radical right with its almost unlimited money is using abortion
and homosexuality as a red herring. For surely, homosexality and abortion are
not the main problems in America today. But up through history to Hitler and the
Ayatollah, and not exempting Stalinist Russia, control and manipulation of
sexuality and the family and suppression of the rights and personhood of women
have been key elements in authoritarian power. The emotions and repressions
linked to sexuality are so powerful that it is also relatively easy to divert
people's attention from their own basic economic interests and even from asking
the tough political questions simply by manipulating sexual hysteria.

The Founding Fathers of this republic wrote into the Bill of Rights the
protection of certain basic areas of privacy. Surely it is politically unwise to
seem to threaten that area of inviolate sexual privacy now, as part of an effort
to secure these basic rights for women. Tactics that smack of sexual
exhibitionism, even slogans like ''sexual preference,'' distort the basic
principle; they seem to invade that very right of privacy for which we fight.

Maybe there was something slightly off in the way we handled abortion. Such
slogans as ''free abortion on demand'' had connotations of sexual
permissiveness, affronting not only the moral values of conservatives but
implying a certain lack of reverence for life and the mysteries of conception
and birth.

After all, why do feminists seem to be fighting ''for abortion'' against women
who say they are fighting for ''the right to life''?  How can we fight the real
battle in such terms? Who is really for abortion? That is like being for
mastectomy. I, myself, am for life.  I am for the choice to have children, which
those who would ban access to safe, legal, medical abortion endanger.  The true
potential of women's power can be realized only by transcending the false
polarization between feminism and the family.  It is an abstract polarization
that does not exist in real life.

For instead of the polarization that has plagued the women's movement in the
last few years and prevented the very possibility of political solutions, new
research shows that virtually all women today share a basic core of commitment
to the family and to their own equality within and beyond it, as long as family
and equality are not seen to be in conflict.

One such study, ''Juggling Contradictions: Women's Ideas About Families,'' was
conducted by Nancy Bennett, Susan Harding, et al. of the Social Science Research
Community at the University of Michigan in 1979. The 33 women in this study were
between the ages of 28 and 45, white, with children, living in small and
medium-size Michigan cities. A third of the women had some college education,
most of the families had an income of between $15,000 and $30,000, and more than
half the women were employed, most of them part time, at jobs ranging from
selling real estate to nursing, hairdressing and cleaning houses.

The researchers admitted that their preconceptions and practically everything
they had read had prepared them to put the women they interviewed into two
categories - familial or individualistic. The ''familial ideology'' places a
tremendous value on the family and on motherhood, both as an activity and as a
source of identity. It holds that family - husband and children - should be the
primary focus of a woman's life and that the needs of the family should be
placed above all else. In contrast, the ''individualistic ideology'' places the
individual on an equal level with the family -mothers have needs and goals to
meet as persons apart from the family.

The researchers reported: ''Instead of finding categories of women, we found
categories of ideas ... bits and pieces of two distinct belief systems -
familial and individualistic ideologies. None of the women we spoke with
subscribed completely to one ideology or the other; they all expressed some
combination of the two, in their words and in their lives. The ideologies are
opposed in the political arena. ... The women we spoke with, however, did not
present these ideas as contradictory.''

The researchers stressed: ''We were not surprised to find conflicting ideas or
ideologies expressed by the women we interviewed, but to find them combined in
the views and behavior of each woman.''

The tension between the two ideologies - woman-as-individual and
woman-serving-her-family - looked irreconcilable in the abstract, but was, in
fact, reconciled in the women's lives. They worked, usually part time or on
different shifts from their husbands, shared child care with husbands or
grandmothers or others and approved of childcare centers, even if they were not
yet ready to use them themselves.

Even those who themselves symbolize or preach one or the other ideology can be
seen combining both in their own lives. When Rosebeth Moss Kanter, the eminent
sociologist and author of ''Men and Women in the Corporation,'' takes her
2-year-old son to a board meeting, her partner-husband, Barry, takes over with
the child. They describe this arrangement in feminist terms. But when Marabel
Morgan ''saves'' her marriage, not by decking her body in ostrich feathers but
by enlisting her husband as partner-manager to keep track of and invest the
money she earns lecturing on ''Total Womanhood,'' she describes this as
''feminine,'' not feminist.

There are not two kinds of women in America. The political polarization between
feminism and the family was preached and manipulated by extremists on the right
- and colluded in, perhaps unconsciously, by feminist and liberal or radical
leaders - to extend or defend their own political power. Now, as ideological
polarization is being resolved in real life by juggling and rationalizing new
necessities in traditional terms and old necessities in feminist terms, women
will strengthen the family in evolving ways.

Politically, for the women's movement to continue to promote issues like E.R.A.,
abortion and child care solely in individualistic terms subverts our own moral
majority. Economic necessity and the very survival of the family now force the
increasing majority of women to work and to make painful choices about having
more children. And women who merely tolerated, or even disapproved of, these
concerns, will now face them as matters of concrete personal urgency and the
survival of their families. The women's movement has appealed to women as
individualists; the Moral Majority has played to and elicited an explosive,
defensive reaction on behalf of women as upholders of the family. Perhaps the
reactionary preachers of the Moral Majority who decry women's moves to equality
as threats to the family are merely using the family to limit women's real
political power. In a similar vein, feminists intent on mobilizing women's
political power are, in fact, defeating their own purpose by denying the
importance of the family.

That Michigan study showed something very important. All the women believed in
equality and all of them believed in the family - from the same or converging
needs for security, identity, and some control over their lives. Whether or not
they supported a particular issue depended on how they perceived its affecting
them. No appeal would be acceptable, even to the most individualistic, if it
denied or conflicted with their commitment to the family, which they all shared.

''Family'' is not just a buzz word for reactionaries; for women, as for men, it
is the symbol of that last area where one has any hope of control over one's
destiny, of meeting one's most basic human needs, of nourishing that core of
personhood threatened now by vast impersonal institutions and uncontrollable
corporate and government bureaucracies. Against these menaces, the family may be
as crucial for survival as it used to be against the untamed wilderness and the
raging elements, and the old, simple kinds of despotism.

For the family, all psychological science tells us, is the nutrient of our
humanness, of all our individuality. The Michigan women, and all the others they
exemplify, may show great political wisdom as well as personal survival skills
in holding on to the family as the base of their identity and human control.  It
is time to start thinking of the movement in new terms. It is very important
indeed that the daughters - and the sons - hold on to the dream of equality in
the years ahead and move consciously to the second stage of the sex-role
revolution. If we cannot, at this moment, solve the new problems we can no
longer deny, we must at least pass on the right questions. These second-stage
questions reflect the most urgent problems now facing this nation.

There is a quiet movement of American men that is converging on the women's
movement, though it is masked at the moment by a resurgence of machismo. This
movement of men for self-fulfillment beyond the rat race for success and for a
role in the family beyond breadwinner makes it seem that women are seeking power
in terms men are leaving behind. Even those women who have made it on such terms
are forfeiting the quality of life, exchanging their old martyred service of
home and children for harassed, passive service of corporation.

In the second stage, women have to say ''No'' to standards of success on the job
set in terms of men who had wives to take care of all the details of life, and
standards at home set in terms of women whose whole sense of worth and power had
to come from that perfectly run house, those perfectly controlled children.
Instead of accepting that double burden, women will realize that they can and
must give up some of that power in the home and the family when they are
carrying part of the breadwinning burden and some beginnings of power on the
job. Instead of those rigid contracts that seemed the feminist ideal in the
first stage, there will be in the second stage an easy flow as man and woman
share the chores of home and children - sometimes 50-50, sometimes 20-80 or
60-40, according to their abilities and needs. In the second stage, the woman
will find and use her own strength and style at work, instead of trying so hard
to do it man's way, and she will not feel she has to be more independent than
any man for fear that she will fall back into that abject dependence that she
sometimes secretly yearns for.

Politically, instead of focusing on woman as victim and on sexual battles that
don't really change anything, like those marches against pornography, feminists
in the second stage will forge new alliances with men from unions, church and
corporation that are essential if we are to restructure jobs and home on a human
basis.

In the second stage questions like ''Should women be drafted?'' will be
obsolete, for it will be understood that for the nation's survival, women simply
will have to be drafted if a major war threatens. With the dangers of nuclear
holocaust, new questions need to be asked about the defense of the nation that
demand a sensitivity to human values and to life on the part of both male and
female military leaders.

Above all, the second stage involves not a retreat to the family, but embracing
the family in new terms of equlity and diversity. The choice to have children -
and the joys and burdens of raising them - will be so costly and precious that
it will have to be shared more equally by mother, father and others from, or in
place of, the larger family.  The trade-offs will be seen more clearly as both
men and women become realistic about the values and the price. It will probably
not be possible economically for most women to have a real choice to be just a
housewife, full-time or lifelong. But men as well as women will be demanding
parental leave or reduced schedules for those few years - or in early, middle or
later life for their own rebirth. A voucher system, such as Milton Friedman and
other conservatives have already proposed for different purposes, could be used
to provide a ''child allowance,'' payable perhaps as a tax rebate, to every man
or women who takes primary responsibility for care of a child or dependent
parent at home. She or he would get equal credit in the wage-earning spouse's
pension and old-age Social Security vestment; this credit would not be lost in
case of divorce. If both parents returned to work and shared child-care
responsibilities, they could use those vouchers to help pay for child care in
the community. Many advanced nations have such a child or family allowance.

And in the second stage, unions and companies will begin to give priority to
restructuring hours of work - flextime and flexible benefit packages - not just
to help women but because men will be demanding them and because improved
quality of work will not only cost less but yield greater results in terms of
reduced absenteeism, increased productivity and profit than the conventional
package.

But in the second stage when we talk about ''family'' we will no longer mean
just Mom and Dad and the kids. We will be more keenly aware of how the needs of
both women and men for love and intimacy and emotional and economic sharing and
support change over time and of the new shapes family can take. In the second
stage we will need new forms of homes and apartments that don't depend on the
full-time service of the housewife, and new shared housing for single parents
and people living alone - widowed, married and divorced - who are the largest
new group in the population.

The only bright spot in the housing market this past year was the great increase
in sales of homes and condominiums to single women living alone. But since in
fact it takes two incomes to buy housing today, banks and boards of condominiums
and mortgage lending officers will increasingly be faced with requests for
mortgages or leases by two, three or more persons unrelated by blood or
marriage.

The common interests of all these kinds of families will create the basis for a
new political alliance for the second stage that may not be a women's movement.
Men may be - must be - at the cutting edge of the second stage. Women were
reborn, in effect, merely by moving across into man's world. In the first stage,
it almost seemed as if women and men were moving in opposite directions,
reversing roles or exchanging one half-life for another. In the second stage, we
will go beyond the either-or of ''superwoman'' or ''total woman'' and ''house
husband'' or ''urban cowboy'' to a new wholeness: an integration, in our
personal lives, of the masculine and feminine in each of us in all our infinite
personal variety -not unisex but new human sex.

If we can move beyond the false polarities and single-issue battles, and
appreciate the limits and true potential of women's power, we will be able to
join with men - follow or lead - in the new human politics that must emerge
beyond reaction. It will be a new, passionate volunteerism, an activism that
comes out of living these new problems for which there may be no single answer.
It must have the same kind of relevance to the vital interests in life of both
men and women and meet the same needs for higher purpose and communality as did
the women's movement.

Now, those whose roots are in the service of life must have the strength to ask,
if no one else does, what should government be responsible for if not for the
needs of people in life? And the strength to start from those real needs of life
to take back government, for the people. The second stage may even now be
evolving, out of or aside from what we have thought of as our battle.  I know
that equality, the personhood we fought for, is truly necessary for women - and
opens new life for men. But I hear now what I could not hear before - the fears
and feelings of some who have fought against our movement. It is not just a
conspiracy of reactionary forces, though such forces surely play upon and
manipulate those fears.

There is no going back. The women's movement was necessary. But the liberation
that began with the women's movement isn't finished. The equality we fought for
isn't livable, isn't workable, isn't comfortable in the terms that structured
our battle. The first stage, the women's movement, was fought within and against
and defined by that old structure of unequal, polarized male and female sex
roles.  But to continue reacting against such structure is still to be defined
and limited by its terms. What's needed now is to transcend those terms and
transform the structure itself.

How do we surmount the reaction that threatens to destroy the very gains we
thought we had already won in the first stage of the women's movement? How do we
surmount our own reaction, which shadows our feminism and our femininity (we
blush even to use that word now)?  How do we transcend the polarization between
women and women and between women and men to achieve the new human wholeness
that is the promise of feminism, and get on with solving the concrete,
practical, everyday problems of living, working and loving as equal persons?
This is the personal and political business of the second stage.

Copyright c 1981 by Betty Friedan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of women marching in 1970 photo of Betty Friedan
(cover)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW TO SUCCEED IN HOLLYWOOD WITHOUT REALLY FILMING

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4350 words


Karen Stabiner, author of a 1979 novel about Hollywood, ''Limited Engagements,''
specializes in writing on the film industry. By Karen Stabiner Before the
Writers Guild of America began its strike last March against motion-picture and
television producers, guild members received a warning about the evils of
contributing to script stockpiling. Producers were buying scripts at a furious
pace, protecting themselves against a long strike by building up an inventory of
producible material. The guild implored its members to avoid temptation: A
producer with scripts to produce is less eager to settle.

A long strike, ironically, was the best thing that ever happened to those
stockpiled scripts, many of which would never have been produced under normal
conditions. Selling a screenplay is no guarantee that it will be made into a
film. On the contrary, most of what is paid for does not get produced. There is
a whole subculture of anonymous successes in Los Angeles, screenwriters who can
afford to turn down assignments but have yet to see their names on-screen.

Consider Alan Berger and Kathy Gori, a writing team in their early 30's capable
of holding their own in a room full of deal-makers. The room they choose for
lunch almost every working day is the Palm Restaurant in West Hollywood, one of
the most popular places in town for making movie deals with a meal.

Five lunches per week is an expensive habit, but Alan Berger and Kathy Gori can
afford it. Although they started writing together only four years ago, three
years before they were married, they have just completed their fifth assignment.
Their price is up to $50,000 to $75,000 for a first-draft screenplay (revisions
are often extra), and since they can turn out a first draft in three months, a
common rate of production, they can easily afford their Santa Monica home and
two foreign cars.

There is a hitch, though. It is impossible to see a Berger/Gori story in a movie
theater anywhere, because none have been released.  They are hardly alone. Many
screenwriters have been at it much longer -Jeffrey Alan Fiskin, for example, who
has sold ''at least 14 scripts'' since 1970, and is only now receiving screen
credit for two features, ''Cutter's Way'' and ''Pursuit.'' Most unproduced
screenwriters are in their early 30's, while most guild members are 10 to 20
years older. These newcomers build careers and enhance their style of living on
the sale of scripts that are shelved over and over again.

Despite this, their fees continue to rise. Less than 10 percent of the Writers
Guild's 6,000 West Coast members earn more than $100,000 annually, with only
three - William Goldman, Paddy Chayefsky and Neil Simon - reportedly earning
over $500,000 per script. This elite group also includes unproduced writers. A
writer who has sold a story, produced or not, is worth more than a writer who
hasn't. A 10-year veteran, John Hill, says, ''I can look at my tax form and say,
'I'm really doing well.' Or I can look at a shelf of screenplays that will never
be produced and say, 'I must be a failure.' '' There are numerous other writers
similarly stuck, earning many thousands of dollars each year for scripts that
don't become movies.

This process resembles the reproductive habits of the grasshopper, which lays
thousands of eggs in the expectation that two will survive and turn into more
grasshoppers. In Hollywood, this is known as story development. Producers
develop many more stories than they ever intend to film. Thom Mount, Universal
Pictures' executive vice president for production, is proud of his studio's
conservative 4 to 1 ratio. Alex Lasker and Wendell Wellman, both unreproduced
writers, recall one year at Paramount Pictures when two of the 75 scripts
purchased by the studio actually made it into production; Paramount prefers not
to discuss the subject.

Any script can become a casualty. Jeff Berg, president of International Creative
Management, believes that quality alone is not enough to insure a script's
becoming a film. He and Thom Mount use the same word - ''intersection'' - to
describe the crucial element.

''All that screenwriting is about is the quality of the script and the timing,''
says Thom Mount. ''If the two intersect, there's a good chance a picture will
get made.''

Michael Elias, co-author of ''The Jerk'' and ''Serial,'' is a long way from his
half-dozen unproduced screenplays, but he knows all about ''intersection.'' He
collaborated on a script that might have been the first feature to be shot in
Castro's Cuba.

''Castro sent troops to Angola and ruined our deal,'' he says, laughing. ''The
script wasn't bad. History was.'' Oliver Stone, Academy Award winner for writing
''Midnight Express'' and writer-director of the recent ''The Hand,'' wrote a
1978 adaptation of ''Born on the Fourth of July,'' the autobiography of disabled
Vietnam veteran Ron Kovic. Orion Pictures and German taxshelter investors
announced plans to put $7 million into it, but when the German half of the
financing collapsed, so did everything else. Al Pacino, who was to star as the
antiwar activist, was contractually obligated to start ''... and Justice For
All,'' and other key participants preferred working to waiting.

The industry is used to near misses. ''Do the arithmetic,'' says a part-time
screenwriter. ''The price of the script is hardly anything compared to the
entire budget.'' A major studio spends between $100 million and $150 million a
year on production, and an additional $60 million to $100 million on marketing
those films, and those figures do not include studio overhead. Estimates of a
year's development costs run between $5 million and $10 million, the bulk of
which goes to writers.

Taken in context, it does not cost a lot of money to get scripts started. As one
cautious entertainment figure put it, ''You can lose as much on one bad 'go'
decision as on all the things you decide not to produce all year long. One flop
movie and you lose the same $5 million.'' Or, in the case of United Artists'
''Heaven's Gate,'' over eight times that figure.

A high mortality rate for scripts was built into the industry's modus operandi
back in the days of contract writers - such as the novelists William Faulkner
and F. Scott Fitzgerald -who were paid to churn out material on a full-time
basis, some of whom probably had a worse written-to-produced ratio than their
freelance successors. Last year, according to Variety, 103 pictures were put
into production by the major studios. Using Universal's 4 to 1 ratio, that means
that at least 500 scripts were developed.

A sale can come about in several ways. A screenwriter who has completed a script
on speculation (with no prior financial commitment from a producer) can sell it
outright for at least the Writers Guild minimum - $26,300 for a feature and
$17,000 for a two-hour movie-fortelevision. (Both fees are now being
renegotiated, along with the crucial issue of participation in profits from
cable and pay television.) If a studio or a producer options the rights for a
limited period, the writer usually stands to make a minimum of 10 percent of
what the script would sell for.

On the other hand, a writer can submit a treatment, an extended outline of his
story, prior to a first draft. Or he can use his finished speculative scripts as
writing samples to try for an assignment.

The actual sale is the first of many surprises, thanks to a bit of legalized
carrot-dangling known as a ''step deal.'' If the point at which a script goes
into production can be considered a landing, then the stairway leading up to it
comprises ''as many steps as there are in the minds of lawyers,'' according to
one deal-maker. It is a difficult ascent, especially for the newcomer.

The screenwriter is paid in chunks as he satisfactorily completes each step of
the screenwriting process, with the two biggest checks coming when the first
draft is completed and when the script goes into production (much as a book
contract calls for partial payment of an advance on signing, on delivery or on
publication). The writer does not earn his full fee unless he survives all the
producer's cutoffs.

Thus, Writer A may be hired - say, for $150,000, and possibly with a percentage
of the profits - to adapt a novel. The book serves as an extended outline, so he
skips the treatment stage and does the first draft and a single set of
revisions, for which he is paid $50,000. If the producer isn't happy, Writer A
can be cut off then. If the producer wants Writer A to proceed to a second draft
and a ''final polish,'' he doles out another $25,000. When the filming actually
begins, Writer A collects his final $75,000 (if he has a percentage, payment of
that must await calculation of the film's earnings).

If, however, the producer brings in Writer B after the first-draft stage, paying
him $25,000 for the second draft and final polish, only the most well-known
Writer A will escape unscathed. The discarded screenwriter with a reputation may
even be able to collect his entire final payment and percentage. But a tyro
Writer A, dealt out after the first step, could end up with $50,000, less than
half the original sale price. He did not pass Go.

The Catch-22 of screenwriting: No producer wants to be the first to risk money
on a novice screenwriter, but every producer wants to employ the writer who
hired by someone else. Whatever deal a writer gets, it will have a value that
cannot be computed in dollars.  Everyone will want his next project. Since it
can take from two to four years to get a script into production, the writer is
in an enviable, if somewhat unreal, position. He has an untarnished reputation
because he hasn't been around long enough for anything bad to happen.

And so, while he awaits the fate of that first project, he gets to ''take
meetings,'' riding the circuit from a studio executive's inner sanctum to a
producer's favorite restaurant. Validated by someone else's money, he perfects
his pithy verbal synopsis of his next idea, since he suddenly can sell ideas
without committing a word to paper.

At first, it is a heady experience. The promise of a screen credit beckons
provocatively. But there are countless obstacles, and time to encounter them
all. Bad judgment, bad timing or simple bad luck all contribute to the plight of
the unproduced screenwriter.

The writers definitely don't get blamed, however. Everyone knows the development
numbers. Indeed, Jim Berkus, who represents Alex Lasker, says that he can often
command a higher fee for unproduced writers, who ''do not get their movies made
for any number of reasons,'' than for writers whose produced work was not well
received.

Money isn't everything, not even in Hollywood. For Kathy Gori and Alan Berger,
lunches at the Palm are small consolation after four years without a screen
credit.

They started writing scripts together while Kathy Gori, a veteran of 10 years of
''screaming rock and roll'' as an FM-AM disk jockey, hosted a late-night radio
talk show. Alan Berger drove a city bus through Watts and East Los Angeles and
slept in two four-hour shifts so that he could work with his partner in between.
After they wrote a speculative script, they acquired an agent, who sent ''Last
Rites,'' a thriller set at a Roman Catholic boarding school, to William Castle,
producer of ''Rosemary's Baby.''

Castle had made his reputation by producing run-of-the-mill horror movies,
hiring models in nurses' uniforms to stand in theater lobbies while his films
were being shown and dispense ''nerve-steadying pills.'' He didn't want to make
''Last Rites,'' but he did want the writers to develop a story about life after
death. Castle, however, died while the project was in the talking stage.

Soon after that, Gori and Berger's agent arranged a $1,500, sixmonth option for
the team's treatment of ''The Last Ride of the Bronx Avengers,'' and they were
on their way. They quickly snared two other assignments: a spoof of disaster
movies, ''The Last Disaster Movie,'' for Universal and the producer Jennings
Lang, and a feature for an independent producer, ''Save the Last Dance for Me.''
They also quit their jobs.

All the projects were doomed, however. ''Bronx Avengers,'' a comedy about New
York gang members who assemble for a reunion after 15 years, was optioned just
before ''Warriors,'' a controversial, bloody melodrama about a New York gang.
Suddenly, anything connected with gangs was a hot potato. Columbia has renewed
its option three times, earning the two writers another $8,500, but there are
still no plans to make the picture.

Bad timing also killed the team's Universal assignment, although at first it
seemed like ''the bonanza'' to Kathy Gori because she and Alan Berger were
allied with Jennings Lang, who had been at Universal for a quarter of a century.
However, just as work was about to begin on ''The Last Disaster Movie,''
Paramount was finishing its disaster spoof, ''Airplane,'' which would become the
studio's biggest money-earner in 1980. There did not seem to be room in the
marketplace for two such similar pictures. The Berger/Gori film never got
started.

The most unlikely of their sales, the independent feature, was, in fact, filmed,
even though there was no distributor. To this day, it sits in a film can in the
producer's home - so independent of the industry that it has never been
released.

And this is not an isolated incident. One tabulation estimates the number of
unreleased features over the last 10 years at 100, pictures that never made it
out of the studio screening rooms or were released in a few test markets and
performed so poorly that they were hastily recalled. For the writers, this limbo
is infinitely more frustrating than having an unproduced screenplay, which can
always be resold or reoptioned.

This year, Alan Berger and Kathy Gori are looking forward to the release of
''Save the Last Dance For Me'' and they have three candidates for their second
released screenplay, each of which brought ever-increasing fees despite the
team's still uncredited past. Now their agent is going to circulate a
''backlog'' of their scripts written on speculation, including ''Last Rites.''
The writers have been too busy to worry about that one lately, but they're ready
to go back to it and try to get it produced. The wait is to their advantage. The
same ''Last Rites'' script that William Castle saw years ago has at least
tripled in value, according to the writers, who expect it to bring a minimum
price of $50,000. In 1977, it was the work of novices; now it is the work of
seasoned, highly paid (if unproduced) screenwriters.

For another writing partnership formed in 1977 - Alex Lasker and Wendell Wellman
- production began this summer on ''Firefox,'' a script they sold to Clint
Eastwood, about an American pilot smuggled into the Soviet Union to steal a
technically advanced Russian war plane. But the waiting has not been easy.

Lasker and Wellman were ''readers'' at United Artists. They wrote script
critiques. One day, a U.A. executive who liked their work asked, offhandedly, if
they had a screenplay they'd like to write.  As it happened, Wellman - a former
pizza delivery boy, former airconditioner salesman, former car salesman - had
once discovered evidence of a crime, which suggested a story he and Lasker
referred to as their ''Blow-Up''-in-California story. It was about a witness who
sees too much but does not comprehend what he has seen. They had nothing in
writing, so they simply told the story to the executive and, as Lasker recalls,
''a producer who was wandering down the hall in his tennis shorts.'' When they
finished talking, the writers were instructed to find an agent who would make a
deal for them with an independent production company that was affiliated with
U.A.

But Lasker and Wellman walked away from the U.A. deal - and their jobs - because
they believed they could find better money elsewhere.  Lasker struck a deal with
the producer Andrew Braunsberg (executive producer of ''The Postman Always Rings
Twice'') which brought them $10,000 for a first draft against a guarantee of
$150,000 when ''The Witness'' went into production.

They never collected the bulk of the money. There were two problems, as the
writers see it: ''The Witness'' was a small story being submitted to, and
rejected by, big-name talent. Studio executives either loved it (the younger
ones) or hated it (the older ones), but could not reach agreement about
producing it.

Meanwhile, the deal had spawned many more deals. Lasker and Wellman were offered
''a whole shopping list of ideas,'' according to Wellman, by executives of
Paramount Pictures who had gotten wind of the Braunsberg deal. They became so
popular on the meeting circuit that they were receiving two or three assignment
offers a week.  Lasker, who earned the nickname ''Dr. No'' for turning most of
them down, estimates that they have been approached with a total of 200
assignments.

In 1978, they accepted three ideas, the foremost being ''Man Outside,'' which
was to be built around the Robert Shaw character in John Frankenheimer's
then-unreleased terrorist drama ''Black Sunday.'' After that, the team were to
write a World War II romance and a treasure story set in the Amazon, both for
Frankenheimer. They were each earning $40,000 annually, which may not be the $1
million stratosphere of the screenwriting trade, but it is up substantially from
the tax bracket inhabited by studio readers and pizza delivery boys.

Still, Lasker and Wellman refer to their year at Paramount as ''Myth of Sisyphus
time.'' Robert Shaw's death and the relatively disappointing box-office
performance of ''Black Sunday'' spelled the end of the sequel. The World War II
story and the treasure story, both costly productions, never made it past the
script stage.

Lasker and Wellman finally left Paramount and showed the script of ''Man
Outside'' to Clint Eastwood, who has production offices at Warner Brothers. They
received an enthusiastic welcome and $15,000 from Paramount to rework the story,
only to have Eastwood return from a weekend in Carmel with ''a feeling in his
gut,'' as Lasker recalls the explanation, that he ought not to proceed with the
picture.

Six weeks later, Eastwood offered salvation, asking Lasker and Wellman to adapt
''Firefox'' for him. The writers expect to collect a complete fee - in this
case, $100,000 - for the first time in their careers.

But even their persistence pales when compared to that of John Hill, who has
survived a decade of frustration and is only now about to receive his first
feature credit. While some of his peers came from a more traditional literary or
journalistic background, Hill started writing screenplays in Kansas City, Mo.,
in the early 1970's, while he made his living composing 30-second advertisements
for the 5 A.M. radio farm news instructing farmers in the correct application of
sugar-beet herbicide. He kept writing screenplays after he packed his belongings
in his Camaro and drove to a new advertising job in Los Angeles. In 1973, an
agent, attracted by the sample scripts, used them to get Hill two assignments
writing movies-for-television. And, within the space of one week, he got John
Hill, professional writer, a higher fee than he did for John Hill, first-timer.

''The producers offered $10,000,'' recalls Hill. ''My agent said the average
going rate was $15,000, but I said, 'That's O.K., I'm new, let's get on with
it.' The next week, they gave me a second assignment and offered $10,000 again.
My agent said, 'No, you have to pay him $15,000.' They said, 'Forget it; he's a
new kid.' My agent said, 'No, he's a professional writer. You guys hired him
last week.' ''

His agent, bolstered by the two assignments, went back and tried to interest
producers in the speculative scripts Hill had written.  The producer Mort
Englesberg optioned a script for Steve McQueen. The producer Michael Phillips,
who co-produced ''The Sting'' with Julia Phillips and Tony Bill, hired Hill to
rewrite ''Close Encounters of the Third Kind,'' which inspired Hill, who
considers himself a ''cautious'' man, finally to quit his advertising job.
E.M.I. asked him to write a script about an antiterrorist squad that has to save
a busload of hostages. He wrote several more movies-for-television.  Hill had
become a hot screenwriter, quicker than you can say sugarbeet herbicide.

But disappointments came almost as quickly as the assignments had.  Hill is
still forlorn about the fate of his second 1973 television assignment, the one
that earned him the extra $5,000. It was a casualty of executive misgiving: A
network official killed it because the idea didn't seem commercial to him. The
story revolved around the escape plot of a group of Americans in a Turkish
prison on drug charges. A feature film on the same subject, ''Midnight
Express,'' has so far earned more than $15 million in film rentals.

Next, the people at E.M.I. decided they didn't want to make a movie about
terrorists after all; that subject wasn't doing well at the box office. As for
''Close Encounters,'' Hill says, ''There isn't even a 'the' in the final script
that is mine. Sometimes you're just a casualty.''

He did get one credit for a movie-for-television in 1976, but ''Griffin and
Phoenix'' meant less to his feature-writing career, he says, ''than if I had
worked on a Roger Corman car-crash flick.''

Hill was finally saved by a producer who had crossed his path before. Michael
Phillips invited Hill to lunch at a point when Hill was willing to endure even a
mysterious mass of Thai squid - his tastes run to steak sandwiches and fries
with ketchup - if it meant he could sell a script to a producer who might get it
made.

The ideas he pitched fell dead. ''I gave him two ideas which he didn't like, so
we decided just to have our lunch,'' Hill says.  ''There I am, trying to choke
down this squid, and he's saying he likes the theme of survival. I know he likes
sci-fi, so I mention this idea I have for a novel, just 17 pages in a bottom
drawer, about two robots who fall in love and run away. And suddenly he's saying
he loves it and we've got to go over to Universal and set it up right away.''
Hill is now within months of his first screen credit for ''Heartbeeps.''

The unproduced screenwriter is what one bewildered practitioner calls ''a goofy,
well-off kind of failure.'' It is about as far from a bus route, or a delivery
route, or the morning farm news, as one can get, and yet it is not far enough.

Only Hill has seen what life after production is like - and, to his
embarrassment and chagrin, he finds it more lucrative and no less risky. He now
reportedly earns six figures for his screenplays, all of it payable in advance.

There was also a mad spurt of interest in his career when the film
''Heartbeeps'' went into production, not unlike the surge that followed his
first sale 10 years ago, though the ante has been upped substantially. ''Life
after 'Heartbeeps,' '' he says, ''is having Dino de Laurentiis call on Tuesday -
and on Saturday you're in his office in London working out a two-picture deal.''
Hill came home with a rewrite assignment on David Freeman's first draft of Peter
Maas's novel, ''Made in America,'' and the promise that de Laurentiis would take
a second script if he was satisfied with the first. Hill was also signed by
Michael Phillips again, this time to adapt two novels.

But the more things change, the more they remain the same. In the intervening
months, de Laurentiis has decided that he isn't sure about the rewrite and,
later, that he loves the rewrite. As for the option on Hill's second screenplay,
this cannot be exercised because of the writers' strike. Universal took Hill's
first adaptation for Phillips and gave it to Oliver Stone, the screenwriter for
''Midnight Express,'' to rewrite. (Even Oliver Stone is still vulnerable to
rejection: Phillips has since turned down his version as well.)

''On some level,'' sighs Hill, ''it's business as usual. I've been up to bat
once already and failed and I don't know about the next one. I could get better
odds at a blackjack table. I have a better chance of surviving a fire than I do
of having one of my scripts produced.''

Not that he, or any of the others, expect sympathy, really; they're too well off
to elicit much compassion. They would like a screen credit, though, which would
make them even wealthier and prove, to the outside world, that they're as
talented as they say they are.  Until then, the only defense against the
frustration is to develop a sense of humor. In Hollywood, even not being chosen
has its rewards.

Hill, having been at it the longest, has the most reasoned point of view.  ''I
figure, I had a television credit in 1976, and now I have a feature credit in
1981,'' he says, grinning. ''There's no way around it. Come 1986, I'm really
going to be hot again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Hill with scripts photo of Kathy Gori and
Alan Berger

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Best Sellers

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1151 words


Jx

FICTION
1 1 9 NOBLE HOUSE, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $19.95.) British and Chinese
businessmen struggle for control of one of Hong Kong's oldest trading houses.
2 2 13 GORKY PARK, by Martin Cruz Smith. (Random House, $13.95.) A triple murder
in Moscow leads to a chase on two continents.
3 4 4 GOODBYE, JANETTE, by Harold Robbins. (Simon & Schuster, $13.95.) Two randy
sisters at large in the Parisian world of haute couture.
4 5 11 FREE FALL IN CRIMSON, by John D. MacDonald. (Harper & Row, $10.95.)
Travis McGee investigates the murder of an ailing tycoon.
5 3 11 GOD EMPEROR OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam's, $12.95.) Leto continues
as guardian and savior of the human race in the fourth novel about the planet
Dune.
6 6 25 MASQUERADE, by Kit Williams. (Schocken Books, $9.95.) An illustrated
fable about the Sun, the Moon and a hidden treasure.
7 12 37 THE COVENANT, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Fifteen
thousand years of South African history.
8 9 2 THE CARDINAL SINS, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Warner/Bernard Geis, $12.95.)
Dhe triumphs and tragedies of two Chicago boys as priests in the Catholic
Church.
9 11 4 LICENSE RENEWED, by John Gardner. (Richard Marek, $9.95.) James Bond
against a mad nuclear physicist.
10 8 2 THE GLITTER DOME, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Morrow/Perigord, $12.95.) Two
veteran homicide detectives trapped by the seductive vices of Hollywood.
11 10 8 XPD, by Len Deighton. (Knopf, $12.95.) The British and the Russians race
to get proof that Churchill once did business with Hitler.
12 15 13 REFLEX, by Dick Francis. (Putnam's, $11.95.) A British jockey copes
with blackmail and discovers his own missing past.
13 14 12 TAR BABY, by Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $11.95.) A black fable of race and
eroticism set on a Caribbean island.
14 13 14 CREATION, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $15.95.) A journey through that
greatest of all ages, the fifth century B.C., in the company of a man critical
of it all.
15 1 ZUCKERMAN UNBOUND, by Philip Roth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, ($10.95.) The
adventures of Nathan Zuckerman, successful writer. .)

NONFICTION
1 1 9 THE LORD GOD MADE THEM ALL, by James Herriot. (St.  Martin's, $13.95.) The
further adventures of the Yorkshire vet at home and behind the Iron Curtain.
2 3 7 THE BEVERLY HILLS DIET, by Judy Mazel. (Macmillan, $9.95.) A regimen
devised by a Hollywood nutrition guru.
3 2 22 NEVER-SAY-DIET BOOK, by Richard Simmons. (Warner, $14.95.) A regimen for
exercise, diet and life style devised by a Hollywood television personality.
4 7 2 MISS PIGGY'S GUIDE TO LIFE, by Miss Piggy as told to Henry Beard.
(Knopf/Muppet Press, $12.95.) Advice about everything from the superstar porcine
personality.
5 5 34 COSMOS, by Carl Sagan. (Random House, $19.95.) Thirteen billion years of
the universe's evolution explained by the NASA medal-winning space scientist.
6 4 8 THE EAGLE'S GIFT, by Carlos Castaneda. (Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) Another
journey into the land of sorcery, hallucinatory visions and Mexican Indian lore.

7 11 2 THEORY Z, by William G. Ouchi. (Addison-Wesley, $12.95.) The reasons for
Japanese business success.
8 6 5 THE PRITIKIN PERMANENT WEIGHT-LOSS MANUAL, by Nathan Pritikin. (Grosset &
Dunlap, $14.95.) A nutritionist's regimen for health and long life.
9 10 11 DR. ATKINS' NUTRITION BREAKTHROUGH, by Robert C. Atkins, M.D.
(Morrow/Perigord, $10.95.) How common illnesses can be treated without drugs,
but with diets supplemented by vitamins and minerals.
10 8 13 MARIA CALLAS, by Arianna Stassinopoulos. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A
gossipy biography of an extraordinary singer and electrifying personality.
11 15 15 WILLIAM E. DONOGHUE'S COMPLETE MONEY MARKET GUIDE, by William E.
Donoghue with Thomas Tilling. (Harper & Row, $12.95.) ''How to profit from
inflation and fluctuating interest rates.''
12 13 2 THE ALPHA STRATEGY, by John A. Pugsley. (Stratford Press, $13.95.)
Advice on financial survival in an economically unstable time.
13 9 18 YOU CAN NEGOTIATE ANYTHING, by Herb Cohen. (Lyle Stuart, $12.) Ways to
avoid conflict and get what you want.
14 1 JANE BRODY'S NUTRITION BOOK, by Jane Brody. (Norton, $17.95.) Advice by The
New York Times personal health columnist.
15 1 EVERYTHING WE HAD, edited by Al Santoli. (Random House, $12.95) An oral
history of the Vietnam War by 33 American soldiers who fought in it.
The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 1,600
bookstores in every region of the

United States.

FOOTNOTES
The one new hardcover fiction title is Philip Roth's ''Zuckerman Unbound.'' Last
week, when it was just short of the list, we reported that its heaviest sales
were in the Midwest.  The pattern continues, with 39 percent in the Midwest, 26
percent in the East, 14 percent in the West and 8 percent in the South.

The two new hardcover fiction runners-up this week are M.M. Kaye's ''Trade
Wind,'' about love and death in Zanzibar in the mid-19th century; and Malachai
Martin's ''King of Kings,'' a biblicalhistoricalabout King David.

The two new nonfiction titles this week were runners-up last week: ''Jane
Brody's Nutrition Book'' (which Footnotes called ''Jane Brody's Nutrition
Breakthrough'' to Miss Brody's surprise and our chagrin) and Al Santoli's
''Everything We Had.'' Mr. Santoli's book is selling evenly throughout the
country.

On the trade paperback list ''101 Uses for a Dead Cat'' displaces ''A
Confederacy of Dunces'' from the top spot, where the latter had a respectable
stay. Neither cats nor their owners are amused by ''Dead Cats,'' but almost
everybody else finds it an irresistible giggle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Rites of Passage

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


To the Editor:$

Regarding Marc Leepson's review of ''Nam'' and ''Everything We Had'' (May 17), I
heartily agree that efforts such as these will ''break down some of the barriers
between the Vietnam veteran and the American public.'' As a psychiatrist who has
worked with Vietnam veterans, I know all too well the long-term effects of
wartime traumas. Ten and fifteen years after the events, there remain
nightmares, fears, depression and, most fundamentally, failures of loving in
veterans of combat. The timelessness of the unconscious does not bend to
political realities. National treaties mark the beginning, not the end, of the
psychic work of mastery.

Primitive societies intuitively knew the value of cultural ceremonies that
marked the end of hostilities. Rites of passage were provided for the soldiers
and the society to make the transition from the regression of combat to the
structure of integrated living. These rituals acknowledged and sanctioned the
otherwise forbidden acts of war. They thanked the soldier for his protection,
forgave him his crimes and welcomed him back to life.

Our failure to provide such a cleansing for our warriors and ourselves has left
our culture struggling for closure. It has as well made the task of intrapsychic
mastery so much more difficult for the individual soldiers.
HARRY J. SCHWARTZ, Philadelphia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT ORANGE IN STAMFORD

BYLINE: By LAURIE A. O'NEILL

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1461 words


STAMFORD PAST the white picket fence and under the American flag that flies from
the porch at 955 Cove Road come the sick, the suffering and the questioning.
They are veterans of the Vietnam War, but to them the battle is not over. An
enemy more deadly, they say, than the one they faced in the jungles of Southeast
Asia still stalks them.

The small green house serves as the Connecticut office of Agent Orange Victims
International, a nonprofit organization that seeks to inform Vietnam veterans
that some of the health problems they or their children suffer from could have
been caused by exposure to a herbicide called Agent Orange that was used in
Vietnam and elsewhere between 1962 and 1970.

The co-directors of the two-and-a-half-year-old Connecticut chapter are James A.
Sparrow, a 34-year-old former Marine, and Roger Pappas, 47, who is not a
veteran. The men, both divorced, share the rented house and run the chapter from
their living room. The Connecticut chapter was the first branch office
established by the organization, which is based in New York City.

The living room is cluttered with pamphlets, clippings, copies of studies
suggesting a link between Agent Orange and a variety of diseases, posters,
banners and bumper stickers. An American combat helmet serves as a lampshade,
and a North Vietnamese helmet, with a small, round bullet hole in the back,
shares space on a coffee table with a sheathed machete.

''We are not anti-American,'' said Mr. Sparrow. ''Nor are we poster-carrying
protesters or pistol-packing revolutionaries. We're humanitarians.''

The organization's goal, he said, is the alleviation of suffering caused by what
he sees as Agent Orange poisoning ''through dignity, self-respect and
solidarity.''

Disseminating information on Agent Orange takes most of his time and keeps him
broke, Mr. Sparrow said. He blames his own exposure to Agent Orange for an
intolerance of cold temperatures, a low resistance to infectious diseases and a
chronic skin rash called chloracne .

The Connecticut chapter has 500 members who pay $7 in annual dues, and keeps
files on 3,000 other veterans with whom it has been in contact. There are 26,000
combat veterans in the state, Mr. Sparrow said, ''so we've only hit the tip of
the iceberg.''

To offset expenses, the chapter occasionally holds a dance, and Mr. Sparrow
works in the kitchen of a Darien restaurant, and Mr.  Pappas, who sold his
hairdressing business so he could devote all of his time to the group, serves as
a liaison with Vietnam veterans in Australia, New Zealand and South Korea. Like
the organization's president, Frank McCarthy, who ran a veterans unification
group in New York City before he became involved in the Agent Orange cause, Mr.
Sparrow and Mr. Pappas say they are several thousand dollars in debt.

Mr. Sparrow travels around the state, talking to veterans who, he said, may be
harboring the effects of Agent Orange exposure. He offers to help find
counseling and medical aid for those who are already ill or for those whose
offspring were born deformed.

''I had to come,'' he told a recent audience in a rural northwestern Connecticut
town, ''because you're not going to get renowned doctors or scientists to come
out here and say this.'' Propping a map of Vietnam against a table, he asked
veterans to ''tell me where you were and when, and I can tell you how close you
came to Agent Orange.''

The Cove Road home is frequented by veterans like Ronald M. Doshna, a bearded,
30-year-old Stamford resident and former combat engineer.  Mr. Doshna and his
twin brother Dennis, another combat veteran, have dozens of crisscross scars on
their bodies. Between them, they have had 160 small, fatty tumors removed from
under their skin.

Named for the band of color around its containers, Agent Orange was used in
Vietnam and parts of Cambodia, Laos and Thailand. Forty-four million pounds of
the oily substance, made in the United States, were used to destroy brush cover
and food supplies and to clear the perimeters of American military bases.

Initially, the Defense Department believed the chemical was nontoxic and advised
military personnel only to shower and change clothes if they came in contact
with it.

But in 1970 the Government learned that Agent Orange contained high amounts of
dioxin, said to be the most toxic chemical known, and the use of Agent Orange in
Vietnam and its surrounding areas was promptly suspended.

Concern about the effects of Agent Orange was touched off in 1978 when a
benefits counselor in the Veterans Administration's regional office in Chicago,
Maude E. DeVictor, noticed an apparent correlation between the health problems
of Vietnam veterans and their alleged exposure to the herbicide. Mrs. DeVictor
did further research on the defoliant and publicized her findings.

Veterans who say they believe Agent Orange is responsible for their health
problems do not blame the Government for exposing them to the herbicide, Mr.
Sparrow said, because there is no evidence that the Defense Department knew it
was dangerous at the time it was being used.

But they are suing nine of the country's major chemical companies, contending
that they are responsible for the cancer, birth defects and miscarriages that
veterans and their families have suffered.

The suit was initiated in 1978 by Paul Reutershan, a 28-year-old veteran then
dying of abdominal and liver cancer. Mr. Reutershan, who founded Agent Orange
Victims International from his hospital bed, had been a railroad conductor in
Stamford and a member of the nowdefunct Stamford Memorial Veterans of Foreign
Wars Post 10013, of which Mr. Sparrow was commander.

Chief counsel to the 7,000 veterans named as plaintiffs in the suit is Victor J.
Yannacone Jr. of Patchogue, L.I., a lawyer noted for his fight against the use
of the pesticide DDT in the late 1960's. Mr.  Yannacone who is receiving
assistance from 150 law firms around the country, described the suit, which has
been granted class-action status, as being among the largest products-liability
case ever filed. It seeks an order that would compel the companies to contribute
to a trust fund that would pay veterans and their families for their injuries.

Besides seeking damages from the chemical companies, the veterans are also suing
the Veteran's Administration in an attempt to improve the care of Agent Orange
victims. The suit, which is also being directed by Mr. Yannacone, contends that
the Veterans Administration is responsible for ''gross and egregious
malpractice.''

The A.O.V.I. says it believes that all of the 2.4 million military personal who
saw combat in Vietnam were exposed to the toxic herbicide, if not directly, then
by drinking contaminated water or eating contaminated food.

Since 1966, more than 100,000 Vietnam veterans have died, but neither the
Government nor the A.V.O.I. have accurate records on the causes of death.
According to Mr. McCarthy, the Veterans Administration has examined
approximately 39,000 veterans who have had neurological or immunilogical
disorders, cancer or other serious diseases, but as of last spring had found
only 24 cases to be service-related.

The Government, which contends that there is no documented evidence to connect
Agent Orange with illness or birth defects, has moved for a dismissal on the
ground that the Veterans Administration is exempt from being sued. Arguments are
to be heard by Judge George C. Pratt in Federal District Court in Westbury,
L.I., on July 15.

Recently, the Senate passed a measure giving high priority to federally financed
medical treatment for veterans exposed to the defoliant. But Mr. Sparrow called
the measure ''an appeasement,'' because, he said, the measure involves no
additional appropriations, programs or facilities. ''We'll be dealt with more
cordially, but no better or faster,'' he said. He noted also that dependents of
Agent Orange victims will not benefit from the Senate action.

Agent Orange Victims International opened the Paul Reutershan Clinic, its first
such facility for veterans, in Smithtown, L.I., on June 15. Contributions
finance the renting of office space, and time has been volunteered by doctors,
nutritionists and counselors. Mr.  Sparrow is seeking space and professional
volunteers for a similar clinic in Connecticut.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of James A. Sparrow

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TIES TO INDIA: NEW STRAINS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1344 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 5


The Reagan Administration's publicized moves to enhance military relations with
Pakistan and China have had the predictable consequence of further souring ties
with India. American and Indian officials see no early improvement in the
situation.

An American delegation headed by James L. Malone, Assistant Secretary of State
for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, is due to go
to New Delhi in a few days, but Mr.  Malone's mission may only underline the
downward trend. He is expected to negotiate the end to the 18-year nuclear
cooperation agreement between the two countries, something brought on by India's
refusal to sign the 1968 treaty designed to limit the spread of nuclear weapons.


India Is Uneasy Over U.S. Moves

The Government of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi sees the Administration's $3
billion economic and military aid package to Pakistan, its decision to sell the
Pakistanis the F-16 fighter-bomber and its decision to make China eligible for
arms purchases as ominous because it suggests a Pakistan-China-United States
axis, something New Delhi has dreaded for a long time.

The Reagan Administration has tried unsuccessfully to assure India that
stepped-up support for Pakistan is not directed against it but is designed to
strengthen Pakistani resolve in facing 85,000 Soviet troops in neighboring
Afghanistan. Indian officials note that in each of its conflicts with Pakistan,
the Pakistanis fought with American arms that had been provided to defend
Pakistan against a Communist attack and not against India.

For experts inside and outside the Administration who have advocated closer
Indian-American relations, the developments had the taste of the inevitable,
given Mrs. Gandhi's reluctance to criticize Moscow, and the Reagan
Administration's policy of militarily supporting countries that appear
threatened by the Soviet Union and to treat coolly those that seem to promote
Soviet objectives.

In the diplomatic box score compiled by Washington, Pakistan and China are
countries face-to-face with a Soviet threat and deserving of help. India, which
like Afghanistan has a friendship treaty with the Soviet Union, is seen by this
Administration, as it was by the Carter Administration, as too supportive of
Moscow, even though it still pursues an independent policy.

Soon after taking office, Mrs. Gandhi irked the United States by recognizing not
only the Palestine Liberation Organization but also the Vietnamese-backed regime
of Heng Samrin as the Government of Cambodia. The recognition of Heng Samrin was
particularly galling to Washington because it was seen as rewarding an invasion
by Vietnam and as being done to satisfy Moscow.

The situation in recent weeks has become more complicated, the experts said,
than simply one of bolstering American ties with Pakistan and China and
downgrading those with India. That is because both Pakistan and China, which
have close ties forged by mutual concerns about India and the Soviet Union, have
also in recent weeks been engaged in at least a pro forma effort to improve
relations with India.

Indian Aide Visits Pakistan

Foreign Minister Narasimha Rao of India visited Pakistan in early June after
months of recriminations between the two countries over Pakistan's newly
emerging military relationship with the United States and each country's fear
that the other was planning to develop nuclear devices that might be used
against the other.

At the end of that visit, Mr. Rao seemed exuberant about the talks he had had in
Islamabad. He said he was ''absolutely certain that a new and fresh relationship
is emerging between India and Pakistan based on objective reality and not on
emotion.''

He promised the Pakistanis that India had no designs on them and that it would
have full respect for ''the sovereignty, territorial integrity, stability and
independence of Pakistan.''

Yet within days of Mr. Rao's departure, James L. Buckley, the Under Secretary of
State for Security Assistance, arrived in Islamabad and reached a general
agreement with the Pakistanis to provide them with the $3 billion aid package,
and more significantly, to allow them to buy the advanced fighter-bomber, the
F-16.

A Major Shock for the Indians

Because the Pakistan Air Force has been flying Korean War vintage aircraft,
augmented with out-of-date MIG fighters from China and a few somewhat more
sophisticated French planes, the promise of the F-16's came as a major shock to
the Indians.

The Indians were aware of Washington's desire to build up Pakistan's military
forces but apparently did not anticipate that it would get the F-16. More than
that, many American officials believe that the Indians were upset that the
Pakistanis were demonstrating their defiance of New Delhi by activating the old
relationship with Washington that had so irritated India in the 1950's and
1960's when Pakistan was a member of the Southeast Asian Treaty Organization.

''India, in principle, would like to have good relations with Pakistan, but only
on her terms,'' a State Department official said.  ''India wants Pakistan to
accept her as the predominant power in the subcontinent and to take its lead
from her.''

It was also something of a surprise for members of Congress; despite Pakistani
requests for more than a year that they be allowed to receive the F-16, the Air
Force had argued that the Pakistanis did not need anything more sophisticated
than the F-5G, the prototype of the so-called FX fighter. However, the State
Department wanted to make a political gesture of support to Pakistan and, in
modern diplomacy, a measure of trust has become the sophistication of planes
sold to another country.

Indians Criticize the Decision

The Indian Foreign Ministry said on June 16 that ''it noted with concern'' the
announcement of the F-16 sale and the $3 billion package. It said that the
decision to provide F-16's could undermine ''the serious effort'' under way to
improve relations with Pakistan.

The reaction of the Reagan Administration officials was to dismiss Indian
criticism as hypocritical since the Indians have a major arms supply
relationship with the Soviet Union and are due to receive Mirage 2000 aircraft
from France in the next five years. The Indians last year signed a $8 billion
arms deal with Moscow and they have a significant arms industry of their own.

China's involvement in this complicated diplomacy was probably spurred by its
desire to reduce border tensions with India and to encourage India to be less
dependent on Moscow. At the same time, the Chinese made sure that they, like the
Americans, reassured the Pakistanis of their support against Soviet moves from
Afghanistan.

In early June, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang visited Pakistan to renew China's
backing against outside intervention. A week later, the announcement of the
American military package for Pakistan was made while Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. was in Peking clearing the way for the Chinese to buy arms
from the United States. In contrast to Pakistan, however, it is unlikely that
the Chinese will make significant purchases from the United States.

A week after Mr. Haig left China, Foreign Minister Huang Hua of China arrived in
India for talks. Although the Indians were known to be concerned about the
announcement of the new arms relationship between Peking and Washington, they
suppressed that feeling publicly to give Mr. Huang a friendly reception. The two
sides agreed to hold negotiations on their frontier disputes.

The talks, however, did not reconcile sharp differences between China and India
over Afghanistan and Cambodia in which the Chinese, like the Ameri-

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Huang Hua

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
San Mateo, Calif., Honors Veterans of Vietnam

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 154 words

DATELINE: SAN MATEO, Calif., July 5


The only city to offer an official welcome to returning Vietnam veterans staged
a spectacular air show today to top off a festive weekend dedicated to the men
who fought in the Southeast Asia war.

The two-day tribute, which included northern California's largest Fourth of July
parade, culminated today with a military review and spectacular at Bay Meadows
Race Track.

The two-hour event featured parachutists, hot-air balloonists, rappelling
demonstrations, a glider exhibition and displays of Air Force minijets and
military helicopters.

At special memorial services at Golden Gate National Cemetery, Capt. Leo
Profillet of the Navy, a former prisoner of war, called on the public to join in
prayers and songs for those who died in action. He said the Vietnam veterans
were ''one group that has never received the recognition it deserves.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COMING HOME TO JASPER: A TASTE OF THE RURAL LIFE

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: JASPER, N.Y., July 5


Donna Shook came back from Dallas after spending two days on the highway with
her husband, Neil. So did Lee and Connie Welty from Wooster, Ohio, Hugh Potter
from Phoenix and many others from towns and cities both near and far.

What brought them back was Jasper Old Home Day, a sort of community homecoming -
without the football game - that dates from 1933 in this hamlet in the foothills
of the Appalachian Mountains near the Pennsylvania border in Steuben County.

''Why do I come back?'' asked Mrs. Shook. ''I come back here because it's
home.'' It was a reply common to several hundred others who showed up yesterday
to taste again the daily life in their hometown, not to mention the barbecued
chicken provided by the Jasper Volunteer Fire Department and the beans prepared
by the Ladies' Auxiliary.

In addition to almost a ton of chicken served to what Sheriff J. A. Dartt judged
to be about 2,500 people, there was a horseshoe toss, a greased-pig contest,
square dances in the school gym, a disco for teen-agers, a foot race,
fire-engine rides, a chance to dunk the local parson in a pool and a parade led
by the 27-piece Bulldog Band from the Jasper Central School.

Newcomers to Rural Living

Jasper may be far from unique in having this celebration in honor of itself. But
not many American towns with a population of 1,100 can boast the sort of spirit
that not only brings natives back from afar year after year, but also attracts
newcomers to an economically depressed region as part of what some believe to be
a renaissance in rural living.

''There is an elusive quality to this town that is hard to explain,'' said Dr.
William Cox, who arrived here a decade ago ''on the rebound from the protests
against Vietnam'' with his wife, Nancy, and their two children.

Dr. Cox, who had been teaching at Lafayette College in Easton, Pa., holds a
doctorate in Russian history from the University of Michigan. Mrs. Cox is a
graduate of New York University, and the couple say they came here to get away
from the competitive pressures of urban life.

Scanning the series of ridges that nestle Jasper, hills that after a summer's
rain are as green as a hundred dollar bill, Dr. Cox said, ''There really is a
sort of magic around here.''

Winter Is Tough

But if Jasper could evoke Brigadoon in the summer, it might well bring to mind
Nanook of the North in February, when five-foot snowfalls and temperatures of 20
below sometimes bring the town to a standstill.

These are the times when Kenneth J. Zaleski, a game warden with the State
Department of Environmental Conservation, makes his rounds by snowmobile over
hills that rise to 2,300 feet.

''We get a northwest wind here that won't quit,'' said Mr. Zaleski, who was
transferred here from Westchester County five years ago.  ''Sure, the winters
are tough, but my wife and I love it,'' he said. ''I've already had half a dozen
offers of transfer elsewhere - even with a promotion to lieutenant - but I'm not
going.''

More Cows Than People

The source of the game warden's contentment is his 100-acre farm; a home, a
barn, several smaller buildings and a 12-foot-deep pond stocked with bass. He
bought the place three years ago for $30,000.

''My wife's a nurse, and I'm a cop, and where else can people like us live in
this country and have the standard of living that we do?'' Mr. Zaleski asked.

Nowhere else, according to Tom Swiler, who gave up a job as a high-salaried
sales manager in an electronics company and moved here to a 540-acre farm 15
years ago from Oakland, N.J., with his wife, Elaine, and their three sons.

The newcomers without exception praise the local school, the friendliness of
their neighbors, and the unhurried atmosphere, but that is not to say that
Jasper, a town with more cows than people, is Eden. Jasper, like many other
towns, has a problem with teen-age pregnancy, and the town is speckled not only
with prosperous farms, but also dilapidated homesteads.

No Farm, No Work

A good number of students who graduate from the Jasper Central School, where
according to one recent survey the average I.Q. is 122, go on to college. Then
many drift away.

''They have to leave. There is no work here to speak of, unless you have a
farm,'' said Robert Dennis, whose ancestors settled here in 1824. Mr. Dennis
said that even at $250 to $300 an acre -prices viewed as reasonable elsewhere -
it still costs a great deal of money to go into farming.

Therefore, the residents say, the young tend to move toward three areas: tending
to farms they inherit, moving away to seek work elsewhere, or staying here to
live off welfare.

The Shooks recently moved to Dallas, where they work for an interior decorator.
Mr. Welty works in Ohio for an agricultural equipment manufacturer.

Cultural Life Nearby

Mr. Dennis is a prosperous stock breeder and farmer, and his wife, Ruth, is a
journalist. They say the isolation of the area, which drove some former
residents away, may be ending.

''We're not culturally disadvantaged any longer,'' Mrs. Dennis said, noting that
professional theater, symphonic music and ballet are performed in the nearby
towns of Hornell, Elmira and Corning.

Yet the way of life in Jasper doesn't bother its natives.  ''This is one of the
few pockets of the world where there is peace and quiet,'' said John Loper, a
farmer who retired this year after 41 years. His wife, Marge, a retired
schoolteacher, added, ''With all there is to do around here I don't know the
meaning of the word lonely.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 3 photos of Jasper N.Y. map of N.Y.

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN CARRYING RAZOR SEIZED IN SLASHINGS OF 15 VAGRANT MEN

BYLINE: By LEONARD BUDER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words


A 32-year-old man who was seized while carrying a bloodstained straight razor
was charged by the police yesterday with murdering one vagrant and with menacing
another.

The city's Chief of Detectives, James T. Sullivan, said the police believed that
the man was responsible for the recent series of throat-slashing attacks that
left two men dead and 13 wounded.

The suspect was identified as Charles Sears, whose last known address was the
Hotel Delevan at 143 Bowery. He was said to have a criminal record. Chief
Sullivan said, ''We do not have the motive for the attacks at this time.''

Seized After 6 New Attacks

Mr. Sears was taken into custody at 2:50 yesterday morning, after a night that
brought six new attacks on indigent men, including the two murders. Several of
the attacks took place in or near the same areas as the first slashings, which
occurred the night of June 27.

The police announcement was made after a lineup at 7 o'clock last night at
Manhattan Detective Area headquarters at the 13th Precinct station house, 230
East 21st Street. The police said they planned to show a videotape of the lineup
to a victim who is in Bellevue Hospital. He is Raymond Miley, 25, of Brooklyn.

Mr. Sears was accused of murdering Michael Fiorentino, 40, and of menacing Edwin
Feliciano, 25. The police said Mr. Sears had spent three years in the Army in
Vietnam and was married and the father of four children. They said he was
separated from his family. He had been wanted in connection with an assault
charge in 1977.

Yesterday's lineup had been delayed, in part, because of a recent ruling by the
State Court of Appeals, New York's highest tribunal.  The court had said that
when the police know a person they wish to interrogate has recently been
arrested in another unrelated investigation, they must first ask him if he
already has a lawyer. If he does, then the suspect may not be questioned or
asked by the police to waive his right to have a lawyer present during the
questioning.

Mr. Sears did have a lawyer on the earlier charge. He was represented at
yesterday's proceedings by a Legal Aid lawyer. The police did not immediately
identify either one.

The suspect was picked up at Prince and Wooster Streets in SoHo by two radio-car
officers. About 10 minutes before, a man notified police that a man had tried,
without success, to slash him at Allen and Delancey Streets on the Lower East
Side.

Fit Suspect's Description

Alice T. McGillion, the deputy police commissioner for public information, said
the officers stopped the suspect because he fit the description carried on the
police radio of the man being sought for the attacks. The description - that of
a black man between the ages of 30 and 35 - was being repeated at half-hour
intervals. The arresting officers were Sgt. George Brown and Frederick Leerhsen
of the First Precinct.

The man offered no resistance and acted rationally when he was stopped, the
police said. When he was frisked, the razor was found in a pocket, its blade
folded into the handle, officials said.

The man responsible for the earlier slashings had been the object of an
extensive police hunt, spearheaded by a task force of about 40 detectives and
plainclothes officers who combed Bowery flophouses, skid row hangouts, parks and
other places frequented by vagrants.

There was no racial pattern to the attacks - six of the victims were white,
seven were black and two were of Hispanic background.

Attacks Took 3 Hours

The latest attacks started shortly before midnight Sunday on the Lower East
Side, continued in the Herald Square area and then moved south again, all within
less than three hours.

The first victim was Mr. Miley who, the police said, was talking to an
unidentified man at 11:10 P.M. Sunday at Chrystie and Delancey Streets, outside
Sara Delano Roosevelt Park. Suddenly, according to the account, the man slashed
Mr. Miley across the throat and then ran away. Mr. Miley was listed in fair
condition at Bellevue Hospital.

The next victim - and the first to be killed in the recent series of attacks on
vagrants - was Mr. Fiorentino, 40. He was believed to be asleep on a bench in
the same park when he was attacked. His body was discovered, with the throat
slashed, at 12:15 A.M.

The attacker then moved north. The police said they believed that he walked to
East Houston and Lafayette Streets, where, at 12:45 A.M., he slashed Richard
Garfola, 42. The victim, who lived on the Bowery, was listed in satisfactory
condition yesterday at the Cabrini Medical Center.

3 Slashings in 15 Minutes

Then, within a 15-minute span, there were three attacks, including the second
fatal slashing.  At about 1:35 A.M., Richard Packingham. 39, was slashed in
Horace Greeley Park at 33d Street and the Avenue of the Americas, one block east
of Pennsylvania Station. Mr. Packingham, who had reportedly come to New York
from Liberty, N.C., was treated at St. Clare's Hospital and later released.

Ten minutes later, William Hurbert, 54, was attacked in the same park, near 34th
Street. He also was treated and released at Bellevue.  At 1:50 A.M., Harold
Wilson was found with his throat cut at 34th Street and Seventh Avenue. He died
a short time later at Bellevue.

'I Am Completely Innocent'

An hour after the news conference announcing Mr. Sears's arrest, he was taken to
the central booking complex at Police Headquarters in downtown Manhattan, where
he was held overnight.  He will be arraigned this morning.

A large brown paper bag, with holes cut out for his eyes, had been placed over
his head so that prospective witnesses would not see his picture in newspapers
or on television before additional lineups could be held. He wore a light blue
shirt, white gym shorts and white socks, but no shoes. His hands were manacled
behind him.

''Did you do it?,'' a reporter asked. ''I am completely innocent,'' the prisoner
replied. Someone asked then why he was being held. ''I picked up something I
wasn't supposed to,'' he said.

---- Suspect's Record Is Given By The Associated Press

Charles Sears, the suspect in a series of attacks on vagrants, is a former
mechanic for the Consolidated Edison Co. who had been sought since 1977 on
charges that he struck a man over the head with a wrench during an argument over
a parking space in the Bronx.

Mr. Sears was sentenced in June 1971 to a year in prison for possession of a
weapon, grand larceny, petty larceny, robbery and resisting arrest.

After being released from prison, according to records, he was convicted in 1972
for grand larceny, forcible theft with a deadly weapon and possession of a
weapon. On Dec. 27, 1972, he was sentenced to three years in jail. The records
show that he was paroled on May 21, 1974, and was discharged from parole on Nov.
27, 1975.

Mr. Sears had appeared several times in 1977 for preliminary hearings in
connection with the argument over the parking space in the Bronx. However, he
failed to appear at another court hearing on Oct. 24, 1977, and a bench warrant
was issued for his arrest. Edward McCarthy, a spokesman for District Attorney
Mario Merola of the Bronx, said yesterday that the warrant was still
outstanding.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Charles Sears (Page B3) map of N.Y.C. (Page B3)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WELFARE DEPENDENCY OF INDOCHINESE REFUGEES WORRYING CALIFORNIA OFFICIALS

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 6


Each month, California officials estimate, from 5,000 to 6,000 Southeast Asian
refugees move to this state, and more than half seek public financial
assistance.

In Los Angeles County, officials say, there are at least 52,000 Indochinese
refugees, and more than 36,000 are receiving welfare payments.

Of the estimated 7,500 refugees in Sacramento County, 5,500 are on welfare, and
in Orange County, south of here, more than 20,000 of the 50,000 Southeast Asian
refugees are receiving monthly assistance checks.

State officials estimate that California, partly because of a ''secondary
migration'' of refugees from other states, has become home to more than 60
percent of the more than 450,000 Indochinese refugees who came to the United
States after the Vietnam War ended in 1975.

Permanent Dependence Feared

While many of the refugees are finding jobs and at least a limited degree of
success here, officials say that they fear a permanent underclass of
''welfare-dependent'' refugees is developing that could present economic
problems for communities in the future.

''What we're starting to see is the beginnings of a cycle in which you have the
second and third generation going on welfare,'' said Joe Diaz, California's
deputy director of health.

He explained that the cycle began when the first adults who came to the states
started receiving public assistance. Now, he said, as their teen-age children
are maturing and raising families of their own, many of them and their children
have also become dependent on welfare.

''The average age of the refugees is young, and there are an average of four
children in each refugee family, and you notice that the age of recipients is
becoming younger and younger,'' he said.

''It's a very significant problem now, but unless something is done to make them
more self-sufficient it will become even more serious during the next three to
five years in California, and in ten years it could be even greater,'' Mr. Diaz
said.

Cost Shifted to States

On April 1, the Federal Government began requiring state and local governments
to pay about half of the welfare costs for refugees who had been in this country
three years; before that date, Washington absorbed all of the costs.

The action brought complaints from officials here that Washington was
''dumping'' the refugees on local taxpayers.  Mr. Diaz said his department
estimates that about 61 percent of the total number of Indochinese refugees who
emigrated to the United States after the Vietnam War are in California.

But while it is difficult to determine exact numbers, many officials say they
believe the estimates to be too low.  ''Our budget services office estimates a
28.1 percent increase for the next fiscal year,'' said Stuart Szidek, research
director for the Los Angeles County Department of Public and Social Services.
''The impact is naturally going to cost everyone more: the Federal Government,
the state and the country.''

Effect on County Budgets

In Orange County, where about 1,000 refugees from Southeast Asia settle each
month, Lois Wax, the coordinator of refugee affairs, said: ''We estimate that
when you combine social services with the financial assistance, even with
Federal reimbursement, it's costing $30 million a year. It has a fair impact on
the county budget.''

Orange County has been one of the most attractive destinations for the
''secondary migration'' of the refugees. Besides the tens of thousands of
refugees who settled in California after the Vietnam War, many others came on
their own after first being resettled in Eastern and Middle Western states. The
reasons for moving to the coast include preference for the moderate climate and,
in many cases, the presence of relatives here.

While Mr. Diaz stressed his belief that America should have an ''open border''
and welcome refugees, he said that there could be growing resistance to such
immigration unless there was greater success in providing refugees with skills
they could use to get off the welfare rolls.

He said that he was working on a new refugee ''master plan'' for the state that
would emphasize language and training for the job market, as well as ''family
planning, which I realize is a touchy subject for a tradition-bound people.''

''At the rate we're going,'' he said, ''the population of refugees in California
will be increasing because of migration by 75,000 a year for the next three or
four years; and after that, I think, the increase may be just as high through
births.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

,

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 233 words


Topics Obscured Vision

Intruders in the Dust

When the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, pundits agreed that guerrilla
resistance would be more difficult than in, say, Vietnam.  Why? Without jungle
ground cover, insurgents have no place to hide. It would be a piece of cake for
Soviet helicopters to pick off the rebels.

That was 18 months ago, and the piece of cake has a bitter taste for 80,000
Soviet troops. According to European doctors who have moved freely among
guerrillas, the occupiers control only about 10 percent of the mountainous
country, and the insurgents are proficient at bagging Soviet tanks. They shoot
down helicopters with rifles - by luring them into valleys where snipers target
vulnerable cockpits from above. As for the lack of cover: ''You can hear a
chopper miles away. So you hit the ground and cover yourself with your
dust-colored clothes. You are invisible, even at a thousand feet.''

To Afghan tribesmen, camouflage is an old story, going back to their wars
against the British Raj a century ago. They used the Persian word for ''dust''
to describe their cloaks. That word passed to India, where it was picked up in
its Hindi form by British soldiers and thence into English: khaki.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 7, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR A PEACE ACADEMY

BYLINE: By Gregory D. Foster

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 867 words


.8,0,174.8,2,478.4,0ARLINGTON, Va. - When President Reagan receives the final
report of the Commission on Proposals for the National Academy of Peace and
Conflict Resolution, he may face a dilemma. His response to that report will
reflect in large measure his commitment to peace.

Since President Reagan's inauguration, we have witnessed numerous examples of
his conception of peace through strength, including his commencement address at
West Point, where he remarked: ''The search for peace must go on, but we have a
better chance of finding it if we maintain our strength while we're searching.''
The President also quoted George Washington: ''To be prepared for war is one of
the most effectual means of preserving the peace.'' Ironically, it was President
Washington who, in 1783, first called for a ''proper Peace Establishment'' for
the United States. Today, almost 200 years later, we still have no institution
devoted specifically to the pursuit of peace.

From 1935 until the late 1960's alone, approximately 140 legislative proposals
for a peace office, institute, or academy were made. But it was not until the
1978 Elementary and Secondary Education Act that such hopes came close to
fruition. That enactment created the Peace Academy Commission and charged it
with assessing the feasibility of a formal peace institution.

The nine-member commission, whose chairman is Senator Spark M.  Matsunaga,
Democrat of Hawaii, considered extensive testimony and research in concluding
that a Peace Academy could save Americans billions of dollars each year and
significantly reduce levels of domestic and international violence.

The proposed academy would be an educational institution rather than a
dispute-settling or policymaking agency. It would award graduate degrees to
midcareer professionals, provide regionally based technical assistance and
training, and perform clearinghouse and grant-awarding functions. These programs
would produce individuals capable of settling community, minority,
environmental, and international disputes.

To deny the value of an institution of such high purpose that would cost less
than $300 million for its first 10 years of operation, according to a commission
estimate, is to suggest that the $2 trillion the United States has spent on
defense over the last 15 years has produced a more peaceful, stable, and secure
world. Only the least discerning among us would accept such a claim.

Yet the Peace Academy faces a difficult road ahead in generating Congressional
support, principally because of the intellectual and philosophical chasms that
divides academy advocates and opponents.

Opponents tend to be indifferent to the idea, or ambivalent, rather than
adamantly against an academy. They fashion themselves as macho conflict
managers, unafraid of the prospects of war and singularly attuned to the ''real
world.'' They see academy advocates as effete ''peaceniks'' who are out of touch
with reality. Most opponents do not relish war but are loath to advocate peace
openly. Illustrative is the case of a retired Army general who supported the
academy movement in its early stages but when recalled to active duty for a
special assignment withdrew his open endorsement.

Academy advocates are equally prone to distortion. A recent statement by Senator
Matsunaga is representative: ''We take many of our most intelligent graduates
and send them to military academies to learn the art of waging war. Why can't we
make it possible for some of them to also learn how to wage peace?'' The logic
of this argument is obscured by the false implication that the military
academies and war colleges are designed to produce advocates of war.

Until the two sides converge, the establishment of a Peace Academy will prove
chimerical. Convergence, however, would occur only with Presidential inducement,
for neither side seems prepared to acknowledge that peace and conflict are
complementary phenomena, not discrete measurements of machismo.

Unfortunately, it is hard to dispel the notion that President Reagan has been
co-opted by the conflict managers. His words betray a one-dimensional approach
to peace, an over-compensation for the country's post-Vietnam lethargy. But
strength alone will not produce peace, and rhetoric will not substitute for
action.

The President's negative approach to peace must be balanced by positive measures
if it is to succeed. Open support of the Peace Academy would afford Mr. Reagan a
unique opportunity to initiate what, in his own words, would be the
transcendence, rather than the containment, of Communism by the West.

Let us hope that the President and the American people do not orchestrate their
own destruction by being unable to decide on a proper road to peace.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Gregory D. Foster is a defense analyst for a ''commercial thinktank'' whose
clients include the Defense Department.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 8, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
3 Coffins Handed Over To U.S. by Vietnamese

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: CLARK AIR FORCE BASE, Philippines, July 7


Vietnam handed over three wooden coffins today with the remains of three
American servicemen missing since the Vietnam War.

In the first such ceremony since 1978, a 10-man honor guard that had been flown
to Hanoi placed the coffins aboard an Air Force C-130 Hercules transport and
flew them back here.

Tomorrow, they will be flown to Hawaii, where tests will be made to determine
identities, a base spokesman said.  The remains were the first to be released by
Vietnam since October 1978 and brought to 74 the number of bodies returned to
the United States since 1973. More than 2,500 servicemen, mostly airmen, are
still listed as missing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 8, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
SLASHING SUSPECT TO UNDERGO TESTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 156 words


A Manhattan Criminal Court judge yesterday ordered that a psychiatric
examination be given to a 32-year-old drifter to see if he was competent to
stand trial on charges he murdered one vagrant and attempted to assault another
last Sunday night and early Monday morning.

The defendant, Charles Sears, who last lived in a hotel on the Bowery, pleaded
not guilty at his arraignment. He did not ask for bail.

Although Mr. Sears has been formally charged with one homicide and an attempted
assault, police officials said after his arrest that they believed he was
responsible for the recent series of throat-slashings that left two vagrant men
dead and 13 wounded Mr. Sears, an honorably discharged Vietnam War veteran, has
a record of previous arrests and convictions on theft, weapons and other
charges.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 8, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
Slashing Suspect To Undergo Tests

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 143 words


A Manhattan Criminal Court judge yesterday ordered that a psychiatric
examination be given to a 32-year-old drifter to see if he was competent to
stand trial on charges he murdered one vagrant and attempted to assault another
last Sunday night and early Monday morning.

The defendant, Charles Sears, who last lived in a hotel on the Bowery, pleaded
not guilty at his arraignment. He did not ask for bail.

Although Mr. Sears has been formally charged with one homicide and an attempted
assault, police officials said after his arrrest that they believed he was
responsible for the recent series of throatslashings that left two vagrant men
dead and 13 wounded. Mr.  Sears, an honorably discharged Vietnam War veteran,
has a record of previous arrests and convictions on theft, weapons and other
charges.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 9, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BODIES OF AMERICANS RETURNED BY VIETNAM:

BYLINE: Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 64 words


Military pallbearers carry the flag-draped coffin of an American serviceman past
an honor guard during arrival ceremonies at Hickam Air Force Base in Hawaii. The
remains of three U.S. servicemen missing in action since Vietnam War were
released recently by Hanoi and arrived yesterday at Hickam. The bodies will be
taken to an Army forensics laboratory for positive identification.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of the flag-draped coffin

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POL POT AIDE SAYS DEATH TOLL WAS THOUSANDS, NOT MILLIONS

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 547 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 9


The former Foreign Minister of Cambodia, dismissing the conventional estimate
that three million to four million people died during the three-year rule of Pol
Pot, said in an interview that the total was actually 20,000 to 30,000. But the
former official, Ieng Sary, acknowledged that these were the result of ''some
big mistakes'' by the regime.

His total, offered in an interview here yesterday, is less than 1 percent of the
number believed to have died between 1975 and 1978 through the forced evacuation
of cities, mass executions and other events. A figure derived from a United
Nations survey suggests that the catastrophes reduced Cambodia's population by
3.4 million.

Mr. Ieng Sary, here for a United Nations conference on Cambodia next week,
contended that the figure of three million to four million ''is not realistic.''
He attributed the hurried evacuation of Phnom Penh, an incident that is blamed
for the deaths of tens of thousands, to a desire to ''escape from the
Vietnamese.'' He apparently meant that the Pol Pot authorities feared an
imminent invasion by the Vietnamese at the time of the evacuation in 1975. The
Vietnamese invaded three years later.

Lack of Food Also Blamed

At other times, the Pol Pot group has said the capital had to be cleared out
because of a lack of food. The speed of the evacuation was one of the ''big
mistakes'' Mr. Ieng Sary spoke of.

Vietnam's invasion resulted in the ouster of Mr. Pol Pot and his replacement by
a regime whose rule is opposed by the Pol Pot guerrillas. The conference opening
here Monday aims at negotiating the departure of the Vietnamese and the free
selection by the Cambodians of a new government.

The conference sponsors from Southeast Asia had hoped that the Cambodian
opposition to the present Government, divided into three factions, would unite.
But Mr. Ieng Sary made clear that his group and the other two are still split.

One faction is led by Cambodia's former ruler, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who now
lives in Pyongyang, North Korea. Since February, the Prince ''has never said
anything bad about us,'' Mr. Ieng Sary said.

'Our Program Not Ideological'

''But maybe he does not believe the national forces can win over the
Vietnamese,'' he said. ''We hope that improvement of the military situation will
get the Prince to understand better because our program is not ideological, not
socialism or Communism.''

The Prince is sending his own representative to the conference next week. So is
the third group, led by Son Sann, who served 17 times in Prince Sihanouk's
cabinets.

Like the Pol Pot faction, Mr. Son Sann has guerrillas near Cambodia's border
with Thailand, but Mr. Ieng Sary has little regard for them.

The Vietnamese, as well as the Soviet Union and the present regime, are
boycotting next week's meeting.

----

Thais Stage Major Maneuvers

BANGKOK, Thailand, July 9 (UPI) -Thailand's armed forces launched the largest
military maneuvers in five years today in an apparent show of force before the
United Nations-sponsored conference on Cambodia next week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WEAPONS FOR CHINA: COST WOULD BE SKY-HIGH;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


The cost of modernizing China's armed forces with American weapons and equipment
would be ''enormous,'' according to many analysts in this country and abroad.
They question whether either the United States or China has the resources to
make China a major military threat against the Soviet Union. A report by the
International Institute for Strategic Studies in London estimated that the cost
of modernizing one of China's 11 armored divisions would be $664 million, if the
present divisional structure was followed.

To modernize the division with adequate self-propelled artillery, helicopters,
mechanized infantry and stronger support forces would raise the estimate to $1
billion for each division.

These estimates, published in the journal Strategic Survey, are based on the
costs of American equipment, not on what it might cost China to produce the
equivalent equipment.

As analysts point out, such production is well outside the range of China's
present weapons industry.

Differences Over Haig's Trip

If overall modernization of China's armament is beyond the reach of the Chinese
and of the present American military-industrial complex, as Pentagon officials
say, Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr.'s recent trip to China may be
less of a threat to the Soviet Union than Pravda, the Communist Party newspaper,
made it out to be.

The trip reminded the Chinese that they had a friend in the United States, a
friend who could, in an emergency, supply limited amounts of weapons. At the
same time, the Soviet Union was signaled that the relationship between Peking
and Washington could lead to military aid for China.

The net strategic result of this diplomatic ploy, analysts said, is that the
Soviet Union is highly unlikely to reduce the force of 46 divisions, backed by
three tactical air fleets, arrayed against China.

Modernization of the military is the last of a list of goals drawn up by the
Chinese Government. It is a bad last, as shown by the budget discussions in the
National People's Congress last September.  The discussions suggested no
startling expansion in military expenditure.

The Government found that military spending had outrun plans by 10 percent and,
as a result, the military budget was reduced by the equivalent of $2 billion
compared with 1979.

There have been no indications from Peking that the Government intends to
increase military spending in the next year.  Yet the relatively poor showing of
the Chinese Army in the short war with Vietnam early in 1980 emphasized China's
weaknesses in weapons and transport. These weaknesses have been re-emphasized by
the continuing patrol activity along the China-Vietnam frontier, which in June
had reached battalion level.

China Gets Some New Equipment

According to a British expert, the Chinese ground forces are receiving a limited
number of battle tanks, light reconnaissance tanks and armored personnel
carriers.

These weapons systems are an advance on the obsolescent Soviet-made equipment
found in most Chinese divisions, but they do not compensate the Chinese for the
absence of modern precision antitank and antiaircraft weapons or sufficient
trucks.

Chinese purchasing teams have toured West European industry comparing such
weapons made in France, Britain and other Atlantic alliance nations.

Within the Chinese Army there has been an increased emphasis on professionalism.
A quiet campaign has been waged to eliminate civilian political appointees -the
Chief of Staff, a military man, has replaced a civilian - and in raising the
level of training of middle-level officers.

China's most significant military progress in the last 18 months has been in the
strategic nuclear area. On May 18, 1980, China's first full-range ICBM, the
CSS-X-4, was launched. The Chinese reported that this solid-fuel vehicle had a
range of about 7,500 miles.

Despite this demonstration of nuclear ability, the emphasis in the Chinese
forces remains on conventional arms and its only unfailing military resource -
manpower.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 10, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WALTER LANGER IS DEAD AT 82; WROTE SECRET STUDY OF HITLER

BYLINE: By WALTER H. WAGGONER

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 508 words


Dr. Walter C. Langer, an American psychoanalyst who producd a secret and
prophetic psychological study of Hitler for the Office of Strategic Services in
1943, died July 4 in Sarasota, Fla. He was 82 years old.

Dr. Langer's analysis of Hitler, undertaken at the height of World War II at the
request of Gen. William J. Donovan, head of the O.S.S., became a reference for
Allied leaders. It predicted Hitler's suicide. In 1972, nearly 30 years after it
was prepared, the work was published as ''The Mind of Adolf Hitler'' and became
a bestseller.

The study was not offered as a psychoanalysis because the subject was never
interviewed. But Dr. Langer talked to a score of people who had known Hitler and
were available to United States intelligence agencies.

Reviewing the book in The New York Times, Dr. Robert Jay Lifton, professor of
psychiatry at Yale, wrote that Dr. Langer had got ''inside Hitler's head, and to
a considerable extent the heads of the German people in general.''

Weakling Bully and Failed Fuhrer

From interviews, Dr. Langer concluded that Hitler's behavior was evidence of a
mixed and divided psyche; a weakling masquerading as a bully, and a failure in
the role of Fuhrer. He was ''probably a neurotic psychopath bordering on
schizophrenia.''

Hitler killed himself on April 30, 1945, in his Chancellory's airraid bunker.
Two years earlier, Dr. Langer wrote that that ''as Germany suffers successive
defeats, Hitler will become more and more neurotic'' and in all likelihood would
take his own life.

In Vienna in the 1930's, Dr. Langer studied with and was analyzed by Anna Freud,
daughter of Sigmund Freud. He also saw Freud frequently and accompanied him on
his trip into exile in 1938.

Students of Dr. Langer's estimate of Hitler's mentality said he had made good
use of Freudian technique.  In an introduction to the book, Dr. Langer wrote:
''I may be naive in diplomatic matters, but I like to believe that if such a
study of Hitler had been made years earlier, under less tension, and with more
opportunity to gather first-hand information, there might not have been a
Munich; a similar study of Stalin might have produced a different Yalta; one of
Castro might have prevented the Cuban situation, and one of President Diem might
have avoided our deep involvement in Vietnam.''

Walter Langer was born in Boston on Feb. 9, 1899, the son of Charles Rudolph and
Johanna Rockenbach Langer. He was a practicing psychoanalyst from the late
1930's until about 1960, and he was the The brother of William L. Langer, the
Harvard historian, and Rudolph Ernest Langer, chairman of the mathematics
department at the University of Wisconsin.

He was graduated from Harvard in 1923 after serving with the United States Army
in France in World War I. He is survived by his wife, Frances.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 11, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

3 VETERANS END HUNGER STRIKE

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 347 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 10


Three veterans of the Vietnam War ended a 45-day hunger strike today after they
were promised that Congress would conduct hearings on their grievances,
according to a spokesman for the men.

The spokesman, Bill Rigole, termed the action ''a gift to the American people.''
''The American people have contacted their representatives in Congress and have
voiced their concern about Vietnam veterans,'' he said. ''We believe in showing
good faith when dealing with these issues so we are removing three more hunger
strikers.''

Steve Androff, one of five veterans continuing a hunger strike in Washington,
D.C., said in a telephone interview that the protest in the capital would not be
affected by what happened in Los Angeles.  ''Those guys were under a lot of
pressure and it has taken a toll,'' Mr. Androff said, ''but I don't think
America wants to see any of these guys die and I know we certainly do not.''

A Leader Is Surprised

In Los Angeles, Bobby Phillips, a spokesman for the Veterans Coalition, said he
was surprised that the three had abandoned their fast, adding that the other
five in Washington would not be ''bought or scared off.''

The veterans are demanding a nationwide inquiry into treatment at Veterans
Administration hospitals and into the toxic effects of Agent Orange, the
defoliant that was used to disclose enemy hiding places in Vietnam.

The veterans' protest began after the apparent suicide last May of James
Hopkins, a former marine. They say they believe he was mistreated by the
Veterans Administration.

Mr. Phillips did not elaborate on the coming Congressional hearings, but he said
that the names of Congressmen conducting the hearings woud be announced at a
news conference in Washington Tuesday. If the hearings prove unproductive, Mr.
Androff said, the remaining hunger strikers will stop taking anything but water.
They are now taking fruit juices and vitamins.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words


Two ancient Greek statues glory in the affection of Italy 3
Radical reformers fear views will not prevail at Polish congress 3
New Italian Government wins final approval 3
South Africans awaiting change of U.S. envoys 4
Around the World 5
United Nations conference on Cambodia opens tomorrow 6
China says only force can drive Vietnamese from Cambodia 7
Mass killings rack El Salvador 9
Different mood expected for French-West German meeting 13

Government/Politics
Mobile voters may settle suit over government 15
Legislature backs division of a judicial district in city 35

General
Around the Nation 20
New York cherry crop is lowest on record 23
25 people treated after inhaling chlorine gas in Rockland 26
Westchester Jail inmates return to cells after protest 26
Financier's indictment for trying to kill wife has Newport agog 26
Man accused of double slaying goes on trial in Orange County 27
Youth work programs fight for suvivial 30
Plan to return black bear to N.J.  provokes dispute 36
Hearings to begin on Hughes es- tate 38

Education/Welfare
12,000 city pupils trying to raise reading scores 33

Industry/Labor
2 newspapers in Dallas in a ''free for all'' 37

Index

International
Two ancient Greek statues glory in the affection of Italy 3
Radical reformers fear views will not prevail at Polish congress 3
New Italian Government wins final approval 3
South Africans awaiting change of U.S. envoys 4
Around the World 5
United Nations conference on Cambodia opens tomorrow 6
China says only force can drive Vietnamese from Cambodia 7
Paraguay accused of imperiling survival of an Indian group 8
Different mood expected for French-West German meeting 13

Government/Politics
Mobile voters may settle suit over government 15
Legislature backs division of a judicial district in city 35

General
Around the Nation 20
New York cherry crop is lowest on record 23
25 people treated after inhaling chlorine gas in Rockland 26
Westchester Jail inmates return to cells after protest 26
Financier's indictment for trying to kill wife has Newport agog 26
Man accused of double slaying goes on trial in Orange County 27
Youth work programs fight for suvivial 30
Plan to return black bear to N.J.  provokes dispute 36
Hearings to begin on Hughes es- tate 38

Education/Welfare
12,000 city pupils trying to raise reading scores 33

Industry/Labor
2 newspapers in Dallas in a ''free for all'' 37
Denver Post bases its hopes on two executives from Dallas 37

Health/Science
Special team of doctors treats ills at rock music concerts 20
Officials fear for rare Michigan songbird 38

Arts/Entertainment
Jerry Jeff Wlaker, quintessential ''outlaw'' singer 38
Ricky Skaggs sings bluegrass at the Lone Star 39
Dick Hyman and Roger Kellaway in duo piano engagement 39
Patti Bown, jazz pianist, singer and writer 39
Marines' art from Vietnam War left unseen in storeroom 39

Style
For women, a landmark rediscov- ered 40

Obituaries
Rev. John J. McMahon, former Jesuit provincial 24

News Analysis
Drew Middleton looks at U.S.  plans for arms aid to Pakistan 11

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. PARLEY ON CAMBODIA WILL OPEN TOMORROW

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 609 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 11


Led by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., the United States meets here
tomorrow with China and 73 other nations in an effort to force the removal of
the Vietnameseinstalled regime in Cambodia.

The conference was called last year by the General Assembly to negotiate a
withdrawal of Vietnam's troops and a process for holding free elections
supervised by the United Nations. But there will not be any negotiations because
Vietnam and its ally, the Soviet Union, are boycotting the meeting.

As a result, a skeptical Asian diplomat has called this ''a conference that
claps with one hand.'' The chief sponsors of the conference, the five member
countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, have rejected that
view.  The organization, which consists of Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, the
Philippines and Thailand, believes that the gathering will have useful political
and public relations effects.

One Southeast Asian envoy said that Hanoi's failure to attend would
''demonstrate that Vietnam intervened in Cambodia not because of threats to its
security but in order to impose its hegemony over a neighbor.'' This diplomat
said that the meeting would turn world attention once again to the unsettled
Cambodia problem and ''take it off the back burner to put it on the front
burner.''

Haig Making First U.N. Visit

American officials support this view and argue that the meeting will also
underline a continuing United Nations concern with the troubled country.

Much interest will be directed toward Mr. Haig, who on Monday will be making his
first appearance at the United Nations.  The deposed Cambodian regime of Pol Pot
and its chief supplier of arms, extending an invitation to Heng Samrin who,
backed by Vietnamese guns, replaced Pol Pot in 1979. More importantly, China and
the Pol Pot forces oppose two points in a declaration that the conference is
expected to adopt.

Among other things, the declaration will call for disarming all Cambodian
factions and for setting up an interim government while the United Nations
supervises elections. However, the Pol Pot forces, with China's support, want to
enter Phnom Penh with their arms before elections are held.

A draft of the declaration also offers Vietnam aid to rebuild and develop as an
inducement to pull out its troops.  Apart from the declaration, the conference
is expected to set up a small committee of nations that would continue to sound
out Hanoi on the possibilities of negotiating a settlement.

Turnout Put at 75 Nations

The turnout for the conference is a subject of dispute. The Southeast Asian
countries assert that as of Friday, 75 nations were to appear at the conference,
an excellent showing, particularly in light of Secretary General Kurt Waldheim's
diffident invitation. He never directly invited any country, but merely asked
whether a nation regarded itself as ''concerned.'' So far, 44 countries have not
replied.

The Southeast Asian group is especially cheered by the appearance of such
important nations professing nonalignment as Yugoslavia, Senegal and Nigeria.
The fact that 16 foreign ministers are attending is also regarded as a sign of
strength.

But the Soviet side notes that the total falls short of the 97 that voted to
hold the conference last winter. Moreover, six of the countries are coming as
observers. Among the 25 declining are India, as well as nations that invariably
vote with Moscow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA SAYS THE VIETAMESE MUST BE DRIVEN OUT OF CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By JAMES P. STERBA, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: PEKING, July 11


China said today that Vietnam's refusal to attend next week's United Nations
conference on Cambodia supported Peking's view that Hanoi's 200,000 troops in
Cambodia must be driven out by force.

In a Government commentary distributed today by the official New China News
Agency, Vietnam was portrayed as a proxy for Soviet expansion in Southeast Asia.

It said the charge by Vietnam that its troops must remain in Cambodia because of
a continuing threat from China was designed to divert world attention from
Hanoi's aims of establishing an Indochina federation and was thus comparable to
Hitler's accusations of threats from the Soviet Communists that camouflaged his
aggressive intent before World War II.

While other nations, including the United States, were describing next week's
conference as an opportunity for Vietnam to end its estrangement from the world
community through cooperation on Cambodia, China has held to the view that Hanoi
understands only force and responds only to pressure.

The commentary said that only by ''forcing Vietnam to withdraw its troops'' can
a neutral and independent Cambodia be achieved.  ''Mere concessions will yield
no stability, but instability; stability can be gained only by fighting for
it,'' it said. ''Like other developing countries, China has a pressing need for
a peaceful international environment, especially stability and peace in
Southeast Asia, for her modernization program.''

The article charged that Hanoi's and Moscow's long-range goals of expansion
prevented either from agreeing to any accommodations for tranquillity in
Southeast Asia.

It said Vietnam was actively resettling Vietnamese in Cambodia for long-term
control. It also said that Hanoi maintained 50,000 to 60,000 troops in Laos in
addition to 10,000 advisers who control that nation and that it had designs for
incorporating 16 provinces of Thailand into its federation.

''The Soviet Union is providing Vietnam with $6 million of aid per day in
exchange for the use of naval and air bases in Vietnam's Cam Ranh Bay and Da
Nang and Kampuchea's Kompong Som,'' it said, using the Cambodians' name for
their country. ''From these bases warships and aircraft of the Soviet fleet
operate in the South China Sea, the Western Pacific and the Gulf of Siam and
encroach on the territorial air and waters of the Philippines.''

----

Vietnam Calls Talks One-Sided

BANGKOK, Thailand, July 11 (Reuters) - Vietnam said today that the United
Nations conference on Cambodia starting on Monday is one-sided and doomed to
failure.

''At this conference, certain countries will propose a solution to the Cambodian
problem with a cease-fire by all contesting parties,'' the official daily Nhan
Dan said in a commentary.

''The authors of this plan want to prevent the Cambodian people and their armed
forces from sweeping away Pol Pot's remnants and are trying to use the U.N. to
interfere more deeply in the internal affairs of independent and sovereign
Cambodia,'' it said. The Cambodian regime of Mr. Pol Pot was ousted by
Vietnamese troops in 1978 and guerrillas supporting him are fighting the
Vietnamese.

----

Cambodia Denounces Conference

BANGKOK, July 11 (AP) - The Phnom Penh Government today denounced the United
Nations conference on Cambodia as ''illegal and arbitrary.''

The official news agency S.P.K., monitored here, said, ''It is an abuse of the
United Nations to involve itself in the internal affairs of Cambodia, to
perpetuate the clique of Pol Pot and to serve the interests of Peking
expansionists in Southeast Asia.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARINES' VIETNAM ART LEFT UNSEEN

BYLINE: By LYNN ROSELLINI, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 39, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 9


In a basement storeroom of the Washington Navy Yard, an odd collection of
artworks is largely unseen and until recently unwanted by the public.

The thousands of paintings and sketches depict Marines, Vietcong, M-16 rifles,
C-130 aircraft and other images of the war in Vietnam.  In an effort to spread
information about its role in the war, the corps, beginning in 1966,
commissioned 78 artists to produce Vietnam combat artworks, flying the artists
by helicopter into battle zones.

But when the corps assembled the sketches and paintings here years later, they
discovered a problem - almost no one wanted them.  ''For a while, I think,
almost everything about Vietnam turned people off,'' John T. Dyer Jr., curator
of the collection, said.  ''Its unpopularity made everything associated with it
unpopular, including artwork.''

'Anything on World War II?'

Mr. Dyer said that although art about Vietnam was becoming more popular, the
military and civilian groups that sponsor combat-art exhibits have had little
interest in Vietnam. ''People would call and say, 'What do you have?' ''
according to Mr. Dyer. ''I'd say that most of it is on Vietnam. They'd say,
'Well, do you have anything on World War II, or recruiting posters?' ''

Many of the works in the basement of the Marine Corps Museum at the Navy Yard
have never been exhibited.  ''Gee, it's muggy down here,'' Mr. Dyer said as he
switched on a light in the storeroom recently. The relative humidity in the room
reaches 89 percent in the summer, according to Mr. Dyer, and the dampness,
combined with extreme dryness in the winter, causes the paintings to
deteriorate.

''We're so overcrowded that I'm forced to hang paintings and artwork everywhere
I can in the building,'' he said.

Down to 35 Requests a Year

Nearly 500 framed works and thousands of unframed ones, representing a sizable
proportion of the entire Marine Corps Art Collection, are in the basement. The
collection has 6,000 works; 4,000 are on Vietnam. Most of the rest deal with
other wars or training exercises. The works have been shown at museums, schools,
libraries and other places and have been featured in the Smithsonian
Institution's traveling exhibitions.

At the height of the Vietnam War, in 1969, the Marines had 11 persons
cataloguing the art and sending it to exhibitions.  After the war wound down,
the staff was reduced to one - Mr. Dyer - who handles 35 requests a year for
pictures.  ''I like to see the artwork used,'' Mr. Dyer, a former military
artist in Vietnam, said as he moved among the stacks of pictures. ''I don't like
the warehouse idea: hang onto it in storage, don't let anyone else see it.''

No Estimate of Cost

Most of the stored art was produced during the Vietnam War by salaried Marine or
civilian artists paid per diem. Mr. Dyer said no estimate of the cost was
available.

The Navy, Army and Air Force also have combat-art collectons that include works
from Vietnam.  One painting, picked at random from a shelf, was titled
''Escorting Prisoners.'' It depicted marines with M-16's escorting grimacing
Vietcong prisoners with their hands tied behind their backs. Others showed
combat patrols, Vietnamese peasants and street scenes in Saigon and Danang.

Gain in Popularity

Mr. Dyer said the Vietnam art was ''not so unpopular now'' as it was 10 years
ago: ''The requests are starting to come in again, and when they come in, they
don't object to us sending an all-Vietnam collection. If you take 10 requests, 7
out of 10 of them won't argue with you if you give them an all-Vietnam show.''

Mr. Dyer predicted that some day Vietnam combat art would be as popular as works
about World War II were today: ''There's a whole brand new audience opening up
who were young kids in 1961, when the war started. To them, it might not hold
the repulsion that it holds for people of the 60's.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Dyer with pieces from Vietnam art
collection

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THERE'S A CONFERENCE ON CAMBODIA BUT VIETNAM ISN'T COMING

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Last week, a United States Air Force C-130 transport and a 10-member military
honor guard flew to Hanoi to retrieve the remains of three Americans killed
during the Vietnam war. The ceremony was more than usually noteworthy because
such transfers are about the only official contacts that take place nowadays
between Vietnam and the United States.

Vietnam ranks at the head of the Reagan Administration's list of ''pariah''
countries. Not only are there no diplomatic relations, but there are no
''interests sections,'' such as the United States maintains with Iraq.
Washington, it seems, has set out with almost a vengeance to isolate Vietnam.
Since President Reagan's inauguration, American diplomats have been instructed
to persuade other countries to ignore Vietnam's appeals for help. Officials say
that Sweden and Finland are the only non-Communist countries providing any
assistance, outside of some limited United Nations aid, to Hanoi.

The rationale for this policy was stated by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig
Jr. in Manila at last month's meeting of the five Southeast Asian non-Communist
countries. ''Today, the greatest threats to the interests, prosperity and
well-being of the peoples of Southeast Asia are the policies of Vietnam,'' he
said. ''The United States will not normalize relations with a Vietnam that
occupies Kampuchea,'' Mr. Haig said, referring to the 250,000 Vietnamese troops
in Cambodia. ''We will continue to question seriously any economic assistance -
whatever the source - so long as Vietnam continues to squander its scarce
resources for aggressive purposes.''

The limits of such a punitive policy are apparent and are not disputed by
American officials. Vietnam's isolation has pushed it further into Moscow's
embrace and complicated efforts to find a negotiated solution to the Cambodian
crisis. A United Nations conference on Cambodia beginning in New York tomorrow
is being boycotted by Vietnam, the Soviet Union and their friends; many other
countries which oppose the Vietnamese-backed Government of Heng Semrin have
shown little interest in attending. One Asian diplomat said it would be ''a
conference that claps with one hand.''

While criticizing Hanoi's past actions, some of Washington's closest Pacific
allies, such as New Zealand and Japan, have been urging the United States to try
a more conciliatory approach.  Thailand, worried about its own frontiers and
trying to stem the exodus of Cambodian refugees and Vietnamese boat people, has
begun its own dialogue with Hanoi which so far has produced no results.  Over
the long term, some Southeast Asian countries with big Chinese minorities, such
as Indonesia, are more worried about China's intentions than Vietnam's, and are
uneasy with Washington's tough stance.

The Reagan Administration answer is that conciliation was tried in the past and
failed to moderate Hanoi's behavior. Now, Mr. Haig insists, the United States
should stand firm not only with Hanoi but with Moscow and make it clear that,
until they agree to a proper international forum for ending the Cambodian
crisis, Vietnam cannot expect to be accepted by the rest of the world.
Moscow Rejected Afghan Talks

The same goes for the Russians and Afghanistan, Mr. Haig has said.  It is now a
cardinal element of Administration policy that if the Soviet Union genuinely
wants to talk with the United States about strategic arms, it should first
discuss Afghanistan. Instead, the Administration notes, the Russians, while
continuing to issue arms control proposals for apparent propaganda purposes,
last week rejected a European Common Market proposal for negotiations on an
Afghanistan solution.

In tracing the history of Vietnamese-American relations, observers have
speculated about what the results might have been had one or the other
government taken a different decision at one of the many turns in the road. In
1973, for example, the Nixon Administration briefly hoped that the cease-fire it
had negotiated with Hanoi might take hold and allow North and South Vietnam to
coexist. Mr. Haig, who helped force the Saigon regime to accept that agreement,
looks back on those days with bitterness, because of Hanoi's subsequent
violation of the accord when it conquered the South in 1975.

The Carter State Department included senior officials such as Cyrus R. Vance, W.
Anthony Lake and Richard Holbrooke who felt the Vietnam war had been a mistake
and who wanted to end the enmity of the past.  Certainly, at no time since
Hanoi's victory over Saigon was a United States Government more sympathetic
toward Vietnam than in 1977. But the Vietnamese, for whatever reasons, at first
seemed oblivious to the opportunity. They insisted on American aid as a
precondition for formal relations, a demand that Congress immediately rejected.

The talks, conducted largely by Mr. Holbrooke, continued into 1978. The
Vietnamese dropped their insistence on aid and discussions began on establishing
embassies. But as these preliminary talks were about to conclude in the fall of
1978, Hanoi seemed to make normalization impossible again. It forced thousands
of Vietnamese and ethnic Chinese to flee as ''boat people,'' it began to build
up troops along the Cambodian border and it signed a friendship treaty with
Moscow. Even the Carter Administration, predisposed to good relations, dropped
the effort and concentrated on normalizing ties with Peking.

Now Vietnam is reportedly in worsening economic straits and, according to a
recent Austrian news account, some Hanoi leaders are rethinking their alliance
with the Russians, who are referred to derisively as ''Americans without
money.'' But for the moment, Washington seems to have no interest in winning
over the Vietnamese.  There has been no dialogue, aside from the talks on
returning remains of bodies and on boat people, since the Carter Administration.
And until Hanoi agrees to negotiate a withdrawal from Cambodia, the Reagan
Administration evidently plans to keep it that way.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Topics;
Coming Home

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 212 words


There is a phenomenon familiar to everyone who has ever participated in a high
school election: a candidate who has been in some way deprived is a shoo-in. The
winning votes are cast both out of sympathy for that unlucky person and guilt
over the relief that the misfortune is someone else's.

A spectator at a large Fourth of July parade remembered that as a group of
Vietnam veterans carrying a homemade banner went by. They were greeted by the
day's loudest cheers. Vietnam veterans have heard many things, but seldom, if
ever, applause.

The cheers could be, of course, simple evidence that time heals all wounds, even
the terrible wound that was the Vietnam war. And they are proof that Vietnam
vets have pulled themselves out of the oblivion into which Americans, reluctant
to remember that war, placed them.

But above all, those cheers may be another version of the emotions of the high
school election. Seven, ten, fifteen years after those who survived Vietnam came
home, a crowd of parade-watching Americans acknowledged at last that those
marchers with the homemade banner had also been deprived - and were trying, with
their hoorays, to make it up to them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 12, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Reading and Writing;
AGING AGITATOR

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 7; Page 39, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


Garry Trudeau, the creator of the ''Doonesbury'' comic strip that exposes some
of the social foibles and political follies of our time, was encountered the
other afternoon breaking open a fortune cookie.  It arrived with a pot of tea;
never mind where. Mr. Trudeau, who treasures his privacy, found a touch of
wisdom in the serendipitous message: ''Keep your plans secret for now.''

Mr. Trudeau's sense of privacy, however, does not extend to his views. At 32 Mr.
Trudeau, whose outspoken characters owe a historic debt to such cartoonists as
Jules Feiffer and the late Walt Kelly, describes himself as an aging agitator.
He earned his bachelor's degree at Yale, then gained what might be called his
graduate education in Vietnam and as a student of Watergate - two lasting
touchstones in his background.

The aging agitator finds inspirational material in more recent political
history, too. His next two cartoon collections, to be published in September by
Holt, Rinehart & Winston, are called ''The People's Doonesbury: Notes from
Underfoot 1978-1980'' and ''In Search of Reagan's Brain.''

Mr. Trudeau's jabs at the high and mighty disturb some editors and enchant his
fans. One of his pictorial techniques is to show only the exterior of the White
House, with its unseen occupants chattering away, rarely to their advantage.
During the Watergate hearings, Mr.  Trudeau had his disk jockey character,
Marvelous Mark, conclude his report on Mr. Nixon's Attorney General, John
Mitchell, by dancing an ecstatic jig to cries of ''Guilty, guilty, guilty!'' The
Washington Post killed the cartoon and somewhat stuffily explained: ''We cannot
have one standard for the news pages and another for the comics.'' Today
''Doonesbury'' runs in the rival Washington Star.

Twenty-one books have been derived from the strip, which runs in 600-odd papers
around the country. About 80 of these papers put him on the editorial page. It
would probably surprise some newspaper editors to discover that Mr. Trudeau
prefers to be on the comic page instead of in the editorial realm. He finds
nothing wrong with being labeled a comic-strip artist, and believes, besides,
that more people read the comics than the editorials. In his book-lined studio
in Manhattan, he keeps bound volumes of the comic-book series ''Classics
Illustrated.''

Sipping his tea, Mr. Trudeau described how he dreams up his cartoons. He spends
a good deal of time watching television, going to the movies, reading newspapers
and magazines. One thing he doesn't do is walk around with a notebook. He also
strongly believes that it is better for him to be an outsider than to fraternize
with important people. In ''Doonesbury,'' he says, he wants to represent the
outsider on the American scene.

Mr. Trudeau regards himself as more of an idea-and-words man than a polemicist.
The idea, which he puts down on yellow legal pads, comes first; then he blocks
out what his characters will say; finally the sketching is done, at the eleventh
hour. After relaxing on the weekend, he says that on Monday morning he wakes up
his characters and tells them: ''O.K., guys, back to work.'' The impudent,
clever dialogue (rather than the drawings of his bleary-eyed characters, whose
drooping lids leave the impression that they could use a good night's sleep) is
what propels a Trudeau panel.

One of the breakthroughs Mr. Trudeau achieved in ''Doonesbury'' was to have his
quasi-fictional characters, such as Michael J.  Doonesbury, Zonker Harris or
Uncle Duke, brush up against public figures whose real names are used in the
strip. When he did a strip about ''The White House Years,'' he identified the
author as Henry Kissinger but retitled the book ''The White Wash Years.'' And he
had one of his characters, the intrepid TV correspondent Roland Hedley, do an
interview with dialogue that went, ''O.K., look, the guy's clearly a war
criminal. Granted, Henry Kissinger had much to answer for, but need so many
trees have died for the cause?'' Lately, Gay Talese has turned up by name as a
''sexual adventurer,'' and David (''Tome'') Halberstam has been described as the
author of very fat books.

Mr. Trudeau's offhand philosophy about cartoons is that you have to care about
your characters, because if you don't, the reader won't; that the aim to
entertain must come before the desire to be a commentator. A cartoonist must
keep all this in delicate balance, trying to find a happy combination in which
the drawing is an instrument for conveying ideas. Otherwise, he believes, you
cannot move people.

The late Jim Andrews of Universal Press Syndicate, who discovered Garry
Trudeau's strip in the Yale Daily News and syndicated it, advised him to pace
himself: If you do a strip about carpet bombing one week, do a strip about
football the next week. That remains his approach. Despite his modest
description of himself as simply a comic-strip artist, Mr. Trudeau aims for the
jugular as often as he aims to please.

Another cup of tea, another fortune cookie. Garry Trudeau broke it open and
grinned his crooked smile. This one read: ''Every man is a volume if you know
how to read him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings of Doonesbury characters

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IN SALVADOR, A U.S.-TRAINED UNIT AT WAR

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: CINQUERA, El Salvador, July 11


An elite Salvadoran Army unit trained by United States military advisers is
engaged in a major operation in the mountains surrounding this isolated village
about 42 miles northeast of the capital.

For the last three days, about 1,200 soldiers of the Atlacatl Battalion, El
Salvador's rapid reaction force, have been taking part in sporadic and sometimes
heavy combat in the densely forested mountains with leftist guerrillas.

Residents in Cinquera pointed to the hills, where they said explosives had been
dropped from United States-supplied helicopters.  Jet fighters flew low over the
hills. Yesterday, heavy artillery pieces fired their shells from a soccer field
in Tejutepeque, six miles to the east east.

Until the outbreak of open civil war here in January, more than 5,000 people
lived in Cinquera, according to a Government census. It was a pro-leftist
village with a revolutionary slogan spray-painted by the Federation of Christian
Peasants on the white-painted mud wall of the simple church.

Peasants in the Hills

The peasant revolutionaries are now in the hills, according to a National Guard
soldier here. They have been replaced by about 300 pro-Government peasants,
including about 100 children, who have been forced by the war to flee their
small mountain hamlets.

At the northeast corner of the square where the only road descends into the
town, a 15-year-old barefoot boy wearing a brown cotton shirt stood his post
behind a pile of rock. He was armed with a pre-World War II bolt-action rifle
that he said he had fired three times ''just playing.'' He was a member of
Orden, a rural civil defense force set up by a former military Government about
10 years ago.

''We're all members of Orden,'' a man said, pointing to others lounging in the
heat or talking with National Guard soldiers.  He said the 90 Orden troops here
share their weapons during sixhour shifts. He said 11 members of Orden were
killed on Jan. 12, the day after the leftists launched their nationwide military
offensive. Nine more were killed recently when a mine exploded, he said.
Villagers said the guerrillas had not killed any civilians.

Village Is Cut Off

Because of heavy guerrilla activity, Cinquera has been cut off since January. It
is not even possible to buy a Coke here, startling evidence of the village's
isolation in a country where even remote clusters of mud huts have at least one
vendor selling soft drinks and packages of corn chips. Villagers pointed to a
flat grassy spot where helicopters have landed with supplies of beans, corn,
rice and salt.

Today, two large yellow road graders, crawling with boys, men and National Guard
soldiers carrying automatic rifles, cleared boulders, trees and other barriers
left by the guerrillas along the only road connecting Cinquera with other
villages.

Soldiers of the Atlacatl Battalion, their green combat uniforms stained by the
sweat, fingers poised on the triggers of automatic rifles, moved cautiously
along the road. The heavy growth of tropical trees and bushes hid abandoned mud
brick houses and cornfields overgrown with weeds. A soldier shouldered a belt of
machine gun bullets, another carried a grenade launcher.

Asked if they had been trained by United States advisers, a sergeant beamed,
emphasizing his pride by answering in English, ''Yes.'' The fact that the
battalion is United States-trained has been attested to by the American Embassy
here. The Salvadoran authorities have said that the unit has been involved in a
variety of other antiguerrilla operations before the one here.

One of the major aims of the 55 American military advisers in El Salvador is to
train the Atlacatl Battalion. The training base is at an abandoned primary
school 18 miles west of the capital. Many of the American advisers are green
berets and most of them fought in Vietnam, according to a United States Embassy
spokesman. He said most of the advisers are Hispanic.

According to a military report, five Salvadoran soldiers have been killed and
eight wounded in the fighting around Cinquera. A military spokesman said the
current operation would probably terminate in two or three days. But he added
that it was impossible to be certain because this was an area of considerable
guerrilla strength.

-----

U.S. Official Visits Salvador

Special to the New York Times

SAN SALVADOR, July 12 - Francis J. West Jr., Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security, left El Salvador after a visit of less than 24 hours,
United States Ambassador Deane R. Hinton said today.

The Ambassador said that Mr. West had met with Government officials. He declined
to give any details of the visit, saying, ''It was not supposed to be known.''

In Washington, a Pentagon spokesman would say only that Mr. West had been in El
Salvador on a ''brief orientation and educational visit dealing with the
political-military situation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DELAY IN ENACTING FOREIGN AID BILL CAUSES CONCERN

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 12


The Reagan Administration's emphasis on its economic legislation is threatening
to force a delay of Congressional action on the foreign aid budget that could
seriously complicate its prospects for passage, Congressional and Administration
officials say.

Several officials who monitor the foreign aid and security assistance program
expressed concern yesterday that such complications could arise if Senate action
on the measure is postponed until after the August recess.

The foreign aid bill not only contains President Reagan's request for $6.6
billion in foreign military and economic aid for the fiscal year 1982, which
begins in October, but also includes provisions that would give the
Administration greater flexibility in its conduct of foreign policy.

The possible delay is the latest in a series of problems that the Administration
has encountered in Congress in its foreign policy initiatives.

Last Wednesday, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. met with the White
House chief of staff, James A. Baker 3d, to press for more immediate attention
to foreign assistance. But he failed to get a firm commitment from the White
House to give the measure greater priority, according to Republican Senate aides
and a State Department Congressional expert.

'No Promises'

''They made no promises,'' the State Department official said.  ''We've offered
to hold their hands,'' said an aide to the Senate Republican leader, Howard H.
Baker Jr. of Tennessee. ''But everyone up here knows that the economic program
takes priority.''

White House officials are known to be concerned and embarrassed by the lack of
progress on the foreign assistance program.  But the officials said that the
President's priorities dictated that he continue to seek immediate Congressional
action on his tax and budget program.

The House and Senate foreign relations panels have already displayed
considerable resistance to several of the foreign aid bill's proposals.

Rejections and Modifications

By the time the committees completed work on the bill last month, more than half
of the major initiatives had been rejected or modified. Among the actions and
modifications were these:

- Both panels tied the Administration's request for $25 million in military aid
for El Salvador next year to a Presidential ''certification'' that the
Salvadoran Government was making ''significant progress'' toward human rights,
political and economic reforms.

- The committees made military aid to Argentina contingent on a Presidential
determination that the nation was improving its human rights record.

- The House Foreign Affairs Committee rejected a request for repeal of the ban
on aid to anti-Marxist rebels in Angola, and the Senate committee tied aid to
''substantial progress'' in resolving the conflict in neighboring South-West
Africa, also known as Namibia.

- The Senate panel rejected the Administration's plans for a $350 million
''contingency'' fund to help the President respond quickly to foreign crises.
The House panel pared the request to $125 million.  Both panels effectively
rejected proposals for a ''revolving'' defense fund to speed arms deliveries to
foreign purchasers. Instead, each authorized funds for one year.

- The committees expanded some reporting requirements and tightened restrictions
on the transfer of men and weapons abroad.

Other Problems in Congress

The Administration has been dealt other Congressional defeats in the realm of
foreign policy. Last month, Ernest W. Lefever withdrew his name from
consideration for the post of Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights
after the Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted 13 to 4 to recommend that the
Senate reject his confirmation.  And two weeks ago, a majority of both the House
and Senate urged the Administration not to proceed with plans to sell Awacs
electronic surveillance planes and offensive equipment for American-built F-15
fighters to Saudi Arabia.

Some Republican officials say that despite these setbacks, the Administration
has achieved several foreign policy successes. For example, the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, but not its House counterpart, voted to exempt Pakistan
from the restrictions on military aid to countries that do not pledge to refrain
from developing nuclear weapons.

The Senate panel also removed many duplicative reporting requirements and eased
some restrictions on arms transfers. Finally, while the committees attached
conditions to repeal of the ban on military aid to Argentina, they agreed to
lift restrictions.

The officials argue that many of the committees' conditions are toothless, and
predicted that others would be overturned in the Republican-controlled Senate.

Some Are Pessimistic

Some Republicans, and especially Democrats, are less sanguine.  Senator John R.
Heinz 3d, Republican of Pennsylvania, for example, blamed what he called a
''lack of a coherent foreign policy'' for some of the Congressional resistance.

Legislators see the resistance as twofold: first, institutional reluctance to
alter the balance of power between Congress and the Executive by relinquishing
powers accumulated since Watergate and the Vietnam War; and second, skepticism
toward several of Mr. Reagan's specific foreign policy initiatives, especially
in El Salvador.

However, Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana and a member of the
Foreign Relations Committee, argued that as soon as the President focused
attention on the foreign policy program, resistance would dissipate.

''The President's winsome persuasiveness has not yet been applied to foreign
policy,'' Mr. Lugar said.  Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of
Brooklyn, and House panel members agreed, but they also predicted that many of
the committees' restrictions would remain.

The timing of the bill's consideration troubles Senate analysts. An aide to Mr.
Baker said that the bill would be in ''deep, deep trouble'' if it were
considered after the August recess, caught in what he called the pre-Christmas
recess legislative ''logjam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMARY OF MAJOR ACTIONS TAKEN BY NEW YORK LEGISLATURE IN 1981 SESSION

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 4238 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, July 12


Following are some of the major actions of the New York State Legislature in its
1981 session, which recessed Friday night.

Finance

After a 42-day delay, a record, the Legislature approved a $16.6 billion budget
for the state fiscal year that began April 1.  The budget included a tax-relief
plan that would mean $75 million in reductions in the 1981-82 fiscal year and
instituted a number of measures to aid small and new businesses as well as
provide modest help to individuals.

It also provided $4.06 billion in aid to elementary and secondary schools, a
$287 million increase over last year.  The budget did not, however, include a
state takeover of the billion dollar local cost of Medicaid, which Governor
Carey had made a top priority.

A criminal justice package supplied $53.8 million for major crime control
efforts, including $6 million for the creation of 51 new courts to try felony
offenses.

New measures to increase state revenues were adopted, among them the adjustment
of tax and withholding payment schedules for companies and increases in various
licensing and registration fees.

When the budget was completed, the state sold $3.05 billion in short-term notes
at an average interest rate of 9.187 percent.  The Legislature failed to agree
on a bill to give $79 million in aid to small cities but did appropriate $4
million for Yonkers. It is expected to deal with the remaining aid program
later.

Late in the session, Governor Carey signed into law legislation converting the
state to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles for the more timely and
uniform reporting of revenues and expenditures.  The measure also made law a
State Court of Appeals ruling that the Legislature, instead of the Governor, had
appropriation authority over Federal funds, the so-called ''off-budget'' items.

Taxes

Signed

Increases by $100 the minimum and maximum standard deductions and increases the
standard percentage deduction by 1 percentage point.  Increases by $50 the
personal exemption on state tax returns.  Increases the household tax credit for
families with incomes below $25,000.  Excludes from state tax liability all
pension income up to $20,000.  Increases tax credits for taxpayers with incomes
up to $16,000 and unusually high property taxes.  Ends double taxation on small,
closely held businesses, giving shareholders the option to have their income and
dividends taxed as corporate earnings or as personal income.

Exempts new businesses for two years from the form of corporate franchise tax
assessment based on capital.  Creates a 4 percent tax credit for research and
development.  Increases to 60 percent the exclusion of long-term capital gains
income from personal income tax.  Creates a complete capital gains exclusion for
gains reinvested in new businesses held for more than six years.  Allows
publishers to allocate income for tax purposes based on where the product is
sold rather than the location of the sales office.

Extends until October the moratorium on assessing property at its full market
value.  Lifts the 5 percent gross receipts tax on radio, television and motion
picture broadcasts of boxing and wrestling matches.  Extends the 5 percent
surcharge on Offtrack Betting winnings.

Passed

Sets up special courts to hear small property tax complaints by homeowners for a
$25 fee.

Killed

Reduction in bank taxes.  Tax credits to businesses providing day-care centers
for children of their employees near the company site.

Criminal Justice

Signed

Makes parents liable for up to $5,000 of damage for children who vandalize
churches, synagogues and religious property.  Allows school boards to offer
rewards of up to $1,000 for the apprehension of those who vandalize school
property.  Ends automatic dissolutions of marriages of inmates sentenced to life
imprisonment.  Requires judges to hand out consecutive sentences to any inmate
convicted of assaulting a guard, employee or other inmate.  Increases penalties,
to $100 from $10, against minors who use false identification to buy alcohol.
Allows a parole officer to see the sealed records of a parolee accused of a
crime but not convicted.  Allows jurors to receive unemployment insurance
benefits.

Passed

Authorizes a $500 million prison bond issue, including funds for temporary
renovation and expansion of Ossining State Correctional Facility, which would be
closed in 1987.

Appropriates $11 million to add 650 emergency cells to the state prison system.
Allows a judge to hold without bail a person charged with committing a serious
crime while awaiting trial for another offense.  Allows the New York City
Transit Authority to assign police officers to a ''fourth platoon'' between 6
P.M. and 2 A.M.  Expands the legal definition of aggravated sexual abuse to
include acts involving the insertion of foreign objects into the body.  Sets up
mediation programs to steer minor criminal or civil cases away from the courts.

Vetoed

Restored the death penalty for certain cases of murder.  Allowed presentence
investigation reports by the Probation Department to be waived in certain cases.


Killed

Prohibited the possession or sale of visual representations of sexual
performances by children.  Allowed television and still cameras in courtrooms.
Prohibited access to telephone subscribers' toll call records without a
subpoena.

Banking and Insurance

Signed

Requires judges deciding malpractice suits to reduce the award by the amount a
patient has received from health insurance.  Requires health insurers to provide
the state information on coverage of Medicaid recipients to cut state benefit
costs.

Passed

Creates an insurance fraud bureau in the State Department of Insurance.
Requires most property owners in Buffalo and New York City to file more
extensive forms when they request fire insurance and requires all property
owners making fire insurance claims of more than $500 to report to a central
state registry.

Allows consumers to buy an experimental form of insurance to cover costs of
legal services.  Prohibits insurers from denying coverage to an applicant solely
because of past treatment for a mental disability.

Killed

Allowed unmarried people to open joint checking accounts.

Business and Labor

Signed

Requires the Office of Business Permits to review all new regulations to
determine whether they overlap with existing regulations and whether they
require excessive paperwork.

Requires employers to pay legal fees of a worker filing a claim with the
Workers' Compensation Board if the board finds the worker has been discriminated
against because of his claim.

Deregulates telegraph corporations.  Prohibits the state from awarding contracts
to any person or business that participates in or aids Arab-led boycotts of
Israel.  Creates a Regional Olympic Development Authority and gives $6 million
to the Lake Placid Olympic Organizing Committee for debts.  Allows the state's
Science and Technology Foundation to offer matching grants up to $25,000 to
groups planning innovative scientific projects.

Increases the cost-of-living provisions in accidental death benefits to
survivors of police officers and firefighters who die in the line of duty.

Extends the ''heart bill'' allowing members of the New York City police and
firefighters to retire at three-quarters of their salary if they develop heart
ailments.

Passed

Creates a foreign free trade zone in the Bronx.  Requires state agencies to
review the paperwork requirements they impose on business.  Allows state
agencies, when petitioned, to consider sufficient a business' compliance with
Federal regulations that meet the ''purposes and provisions'' of state
regulations.

Provides $40 million to Rochester to build a new convention center.  Establishes
a system to register attorneys, including a $50 biennial fee that would also
finance the reimbursement of victims of lawyer dishonesty.

Requires municipalities to adopt a minimum fire safety code set by the state and
giving them the option to upgrade the standards.  Requires restaurants and
stores to post signs to show fire exits.  Requires hotels to post in each room
instructions on what to do in case of a fire.  Reorganizes the New York City
firemen's pension system, requiring increased contributions by firefighters and
the city.  Increases the pension supplement for state and city public employees
who retired before 1970, and gives pension supplements to state and city public
employees who retired after 1970.

Extends for two years the right of public employee unions to charge a
negotiating fee to nonunion members.

Vetoed

Required the state to give preference to American companies in state contracts
for structural and reinforcing steel.  Required the World Trade Center to
conform to New York City building, fire and safety codes.

Killed

Allowed the Public Service Commission to deregulate the mobile telephone
markets.  Deregulated cable television.  Allowed casino gambling.  Made sexual
harassment grounds for collecting unemployment benefits.  Prohibited private
clubs that received tax exemptions from discriminating on the basis of sex.

Education

Signed

Provides penalties of up to $1,000 against companies selling term papers knowing
or believing the student plans to submit it as his own.

Penalizes physicians and dentists who take advantage of Regents medical
scholarships and fail to practice for the required time in medically underserved
areas.

Increases state aid for public libraries by $7.5 million.  Provides $14.7
million in aid to educational television and public radio.  Grants state aid to
community colleges that contract to provide technical training for industrial
employees.  Bars school districts from dropping a student over the compulsory
attendance age from its rolls until he had missed 20 consecutive school days.

Passed

Increases the money available to college students under the state's Tuition
Assistance Program, creates a special financial aid program for college students
in remedial programs and provides for a state takeover of the costs now borne by
colleges for the work-study program.

Killed

Expanded the membership of the New York City Board of Education.

Consumer Affairs

Signed

Extends for four years the requirement that stores put prices on most individual
items.  Exempts stores in most areas with under $3 million in annual sales,
rather than $2 million, from unit pricing requirements. Cities or counties under
100,000 may set a $2 million limit.

Passed

Allows druggists to fill prescriptions for generic drugs with higher-priced
brand-name drugs if they are out of the generic formula.

Prohibits banks from making service charges on checks bounced because of bank
error.  Defines consumer rights in dealings with utility companies and prohibits
companies from requiring security deposits from new customers.

Vetoed

Required government agencies that resisted freedom-of-information requests and
lost to pay the legal costs of the person seeking the information.

Killed

Required food manufacturers to put understandable ''pull dates'' on many of
their products.  Mandated that artists' supplies sold in the state carry content
labels and instructions on how to use the product to avoid ill health effects.

Welfare and the Family

Signed

Increases the basic monthly grant for welfare recipients by 15 percent.  Raises
the allowance for personal articles allotted nursing home residents on state
medical assistance.  Allows expanded use of blood tissue tests in paternity
proceedings.  Gives foster parents preference in adoption proceedings after 18,
rather than 24, months.  Shortens to three days the waiting period between blood
test and marriage.  Makes it easier for chidren born out of wedlock to inherit
from their fathers, and for fathers to inherit from out-of-wedlock children.

Increases allowance for Supplemental Security Income recipients.  Requires
welfare workers to place a child being returned to foster care with the last
foster-care family that took care of it, if the foster family so desires.

Passed

Allows courts to appoint temporary guardians to remove people from religious
cults for 45 to 75 days.  Terminates parental rights in cases of severe or
repeated child abuse.  Requires local child protective service agencies to
expunge records of unsubstantiated allegations of child abuse.  Makes parents
who adopt a hard-to-place child eligible for monthly social services payments.

Vetoed

Required the courts to consider joint custody if one member of a divorcing
couple requested it.

Killed

Ended state Medicaid financing for abortions.  Prohibited a person from being
found guilty of adultery if he or she was legally separated from his or her
spouse.

Housing

Signed

Extends for two years the state's rent law, including rent stabilization in New
York City and in Nassau, Westchester and Rockland Counties.

Extends for two years the state's cooperative and condominium conversion law
requiring approval from 35 percent of the tenants for conversions involving
evictions.

Allows the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development to
set initial rent for apartments that have been rehabilitated with Federal funds.

Prohibits the eviction of dependents of on-duty military personnel for
nonpayment of rent without a court order.

Killed

Extended the moratorium on eviction of loft tenants.  Required 51 percent of
tenants to approve eviction plans in cooperative conversions.

Health and Environment

Signed

Allows Vietnam veterans to file suits for possible exposure to Agent Orange
within three years of discovery of health symptoms, rather than three years of
exposure.

Puts a synthetic narcotic known as ''China White'' on the state's list of
controlled drugs.  Toughens penalties for sale and possession of PCP, also known
as angel dust.  Requires companies that issue inpatient group health insurance
to offer coverage for diagnosis and treatment of alcoholism.  Requires
candidates for a practical nursing license to have a high school diploma or its
equivalent.  Allows dentists to initiate patients' worker's compensation claims.
Requires controlled substances to be placed in orange containers or marked with
orange labels.  Increases state payment rates for hospital outpatient care.

Passed

Creates a hazardous waste exchange program to give techical assistance to
industries to reduce and recycle waste.  Requires the Department of
Environmental Conservation to report an annual inventory of wastes created in
New York State.  Authorizes Department of Transportation to regulate the
transportation of hazardous materials.  Allows the state to acquire 260 acres of
land in Washington County for the disposal of toxic PCB's, polychlorinated
biphenyls.  Makes a felony the unlawful possession, transportation or disposal
of hazardous waste in New York State.  Requires the state to list companies that
generate industrial waste.  Requires death certificates to indicate whether a
body contains a battery-powered heart pacemaker and lets morticians refuse to
cremate such bodies.

Requires the state to remove radioactively contaminated gold jewelry from the
market by purchasing it.  Gives social workers the power, through a court order,
to provide short-term involuntary protection to people unable to care for
themselves.

Killed

Required water metering in all new construction or substantial renovation in New
York City and gradual introduction of metering in older buildings.

The so-called ''bottle bill,'' requiring deposits for return on all beverage
containers sold in the state.  Liberalized time limits for filing suit for toxic
waste injuries.

Transportation

Signed

A five-year, $5.85 billion capital improvements package for the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority, $105 million in new state operating assistance for the
agency and aid to upstate roads.

A package of taxes to aid mass transit, including increases in the state sales
tax in the Metropolitan Transportation Authority region by 1/4 cent on the
dollar; taxing the gross receipts of oil companies at 0.75 percent; including
the net income and capital of oil companies' out-of-state and international
operations when computing the state franchise tax; applying a 10 percent tax on
capital gains in real-estate transfers of more than $1 million within New York
City, and a corporate franchise tax of 0.75 percent on gross returns from the
in-state portion of interstate communications and commercial transport.

Creates an offices of M.T.A. inspector general, with inspectors assigned to
Conrail, the Long Island Rail Road and the New York City Transit Authority, and
commuter advisory boards for these lines.

Allows free transportation of guide dogs for the hearing impaired.  Allows the
state to refuse to issue a driver's license to anyone holding a valid license
from another state.  Gives the police the power to seize any driver's license,
registration certificate or license plate that has been suspended or revoked.

Bans mirrored or reflective windows on motor vehicles.  Requires shopping center
owners to provide special parking spaces for handicapped drivers.  Requires
safety seats for children under 5 who are passengers in privately owned
vehicles.

Passed

Increases fines for drunken driving and allocates those funds to counties for
prosecution costs and education programs.  Requires an immediate, mandatory
license suspension when a motorist, convicted within the last three years for
drunken driving, is arrested on the same charge.

Requires that the conditions of probation on drunken driving charges be noted on
the driver's license.  Requires a mandatory seven-day jail sentence for a
motorist who continues to drive after his license has been suspended or revoked
for drunken driving.

Requires the Department of Motor Vehicles to keep an updated list of all insured
vehicles.

Vetoed

Required traffic violations to be thrown out of court if prosecutors were
unprepared to try the case at two consecutive hearings.

Killed

Required all new drivers to take a three-hour course on the dangers of driving
while intoxicated.  Repealed requirement for annual automobile emissions tests
in New York City and Nassau and Suffolk Counties.

Energy

Signed

A moratorium on licensing of liquefied natural gas facilities.  Requires oil
burner service contracts to include an optional, annual, consumer-paid test of
burner efficiency.  Requires utilities to charge shareholders, rather than
customers, for the cost of political contributions.  Gives the Public Service
Commission authority to order utilities to make refunds on fuel adjustment
charges levied to cover the costs of mistakes by a utility.

Passed

Allows the state direct access to technical information from nuclear reactors in
the event of an accident, assessing utilities fees to finance state and local
emergency plans and requires radiation detectors near nuclear plants.

Directs the Public Service Commission to study the feasibility of creating a
rate structure for Westchester separate from New York City.

Subjects the Power Authority of the State of New York to New York City air
quality standards.  Eliminates the summer surcharge on electricity up to 500
kilowatt hours in any month for residential customers.

Elderly

Signed

Eliminates automatic right to dismiss jurors between the ages of 70 and 76.
Increases the income limits for elderly citzens who want to participate in the
state ''Green Thumb'' program of park jobs for the elderly.

Killed

Eliminated mandatory retirement. Bills passed by the Senate and Assembly both
covered public employees, but disagreed over whether to include private
employees.

Allowed elderly people to audit State University courses for credit on a
space-available basis.

Miscellaneous

Signed

Allows producers of small shows to syndicate interests to fewer than 36 people
without filing a prospectus.  Extends to four years the period one can go
without voting without having to reregister.  Changes ''white man'' in Indian
Law to ''nonresident of the reservation.'' Requires school districts to mail
absentee ballots for each school election to ''permanently disabled'' voters.
Expands the state's ''shield law'' for journalists' confidential sources.
Requires the state to provide sign-language interpreters at adjudicatory
hearings when a deaf person is involved.

Passed

Requires the State Athletic Commission to set standards for prefight and
post-fight physical examinations at boxing matches.  Empowers local governments
to create laws governing public safety at concerts and other events at arenas
holding more than 5,000 people.

Allows absentee ballots to be distributed not only by the Board of Elections,
but also by political parties; county, city, town and village clerks; libraries,
colleges and other organizations.

Bars autopsy or dissection of bodies of people who wear special tags noting
their opposition to such operations.  Allows the Council on the Arts to make
low-cost loans to symphonies to purchase instruments.

Vetoed

Allowed off-duty police officers to work at volunteer fire houses where beer is
sold.  Allowed police officers to join and make contributions to political
clubs.  Required state agencies to publish fee changes and provide a comment
period, as they must for regulatory changes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Assemly Speaker Stanley Fink

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WORRY OVER ILLEGAL ARMS EXPORTS GROWING AMONG U.S. PROSECUTORS

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2558 words

DATELINE: CHINA LAKE, Calif., July 8


Federal investigators and prosecutors say they are increasingly concerned about
the extensive illegal exporting of arms and sophisticated technology from the
United States to countries such as Libya and the Soviet Union.

As examples of what they view as a serious and growing national security
problem, the law-enforcement officials cite the theft of military equipment from
the Naval Weapons Center here and the involvement of former weapons specialists
at the center in training Libyan terrorists.

Neither case has been resolved. The investigators and prosecutors involved in
the China Lake cases say that it is evident from these and similar cases that
senior American officials are neither fully aware of the severity of the problem
of illegal arms exports nor prepared to take sufficient steps to deal with it.

Bureaucratic Inertia Blamed

In response, senior officials of the Justice, State, Commerce and Treasury
Departments say they realize there is a problem of illegal exports and concede
that the Government has been slow to mobilize efforts against it. They place the
blame on Federal bureaucratic inertia.

There have been allegations in legal proceedings that the Central Intelligence
Agency is behind some of the illegal activity connected with the China Lake
cases, supposedly to exchange American military hardware for sophisticated
Soviet radar equipment, but the agency denies it. Federal prosecutors say they
are generally satisfied with the denial, although some say they are not entirely
convinced by it.

Later, there was a chain of arrests and indictments in Philadelphia and
Lexington, Ky., involving the illegal posession of weapons and further talk
about arms deals in Libya involving Soviet electronic equipment.

Then, last December, officials said they learned that two other civilian
employees of the center, while on leave in 1976 and 1977, apparently traveled to
Libya, where they served as instructors in handling explosives at a camp for
training terrorists set up by Edwin C. Wilson and Francis E. Terpil, two former
C.I.A. agents. Mr. Terpil and Mr. Wilson are now under indictment for conspiring
to transport explosives illegally to Libya.

Despite the intersections between the two cases, including the fact that they
both involved employees at the Naval Weapons Center, the Justice Department has
not coordinated investigations. When the first case started to spread to
disparate jurisdictions around the nation, officials in the department's
criminal division rejected a request by the United States Attorney in
Philadelphia that the investigations there and in Lexington and California be
handled by an interagency investigative force.

'Fumbling Around the Country'

''We banged our head against the wall for months trying to get some
coordination,'' said Roberto Rivera-Soto, a former Assistant United States
Attorney in Philadelphia now in private practice.  ''Some kind of task force
should have been organized. Instead, we had a bunch of assistant United States
attorneys fumbling around the country because they didn't know what each other
was doing.'' One result of the lack of coordination, officials said, was a
19-month gap between the discovery of the theft of hardware at China Lake and
indictments in the case by a grand jury in Fresno, Calif. As a result, officials
said, a trial is to begin next month on the charges in the first of the complex
sequence of events, long after cases involving later phases of the sequence were
tried. That reverse sequence, officials said, has hampered prosecution efforts.

Senior officials in the Justice Department acknowledged that they had declined
requests to coordinate the various investigations. They said that the flow of
investigative information between agencies and prosecutors was satisfactory.

These same Justice Department officials, who asked not to be identified,
acknowledged that there was growing concern in various Federal agencies about
the problem of illegal export of arms and technology but said that efforts to
coordinate law enforcement activities had been stalled by bureaucratic delays
and interagency feuding.

''The full dimensions of the illegal export problem are not even known,'' said a
senior official in the criminal division. ''It is a potentially lucrative arena
for criminal activity in which there is a minimal risk of detection, a minimal
risk of apprehension and minimal penalties if you are caught.''

Laws on Arms Exports

Under several Federal laws, the State Department and Commerce Department are
responsible for licensing and monitoring the export of arms and technology. The
State Department, for example, maintains a munitions list of arms that cannot be
exported to friendly nations without a license and are banned from export to
unfriendly nations.

In the last decade, the Commerce Department uncovered about 50 cases involving
the illegal export of computer, optics and weapons technology to the Soviet
Union, a number that investigators said was probably a fraction of the actual
total.

Officials said that illegal weapons and technology export could take several
forms. In some cases, legitimate export licenses are obtained from the
Government under the pretext that the goods are being shipped to a Western
European nation; they are subsequently transshipped from Western Europe to the
Soviet Union. In other cases, fraudulent export licenses are obtained by bribing
Government officials. Several cases of both types have been prosecuted, with
several convictions.  Matthew T. Crosson, deputy chief of the fraud bureau in
the Manhattan District Attorney's office said an investigation into gun
smuggling by Frank Terpil in 1979 found evidence of widespread illegal arms
shipments to Libya via Portugal.

Indictments in Libyan Case

Mr. Terpil and Mr. Wilson face Federal charges of shipping large amounts of
explosives to Libya as part of a plan to train Libyans in terrorist techniques.
Mr. Wilson, Mr. Terpil and Jerome S. Brower, a California explosives
manufacturer said to have participated in the plan, were indicted in Washington
in April 1980.

Mr. Brower pleaded guilty earlier this year to one count of illegally shipping
explosives. Mr. Wilson and Mr. Terpil are living abroad and have not been
apprehended.

The certain connection of one of the China Lake cases to the Wilson-Terpil
operation and suspicions, so far unproven, that the other may be connected have
focused unwelcome attention on the China Lake installation.

The case connected to Edwin C. Wilson and Mr. Terpil involves the
terrorist-training activities of two former weapons center civilian employees,
Robert E. Swallow and Dennis J. Wilson, the latter no relation to Edwin C.
Wilson. Mr. Swallow and Dennis Wilson have been investigated but have not been
charged with any crime. No law prohibits Americans from training terrorists
abroad.

According to Federal investigators, Mr. Swallow and Dennis Wilson, who had
top-secret security clearances, took unpaid leaves from the center in late 1976
and early 1977 to go to Libya to work at the terrorist training camp set up by
Edwin Wilson and Mr. Terpil.

Navy officials at the center said that they did not learn about the true purpose
of the leaves until they read newspaper reports late in 1980, and Capt. J.W.
Patterson, the chief staff officer at the center, said that had officials known
the nature of their plans, the leaves would not have been granted.

Defense Department officials familiar with the case said that in his application
for a leave, Mr. Swallow stated, ''I have an opportunity to assist in opening
and managing an explosives sales and demolition consulting office in Libya for
the J.S. Brower & Associates Inc., of Pomona, Calif.''

Despite that statement, made at a time when United States relations with Libya,
a militant Arab North African nation, were strained and Libya was viewed as a
source of aid to terrorist groups, officials of the center granted the leave as
a routine matter.

Work on Sensitive Projects

Though neither Mr. Swallow nor Dennis Wilson was working on particularly
sensitive projects when they went to Libya, Defense Department officials said
that the two men had worked in the 1960's on Project 308, a highly classified
effort by the C.I.A. and Defense Department to develop weapons for special
warfare in Vietnam.

Dennis Wilson resigned from the center in September 1978. Mr.  Swallow went on
sick leave in December 1980 and has not returned to work. Reached by telephone,
Mr. Wilson declined to comment. Mr.  Swallow was said by someone who answered
the phone at his home to be on vacation and unavailable for comment.

Federal investigators are exploring their involvement in the Edwin Wilson-Frank
Terpil operation, looking for other connections between it and the weapons
center. Officials at the center said they had not reviewed other leaves in the
same period to see if anyone else had worked in Libya.

Federal investigators are also exploring possible connections between Mr.
Swallow and Dennis Wilson and the other China Lake case, the 1979 loss of
equipment.

According to the indictments handed down in Fresno in March 1981, two civilian
employees at the center, James S. Nichols and Ralph E.  Calvani, were involved.
Mr. Nichols, who resigned last week, was an electronics technician, is charged
with embezzlement of government property. Mr. Calvani, who left the center in
1977, was also an electronics technician, working in the electronic warfare
department, which handles the center's most sensitive research and testing. He
is charged with receipt of embezzled government property. Both were telephoned
repeatedly but could not be reached.

Also charged with receipt of embezzled Government property in the case are Larry
E. Bryant, a retired Air Force electronics expert, and his cousin, Bradley F.
Bryant.

When he was first questioned about the missing equipment, according to
investigative reports prepared by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms,
Mr. Nichols explained that he had removed the equipment as the first step in a
complex plan, sponsored by the C.I.A., to trade military equipment in Libya for
a piece of Soviet radar equipment.

According to officials at China Lake, the center has, on occasion, been supplied
with Soviet radar equipment in order to test countermeasures. Officials say they
do not know, and do not ask, how the Soviet equipment is obtained.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation traced some of the nightscopes, used to aim
weapons at night through infrared detection, to Las Vegas, where agents observed
them being transported by Larry Bryant in a car.

In an interview in Las Vegas last week, Larry Bryant said that he did not know
that the cartons he was transporting contained nightscopes. Mr. Bryant said that
while stationed at Nellis Air Force Base near Las Vegas, he had made occasional
trips to China Lake to assist in research projects. Officials at the center said
that Mr.  Bryant had worked closely at the center with Mr. Calvani.

Arrests in Philadelphia

On Jan. 4, 1980, while the disappearance of the nightscopes and other equipment
was under investigation in California and Nevada, the Philadelphia police
arrested Bradley and Larry Bryant at an airport hotel. The pair were being
watched in a routine vice investigation, and the police said that they found a
small cache of arms in Bradley Bryant's suitcases.

According to the Philadelphia police and Federal investigators, both Bryants
told the authorities that they were working for an unspecified Government
agency. Larry Bryant, these officials said, told officers that the guns were
part of a plan to trade weapons in Libya for Soviet radar equipment and that the
project was authorized by the C.I.A.

Larry Bryant, in an interview, said that story was a garbled version of what he
had told the police. He said that he had told them that he had specialized in
electronic warfare in the Air Force and knew a lot about Soviet radar and that
he might also have mentioned discussions in the early 1970's among his
colleagues in the Air Force about a plan to swap American military equipment in
Libya for an important piece of Soviet radar equipment. The plan was never
carried out, he said.

The Philadelphia police, he said, had twisted these separate stories into one
story.  After the acquittal of Larry Bryant on charges of illegal possession of
a silencer and the conviction of Bradley Bryant on the same charge, the reported
C.I.A. connection was raised anew at the April 1981 sentencing hearing.

Alleged C.I.A. Contract

Assistant United States Attorney Steven Weiner testified that Bradley Bryant
claimed that ''he was under C.I.A. contract during the time'' of his arrest. Mr.
Bryant's lawyer, Oscar Goodman, said his client had not said he had a contract
with the C.I.A., but had told prosecutors of a contract with an unnamed
Government agency.

Mr. Goodman, in an interview, said that the issue of Bradley Bryant's possible
relationship with the C.I.A. was a confidential matter covered by lawyer-client
privilege.

The C.I.A. denied at the time, and still does, that any of the figures in the
stolen-hardware case from China Lake had connections with the agency.

The arrests in Philadelphia led to the search of a warehouse in Lexington rented
by Bradley Bryant where police found a large arsenal of weapons valued at more
than $250,000, various electronic surveillance devices and an infrared
nightscope. Federal authorities believe that the nightscope found in Lexington
was one of the 10 from China Lake.

Larry Bryant was not charged in Lexington. Bradley Bryant was aquitted there in
May 1980 on a charge of illegal possession of firearms.

On May 20 of this year, Bradley Bryant was arrested in Illinois and charged with
unlawful delivery of 804 pounds of marijuana to Federal undercover agents. He is
currently being held in prison in Elgin, Ill.

Bartering for Weapons

Federal authorities who are familar with these cases said that they believed the
hardware stolen from China Lake was actually intended for use in exchange for
drugs in Colombia. They discount the possibility that either Larry Bryant or
Bradley Bryant or the two civilians from the weapons center seriously hoped to
swap the hardware and weapons in Libya.

But sources in the Defense Department said that at the time the equipment was
removed from China Lake, Government agents covertly acquiring Soviet electronic
weapons systems often resorted to bartering American military equipment in
third-party nations such as Libya.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Soldier aiming rifle equipped with Starlight
nightscope

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN WALDHEIM RUNS, ALL THE WORLD'S HIS STUMP

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1244 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 13


He cannot hire a hall, television time or a brass band, but Kurt Waldheim has
been running a strong if discreet campaign to succeed himself as Secretary
General.

Mr. Waldheim has toured the five capitals where his fate will be decided
-Washington, Moscow, London, Paris and Peking. He stopped in Paris again late
last month because he saw only Foreign Minister Claude Cheysson on his first
visit and he wanted to meet with the new President, Francois Mitterrand.

Mr. Waldheim also touched down in Nairobi, Kenya, for a meeting of the
Organization of African Unity. He received warm praise from President Siaka P.
Stevens of Sierra Leone, who called the Secretary General ''a friend of human
causes.'' But after Mr. Waldheim left, the O.A.U. endorsed Salim A. Salim,
Tanzania's Foreign Minister, as the group's candidate for Mr. Waldheim's job.

The Secretary General, however, has done better for himself in most of the other
capitals.

Unanimous Assent Is Required

His trip is the diplomatic equivalent of the old New York City politician's
travel through the Three-I League, Israel, Ireland and Italy. The five key
capitals hold the permanent seats on the United Nations Security Council and
their unanimous assent is necessary for the selection of a Secretary General.

Mr. Waldheim came back, according to aides, with only one outright promise of
support, from Lord Carrington, the British Foreign Secretary. London was more
forthcoming, a Western envoy said, because Mr. Waldheim cannot forget that
Britain backed Max Jakobson of Finland against him 10 years ago.

''His nose is always out of joint unless he is patted on the back continually
and told he is doing a hundred percent perfect job,'' the diplomat said.

In the other capitals, save Peking, heads of governments gave Mr.  Waldheim the
diplomatic equivalents of nods and winks to let him know they would not oppose
his bid. In Moscow, Pravda coupled his name approvingly with that of Leonid I.
Brezhnev and cited their joint efforts in seeking peace.

No Support From Peking

The Chinese, however, have ritually insisted that the Secretary General come
from the third world. They might give Mr. Salim of Tanzania enough support to
block Mr. Waldheim and force the selection of a third person. Even so, Mr.
Waldheim's entourage was comforted by a Peking visit that lasted five days and
included talks with Deng Xiaoping, the deputy party chairman who is China's
principal leader.

Mr. Waldheim's campaign is inhibited by United Nations folklore that insists the
job must seek the individual and not vice versa. A candidate is further
restrained by a tradition that no one has won more than two terms. Mr. Waldheim,
a 62-year-old Austrian diplomat, was first chosen in 1971 and selected again in
1976. His current term ends in December.

Mr. Waldheim does not acknowledge publicly that he wants a third term. Instead,
as a Western envoy put it, he constantly reiterates ''the heavy burden this job
is'' and ''how tired I am of it all, with 154 employers.'' The United Nations
has 154 members.

A Western diplomat commented caustically: ''He is a bit heavyhanded and I'm
getting tired of his constant recital of burden.  You have to reply, 'Better you
than I; in the circumstances, who could do it better?' He needs constant
reassurance.''

Politicking at the Ballet

But even within the limits of the folklore, Mr. Waldheim can do much to help
himself, at a high level and low. Last winter, he learned that President Reagan
was coming to New York to see his son Ron perform in the Joffrey II ballet
company. Mr. Waldheim arranged a box for himself next to that of Mr. Reagan. He
also called the United States mission to make sure he could enter the box at
intermission and shake the President's hand.

Mr. Waldheim knew that some of Mr. Reagan's advisers were cool toward the United
Nations and his role. So, through the Austrian delegate, Thomas Klestil, Mr.
Waldheim arranged a quiet luncheon with Norman Podhoretz, editor of Commentary.

Mr. Podhoretz's wife, Midge Decter, is the mother-in-law of Elliott Abrams, the
Assistant Secretary of State in charge of United Nations affairs, and she is
also the mother-in-law of the incoming press counselor at the mission, Steven C.
Munson. The mission chief, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, first came to Mr. Reagan's
attention with an article in Commentary.

Strolling Through the Minefield

At the policy level, Mr. Waldheim walks through political minefields with great
skill. A singular case in point was the General Assembly's demand last fall that
Mr. Waldheim call a conference ''early in 1981'' to bring peace to Cambodia
through United Nationssupervised elections.

The West, China and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Singapore,
Malyasia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand - strongly support the
conference. The Soviet Union is firmly against it because it might dislodge from
Phnom Penh the Heng Samrin regime installed by troops of Vietnam, Moscow's ally.

So Mr. Waldheim waited. He waited as long as he could but finally called the
conference for this week. That pleased the Asean nations, China and the West,
but it displeased Moscow. Mr. Waldheim countered by ruling that no less than 144
nations should be invited. This dilution tempered Moscow's disappointment.

Further, Mr. Waldheim decided he could not invite Heng Samrin because the United
Nations does not recognize him. That displeased the Asean countries, which
wanted a genuine bargaining conference.  But it pleased China, which does not
want to legitimize the Vietnamese-supported group. The conference is being be
held, but the Soviet Union and Vietnam are boycotting it.

Patronage Is Also Used

At a lower level, patronage is part of the art of winning elections. The Soviet
Union wanted to break the United Nations rules and extend the contract of Victor
M. Lessiovski, an aide in Mr.  Waldheim's office, for a year beyond the
retirement age. This drew criticism, particularly since Mr. Lessiovski had been
identified as a K.G.B. officer. Mr. Waldheim, in a Solomonic decision, gave Mr.
Lessiovski half the difference, six months, and he has now gone.

Again, the Scandinavian countries have held the second highest job at the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities. But their man, Halvor Gille of Denmark,
is retiring. The Scandinavians have another candidate. But the United States
wants the post for Oscar Harkavy, chief of population activities at the Ford
Foundation. American officials say that Mr. Waldheim has indicated that Mr.
Harkavy will be named.

One of Mr. Waldheim's touchiest tasks involved a scandal in the Economic
Commission for Latin America.  Brian Urquhart, a highly regarded United Nations
official, had discovered in a preliminary inquiry that the commission had become
''demoralized'' because it punished low-ranking workers for cheating on
insurance claims but promoted or let off high-ranking professional employees who
had done the same thing.

Mr. Waldheim could have been hurt if Mr. Urquhart's findings were upheld. So he
turned the inquiry over to James Jonah, his chief of personnel and a man
regarded as ambitious to win the top post. Mr.  Jonah concluded that the favored
professionals had been ''loyal'' servants of the commission and closed the case.

An admiring European diplomat said: ''The Secretary General's job is to
conciliate. Mr. Waldheim does it well, regardless of any campaign.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Secretary General Kurt Waldheim

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM SPEECH BY HAIG

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 13


Following are excerpts from a speech by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
today to the opening session of the General Assembly Conference on Cambodia:

Mr. Chairman, distinguished delegates.  Our purpose in meeting here today is of
compelling importance - to restore Cambodia's sovereignty and independence. The
conquest of one nation by another represents the most fundamental violation of
the U.N. Charter. The international community cannot and will not acquiesce in
the eradication of Cambodia's sovereign identity to the aggression of its
neighbor.

The great majority of the members of that community have already expressed their
desire for a comprehensive solution to the Cambodia problem through U.N. General
Assembly Resolution 35/6, which mandates this conference. Our gathering owes
much to the initiative of Asean, which, besides the Cambodian people themselves,
represents those nations most affected by the situation. The United States will
continue to work closely with Asean in seeking to resolve the Cambodia issue in
recognition of the fact that the interests of one of its members - Thailand -
are most directly threatened.

Danger to Small Nations

A successful conference will be of great importance to the entire world
community but most particularly to the smaller nations, which are increasingly
in danger of foreign intervention. Most of all, our efforts are crucial to the
Khmer people, who have suffered for over a decade from a succession of horrors:
civil war, genocide, invasion, starvation and colonization. The position of the
United States is clear: we believe that the world community has an obligation to
assure that these horrors be ended and that they not be inflicted upon the Khmer
people again. Their right to choose their own government and to live in peace
and dignity without any coercion whatsoever must be restored and guaranteed.

We, therefore, see this conference as having two closely related goals: one, the
restoration of a sovereign Cambodia free of foreign intervention, whose
government genuinely respects the wishes of the Khmer people, and two, a natural
Cambodia that represents no threat to any of its neighbors. These goals can be
realized through the implementation of U.N.G.A. Resolution 35/6, which calls for
U.N.  supervised withdrawal of all foreign forces and restoration of Khmer
self-determination. The achievement of these goals would remove the main cause
of conflict in the Southeast Asia region, greatly improving the prospect for
resolving other regional disputes and for easing global tensions. All nations in
the area - including Vietnam - would benefit from such an achievement.

Vietnamese Stand

Unfortunately, the Vietnamese authorities have been blind to their own best
interests. They have rejected all serious efforts to negotiate the substantive
issues of the Cambodia problem, maintaining that the present arrangement there
is an ''irreversible'' condition. We are therefore asked by Vietnam to ignore
the facts, to pretend that there is no Cambodia problem and that, instead of
this forum, a regional meeting should be held between the Asean countries and an
''Indochina bloc.''

Vietnam is paying a price for its blindness in the form of an ever-deepening
diplomatic and economic isolation from the world community. Vietnam must realize
that participation in this conference provides the best opportunity to escape
the dead end of international reproach and economic repression.

For our part, the United States has no intention of normalizing relations with a
Vietnam that occupies Cambodia and destabilizes the entire Southeast Asian
region. We will also continue to question seriously any economic assistance to
Vietnam - from whatever source - as long as Vietnam continues to squander its
scarce resources on aggression.

Vietnam is not the only party to this tragedy missing here today.  We believe
that the Soviet Union, the financer of the Vietnamese military occupation of
Cambodia, has a special obligation to cooperate in this effort to resolve a
major source of international tension. Soviet participation in this conference
and in the proposed conference on Afghanistan will indicate Moscow's interest in
surmounting these major barriers to the development of more constructive
East-West relations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MISHAPS MAR U.N.'S CAMBODIA MEETING

BYLINE: Kirkpatrick, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 712 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 13


A series of diplomatic mishaps marred the opening today of a conference aimed at
negotiating the removal of Vietnam's troops from Cambodia.

China succeeded, at least temporarily, in blocking the conference sponsors, the
Southeast Asian nations, from extending a symbolic invitation to the regime
installed by Vietnam in Phnom Penh, which would not have come to the gathering
here in any case. But most nations at the conference, including the United
States, hoped that an invitation would point up their intention to bargain with
Vietnam and not simply excoriate it.

Then Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. declined to attend a dinner for
conference delegates because the Southeast Asian hosts withdraw an invitation to
Israel after they discovered that two of their number, the Moslem nations of
Indonesia and Malaysia, had no relations with Israel.

In addition, Mr. Haig and Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the American delegate to the
United Nations, walked out of the gathering when a representative of the deposed
Pol Pot regime rose to speak. The United States, with China, is in the forefront
of those nations that support the Pol Pot faction's retention of Cambodia's seat
at the United Nations in preference to giving it to the regime installed by
Vietnam. The Pol Pot group has been accused of killing more than three million
Cambodians and was driven from power by Vietnamese forces in 1979. Mr. Haig said
he had another appointment. An aide said he had no plans to meet the Pol Pot
representative, Foreign Minister Ieng Sary.

Soviet and Vietnamese Stand

Even before these events, the meeting faced a severe handicap. Both Vietnam and
its chief ally, the Soviet Union, announced that they would not attend. They
insist that the current Government is an ''irreversible fact'' and that no
negotiations can remove it from Cambodia. Nevertheless, the 83 nations here plan
to set up a small group of countries to explore future bargaining with Hanoi.

Mr. Haig, in his first address at the United Nations, warned that Vietnam would
suffer ''an ever-deepening diplomatic and economic isolation'' as long as it
maintained its 200,000 troops in Cambodia.  The conference, he said, ''provides
the best opportunity to escape the dead end of international reproach and
economic repression.''

The Secretary warned that the United States would ''continue to question
seriously'' economic aid from any source to Hanoi.  Washington has succeeded in
tying strings to $118 million in aid approved by the United Nations Development
Program for Vietnam over the next five years. From now on, every project with a
possible military use, such as transportation projects, must be approved
separately by the Development Program's 48 nation-governing council.  No other
country faces such restrictions.

A draft of a declaration the conference is to adopt at the end of the week holds
out economic aid as an incentive for Vietnam. It voices the hope that once the
Cambodian issue is settled peacefully, ''an intergovernmental committee will be
established to consider a program of assistance to Cambodia for the
reconstruction of its economy and for the economic and social development of all
states of the region, including Vietnam.''

A Reproach to Soviet

Mr. Haig also reproached the Soviet Union, ''the financer of the Vietnamese
military occupation,'' for boycotting the meeting here.  The struggle over
inviting the current leaders in Cambodia took place largely behind the scenes.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, or Asean, supported by most of those
attending the conference, had hoped to invite to all Cambodian factions. But
Asean and the others also want all issues here settled by consensus.

The conference president, Foreign Minister Willibald Pahr of Austria, announced
that there was opposition to inviting the current leaders and said he and the
other conference officers would study the issue. They are expected to refer it
to still another committee. As an Asian diplomat said, ''The invitation will
stay in the deep freeze.''

China's acting foreign minister, Han Nianlong, urged the conference to call on
Hanoi to withdraw its troops in six months. The draft declaration calls for a
withdrawal but so far does not specify a time limit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. with
Jeane J. photo of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. greeting delegates

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE VIETNAM MEMORIAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 296 words


To the Editor:

I was very surprised and shocked after reading the June 29 article about me (and
the Vietnam memorial design). I was quoted as saying that the ''v-shape doesn't
have anything to do with 'Vietnam,' 'victory,' or 'veterans,' '' and in
misquoting me you have misinterpreted my design.

In designing the memorial I never thought of these walls as being a letter ''v''
written in the earth. This labeling is a false simplification of my design; the
memorial's two walls come together at a 130o angle, hardly a ''v'' at all in my
opinion! The angle was in reality formed with respect to both the Lincoln
Memorial and the Washington Monument; it brings the Vietnam memorial into the
architectural plan of the Mall, and also brings it into a historical context.

I explained to your reporter that this angle is not to be read as a literal
symbol of the letter ''v,'' therefore I had said that the ''v-shape does not
stand for 'Vietnam,' 'victory,' 'veterans,' or for that matter, any other word
beginning with the letter 'v.' '' But for your article to say that my design for
the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial has nothing to do with the Vietnam veterans is
totally wrong.

I feel that your article damages the meaning of the memorial, and that it is a
great injustice to the veterans for whom the memorial is designed. The time
sequence, which has the dates of the first and last deaths meeting at the
intersection of these walls, is the essence of the design. It is a segment in
time, meant to recognize all those who served during this war, and giving
special recognition to those who will never return from it. In this sense, this
v-shaped (if you insist on calling it that) memorial has everything to do with
the veterans!
MAYA YING LIN, Washington, June 29, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 14, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION

BYLINE: By DENA KLEIMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1274 words


LONGVIEW, Tex.  MEL and Norma Gabler seem simple folk at first. She dwells on
the grandchildren. He mows the lawn. They have lived for years in the same
modest ranch house here in this dusty East Texas industrial town.

But in their own quiet way, the Gablers have become an important voice in
American education. Their goal: to cleanse the nation's schools of all materials
that they consider antifamily, anti-American and anti-God. Their target:
textbooks.

''We're losing our children in the classroom'' said Mrs. Gabler, whose wide
smile and slow manner of speech have become familiar at state textbook adoption
hearings here in Texas, one of 27 states where school textbooks are selected by
a single statewide authority.

Of the numerous textbook critics across the country, the Gablers, neither of
whom completed college, have become the best known and are considered among the
most thorough and persistent. In large part because of their efforts, social
studies textbooks have been recalled, health manuals replaced and English
anthologies removed from textbook lists around the country.

While textbook publishers publicly minimize the importance of the Gablers,
privately they acknowledge that this soft-spoken couple has become an important
symbol of parents across the nation and that their message needs, at the very
least, to be heard if not heeded by the $940-million-a-year American textbook
industry.

''We're all certainly very much aware of them,'' said Robert D.  FitzGerald,
vice president of Allyn & Bacon, a major textbook publisher in Boston. ''I have
no quarrel with the Gablers. I do feel strongly that we should listen to them
and everyone else. They have a right to be heard.''

The Gablers are at the center of a growing network of parent groups, emboldened
by what they see as the new conservative mood in the nation, who are demanding
the alteration or removal of teaching methods, curriculums and individual books
that they contend are in large part to blame for the high teenage pregnancy
rate, venereal disease, declining test scores and other problems of today's
youth.

With a mailing list of over 12,000 and a staff of seven, the Gablers embrace
goals similar to those of such national organizations as Moral Majority, the
Eagle Forum, and the Christian Broadcasting Network. All try to provide
grass-roots parents' groups with the lobbying techniques and literature to wage
attacks on individual books or school practices.

''Until textbooks are changed, there is no possibility that crime, violence,
venereal disease and abortion rates will decrease,'' reads a fund-raising
pamphlet from the Gabler organization. ''If all the problems of our world were
suddenly resolved but textbooks remained unchanged, most of these same problems
would soon return because of what is being taught our children in classrooms.''

In the Gablers' eight-room home, overflowing with file cabinets and book
shelves, the couple works from dawn to midnight scouring textbooks for
''questionable'' material. In the guest bedroom, the bed has become a table Mr.
Gabler uses to answer his correspondence, which averages 200 letters each week.
What was once a sun porch is now lined with file cabinets and papers. Throughout
the house, on shelves, wedged behind curtains and in front of windows, are books
and more books that the Gablers and their associates have subjected to their
scrutiny.

While Mr. and Mrs. Gabler say they have no standard list of objectionable ideas,
their criticism revolves around certain themes: that textbooks today undermine
patriotism, the free enterprise system, religion, and parental authority; that
the books are ''negative'' in their discussions of death, divorce and suicide;
that the books erode absolute values by asking questions to which they offer no
firm answers.

In one recent review of a ninth-grade literature book published by Houghton
Mifflin, the Gablers objected to ''The Cask of Amontillado,'' a short story by
Edgar Allan Poe:

''Gruesome, murderous, bizarre content,'' the Gablers' review says of the story.
''Not suitable for a literature class.'' The Gabler organization took issue with
''The American Adventure,'' published by Allyn & Bacon, because, among other
things, they said it overemphasizes Watergate and the Vietnam War. In response,
Mr. Fitzgerald said, ''They were certainly significant events in our history. To
some people, to mention them is too much.''

In other cases the Gabler organization has objected to a history textbook's
mention of George Washington's violent temper, a social studies text's
discussion of Marilyn Monroe, and essay questions that require a student to give
his opinion about the Vietnam War.

''We are spending too much time trying to relate and make it relevant,'' said
Mrs. Gabler, who is 56.  ''There is too much negativism,'' said Mr. Gabler, who
is 66 and was a clerk at the Exxon Corporation for 39 years before he became
involved in reviewing textbooks.

The Gablers say their interest in textbooks began some 20 years ago when their
son Jim, who was then 16, complained to his father that his high school history
text endorsed a Washington ''dictatorship'' - the expression is Mr. Gabler's -
and made no mention of the rights retained by individual states for their own
governance.

''Where can a young person go to find the truth?'' Mr. Gabler said his son asked
him. From that point on, Mr. Gabler said, he wanted to examine what other
fallacies were being taught in school.

They are against having the story of Robin Hood taught in school because, they
claim, it sanctions stealing. They take issue with a textbook that reads: ''The
law that allowed slavery in America was wrong, so people could break the law.''
because, they say, it encourages insubordination. They seek to remove a book
that encourages youngsters to imagine themselves as sit-in protesters of the
1960's on the grounds that doing so teaches rebellion.

In addition to reviewing individual books, the Gablers serve as a clearinghouse
for other issues and put interested parents in touch with other groups
concerned, for example, with seeing sex education eliminated and the biblical
story of creation taught alongside evolution.

The Gablers maintain a hectic speaking schedule and have been to virtually every
state, as well as Australia and New Zealand. The trips, they say, are paid for
by the parent groups who invite them to speak. They plan to speak to parents
this summer in England.

The trouble with most of the textbooks, the Gablers contend, is that they are
written from the perspective of people who do not believe in God or an absolute
value system. This perspective, they say, is a religion called secular humanism,
which permeates every aspect of contemporary society and teaches youngsters to
lie, cheat and steal.

''Humanism is the religion of the public schools,'' said Mr.  Gabler. who refers
to them as ''government seminaries.'' Behind the lace curtains in the guest
bedroom is a wall of yellowing books, many out of print, that Mr. Gabler says he
would like to have brought back into the nation's schools.

''We feel safe with older books.'' said Mr. Gabler.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Norma and Mel Gabler (Page C4)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 15, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AT U.N. HANOI IS URGED TO PULL OUT OF CAMBODIA

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 528 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 14


Two Southeast Asian nations said today that a Vietnamese troop withdrawal from
Cambodia was in Vietnam's own interest.

Thailand and Malaysia, speaking on the second day of a conference designed to
negotiate such a withdrawal, also criticized Vietnam's continuing occupation and
urged that elections, supervised by the United Nations, be held in Cambodia.

''The Vietnamese occupation of Kampuchea, by Hanoi's own admission, has affected
Vietnam's plan for nation-building and economic development,'' said Siddhi
Savetsila, the Foreign Minister of Thailand, using the name Cambodians prefer.
Thailand has received most of the refugee flow from Cambodia.

Ahmad Rithauddeen, Malaysia's Foreign Minister, said a negotiated political
solution would ''remove suspicion and mistrust'' and ultimately aid the economic
development of all nations in the region, including Vietnam. Vietnam invaded
Cambodia in 1979 and overthrew the Pol Pot regime, which has been accused of
killing more than three million Cambodians.

Conciliatory Tone Adopted

At the same time, Thailand and Malaysia, both of whom are leading candidates to
serve on a permanent committee that will attempt to start negotiations once the
conference is over, adopted a relatively conciliatory tone toward Vietnam, in an
attempt to bring it into the negotiations. Both nations said they regretted that
Vietnam and the Soviet Union had declined to attend the conference.

''We seek neither to impose nor to dictate the terms of any agreement either on
Vietnam or on others,'' the Malaysian Foreign Minister said. He said that
Malaysia had held talks with both Vietnam and Laos but that ''regrettably, a
convergence of views has not emerged.''

A draft of the declaration that the conference is to adopt at the end of the
week holds out economic aid as an incentive to Vietnam.  The draft expresses the
hope that once the Cambodian issue has been peacefully settled, an
''intergovernmental committee'' will be set up to consider an aid program for
''the reconstruction of its economy and for the economic and social development
of all states of the region, including Vietnam.''

China Has 2 Objections

China has objected to two points in the draft, according to a key Asian
diplomat. One calls for the ''disarming of all Kampucheans.'' Instead, China
wants language saying that no armed faction should seize power by force. China
also wants to eliminate the proposed establishment of an interim government in
Cambodia until elections are held. China is the chief supplier of arms and aid
to Mr. Pol Pot's guerrilla forces.

The Asian diplomat said it was likely that the five members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations would accept the changes. The association countries
are Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines, Indonesia and Singapore.

The conference has not yet decided whether to adopt an association proposal to
invite a representative of the Cambodian regime. China is known to oppose the
invitation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 15, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1104 words


As the royal wedding draws near, the British are agog A2
Vietnam urged to withdraw from Cambodia A3
Leftist chic are out in force at Bastille Day fete in France A3
Argentina places ex-member of junta under house arrest A3
Around the World A5
Menachem Begin receives a formal bid to form a government A8
Haig aide insists rights policy is evenhanded A10

Government/Politics
Mobile, Ala., voters reject change in form of government A12
Largest conference ever begins work on budget A14
About Washington: Camera corps takes over on Capitol Hill A14
Ex-Deputy Director of C.I.A.  viewed as a nonprofessional A18
Securities lawyers say inquiry on Hugle case is unlikely A18
Nassau reaches settlement to ease crowding at county jail B2

General
Around the Nation A12
Youths flee Atlanta fear at Minnesota camp A12
Suspect's sister testifies against him in 1952 slayings B2
Jersey high court sets rules on hypnotized witnesses B3
Sewage from plant in Sheepshead Bay imperils beaches B3
Warrant issued for removing baby from hospital B4

Indutry/Labor
Federal mediator joins talks between postal service and unions A16

Obituaries
Rene A. Wormser, lawyer who specialized in estate planning A16
William Chanler, former New York City Corporation Counsel A16

Living Section
Food Outdoor cooking with Latin flavor C1

The mass production of ''gourmet'' food C1

Kitchen Equipment C2

A California cooking school with no secrets C3

60-Minute Gourmet C3

Johnnycake is traditional and controversial in Rhode Island C8

Lukewarm foods catching on C9

Wine Talk: Chalone Vineyard, remote but fine C14

Best Buys C15
Living College vacations for the over 60's C1

Metropolitan Diary C2

Personal Health: Outpatient surgery now more common C10

Discoveries C12

World of men's clubs: a guided tour C16

Arts/Entertainment
Le Bouef's heyday is recreated at Paris gallery C17
Buoyant Emmylou Harris at Dr Pepper Festival C17
''Man With the Horn,'' new album from Miles Davis C19
Blondie has become more than just a group C19
David and Don Was explain meaning behind the madness C19
Two one-act plays by Laurence Holder are staged C21
Daniel Yankelovich's treatise on self-fulfillment is reviewed C21
Charlie Morrow's avant-garde band salutes sunset C22
British-made biography of Cecil Rhodes on Channel 13 C23

Sports
Secretary of Labor Donovan to join baseball talks today B5
Giants set to open camp on positive note B5
Maple testifies of money offer by Vasquez B5
Floyd in top form to challenge British Open B5
Red Smith on the baseball season that isn't B7

Features/Notes
Man in the News: John Stein, C.I.A.'s covert operations chief A18
About New York B3
Notes on People B4

News Analysis
Leslie H. Gelb assesses speech by Secretary Haig A11

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A22

Enough of straddles Brave Jerry Brown Lost refuge The B-plus Legislature Letters
A22
James Reston: Reagan at the summit A23
Russell Baker: don't do it, Mr.  President A23
Selig S. Harrison: India, and Reagan's tilt toward Pakistan A23
W.D. Eberle: profiting by the Ottawa summit conference A23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI HINTS IT MIGHT TALK WITH A U.N. PANEL

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 598 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 15


Vietnam, which has boycotted the conference on Cambodia here, left the door ajar
today for talks with the committee of nations that the conference plans to
establish.

Ha Van Lau, Vietnam's representative at the United Nations, pointedly declined
three times to rule out conversations with the conference committee. He was
replying to questions at a news conference held outside the conference hall.

In diplomatic parlance, ''talks'' are less formal than ''negotiations,'' and Mr.
Lau indicated that he would not negotiate with the committee. Indeed, he said
that all the works of the conference were ''illegal and immoral.''

But he provided the first indication that the gathering here might lead to some
practical result by refusing to say that the Hanoi Government would not talk to
the committee members. However, he suggested that the group must somehow divorce
itself from the conference if it wanted to conduct conversations with Vietnam.

Free Elections Sought

The conference, expected to end on Friday, is seeking to persuade Hanoi to
withdraw its 200,000 troops from Cambodia and permit free elections, supervised
by the United Nations. Vietnam, after deposing the regime of Pol Pot in 1979,
installed its own set of rulers. It is called the Heng Samrin regime in
diplomatic documents and discussions, for the Cambodian President, Heng Samrin,
even though Pen Sovan has become Prime Minister and party leader.

As is the case at most United Nations meetings, the real issues here are being
thrashed out in private. There are three disputes and China, although it is
almost alone, appears likely to win them all.

The chief architects of the conference, the members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, want to invite a representative from the Phnom Penh
Government as a gesture demonstrating their willingness to negotiate with all
Cambodian factions. But Peking, which supplies arms to Mr. Pol Pot's insurgent
forces, is strongly opposed.

The conference officers have been charged with recommending a solution.
Diplomats in all camps believe that the question will not reach the floor, thus
avoiding a divisive vote, and so no

invitation is likely to be issued.

The overwhelming majority of the 87 participating nations also want the
conference to issue a declaration calling for disarmament of all Cambodia's
factions before the holding of elections. But China opposes taking arms away
from Mr. Pol Pot's forces and other guerrillas and calls simply for ''disarming
of Heng Samrin's puppet forces.'' In the end, the conference is expected to drop
the demand for disarmament and simply urge ''uncoerced'' elections.

'Interim Administration' Urged

The last issue revolves around a Southeast Asian proposal for creation of a
neutral ''interim administration'' to preserve law and order while elections are
held. The Chinese oppose this on the ground that it would prevent their
insurgent allies from moving into Phnom Penh if and when Hanoi pulls its troops
out. Again in the name of unanimity, the final declaration is likely to delete
references to an ''interim administration.''

In the conference hall, Lord Carrington, the British Foreign Secretary, and
other speakers today repeatedly urged that Cambodians be allowed to choose their
own government and establish a state free of alignment with any big power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'BOAT PEOPLE' COOL TO JAPANESE OFFER OF FULL ASYLUM

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 582 words

DATELINE: KONAGAI, Japan, July 12


Until two years ago, freighters that picked up Vietnamese ''boat people'' at sea
had to provide a formal guarantee of resettlement in another country before
Japan would give their passengers temporary shelter here, and no Indochinese
refugee was admitted for permanent resettlement.

Japan's contribution for the care and feeding of refugees amounted to $12
million from 1975 through 1978. Stung by international criticism, Japan shifted
gears in 1979, when its contribution to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and for relief for starving Cambodians leaped to $90 million for that
year. It climbed to $100 million during the last budget year.

In human terms, Japan is now willing to accept more Vietnamese for permanent
asylum than the number of those who wish to fill the available places, and
guarantees are no longer required for temporary shelter.

''Our initial attitude toward Indochinese refugees was totally unsatisfactory,''
said Koji Watanabe, deputy director of the Foreign Ministry's Asian affairs
bureau.

Now the defensive attitude is taken by Vietnamese, who are grateful for the
first asylum that Japan has granted them but do not want to avail themselves of
the Japanese offer of a permanent home. The offer is extended to all refugees
who are in good health and willing to accept one of the many jobs that are
available in this country of almost no unemployment.

Vietnamese, like other Asians, are even more conscious of the unusual
cohesiveness of Japanese society than are Western residents here, and they fear
that they would not fit in. ''The mesh of Japanese social structure is so minute
it is so very difficult to absorb an alien element,'' said Mr. Watanabe.

''There is acceptance of refugees in principle by the Japanese,'' he said, ''but
when it comes to their own community I have to admit there is still
resistance.''

''It is very hard to take part in Japanese society,'' said a Saigon University
graduate at a refugee camp. ''In the Japanese language it is hard for us to
improve our education. Here we can only work. But besides working and improving
our living, we have to improve our knowledge, so that when our country is free
again we can go back to rebuild it.''

The bulk of the refugees here are fishermen and farmers from central Vietnam.
Altogether, 1,621 Vietnamese are waiting in 24 camps run by religious groups and
the Japanese Red Cross under United Nations auspices. Almost to a man, woman or
child, according to Japanese and international officials, they want to go to the
United States.

For some, the motivation is familiarity with the language, for many, the
presence of relatives or at least a sizable Vietnamese community, and for almost
all it is a belief that integration into Japanese society is too difficult.

The result is that the quota of 3,000 refugees that Japan is ready to admit
permanently largely goes begging. Although Yukio Imagawa, director of the
refugee division, said that Japan was ready to increase the quota if the demand
was there, this willingness is likely to go untested.

''In Japan we find it very hard to realize our dreams,'' a refugee here said.
And while three others, all English-speaking veterans of the Saigon military
forces, indicated approval, he added, ''If I have to wait here for five years to
go to America, it's O.K. with me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EX-ARMY WARRANT OFFICER ACCUSED OF BEING SOVIET SPY

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 794 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, Fla., July 15


A former Army warrant officer who had access to top secret coding devices was
arrested today on charges of supplying the Soviet Union with such vital secrets
that he was awarded the rank of colonel in the Soviet Army.

Joseph George Helmich, 44 years old, who formerly served in the Army Signal
Corps, was arrested by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and charged
with selling top secret information about a sophisticated teletype coding
machine to Soviet officials while he was stationed in Paris in 1963 and 1964. In
addition to receiving $131,000 from Soviet agents, the indictment said, Mr.
Helmich was promised additional payments in exchange for more data.

Gary Betz, a United States Attorney, said that what Mr. Helmich supplied Soviet
officials could have been enough for them to make a code machine of their own
and decipher American intelligence messages in the Vietnam War.

Mr. Helmich, a native of Florida who is employed by the Beach Tile Company of
Neptune Beach, said he had only $14 when he was taken into custody at his
parents' home on Jacksonville Beach, where he had been living with his wife and
their child since moving there six weeks ago from Niagara Falls, N.Y.

Assigned to Paris Embassy

The four-count indictment charges that Mr. Helmich delivered classified, secret
and top secret information and equipment to Soviet agents from January 1963 to
last August, and that he received approximately $131,000 from January 1963 to
July 1964 from Soviet agents in Paris, where he was a crypto-custodian assigned
to the United States Embassy. Conviction on each count, one of conspiracy and
three of espionage, carries a maximum penalty of life in prison.

Among the honors bestowed on Mr. Helmich by the Soviet Union, Mr.  Betz said,
was the rank of colonel.  Although the indictments covered a 17-year period from
1963 to 1980, Mr. Helmich served in the Army only from 1954 to 1966. The
indictment did not spell out how he communicated with Soviet agents after he
left the Army.

Lawrence Lawler, a special agent in charge of the F.B.I. office in Jacksonville,
said it took as long as it did to bring the indictment because it was a complex
case involving ''bits and pieces of information put together in a gigantic
mosaic.''

Held on $500,000 Bond

Mr. Helmich appeared in court unshaven, wearing blue slacks, a pinstriped shirt
and black boots. United States Magistrate Howard Snyder set bond at $500,000
pending Mr. Helmich's arraignment tomorrow. The magistrate declared the former
serviceman indigent and appointed Peter Dearing, a former United States Attorney
now in private practice, to represent Mr. Helmich.

In arguing for a high bond, Mr. Betz told the magistrate that Mr.  Helmich had
''funds put away for him outside the United States and means and methods for him
to leave the country.''

Mr. Helmich is the fourth person arrested on espionage charges in the last two
months. On May 29, Second Lieut. Christopher Cooke, 25, of Richmond, an Air
Force missile-launching officer, was charged with 13 counts of making
unauthorized visits to the Soviet Embassy in Washington and five counts of
disclosing defense information.

On June 28, Marian Zacharski, a 29-year-old Polish businessman, and William
Bell, 61, an employee of the Hughes Aircraft Company, were arrested in Playa del
Rey, Calif., and charged with espionage.  Both Mr. Zacharski and Mr. Bell, who
was accused of selling classified documents on defense-related radar systems to
the Polish Government, pleaded not guilty.

Gave Data to Soviet Agents

The indictment against Mr. Helmich accuses him of delivering the repair and
maintenance instructions for the KL-7 Cryptosystem, described by Mr. Betz as a
''cryptography system that encrypts teletype messages,'' technical details
concerning the KL-7 rotors, and lists of settings for the system.

The indictment contends that Mr. Helmich got in touch with Soviet agents at the
Soviet Embassy in Paris in January 1963 and delivered the manuals, technical
details and lists to Soviet agents at the Soviet Trade Mission in Paris.

It also said that, while Mr. Helmich was in Paris, he ''received instructions
from agents of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in espionage tradecraft,
including photography, secret writing and methods of clandestine
communications.''

In addition, he is accused of having concealed and given false information to
American counterintelligence agents who interviewed him in 1964.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Joseph George Helmich (pg.1)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW V.A. CHIEF SAYS VETERANS OF VIETNAM AREN'T NEGLECTED

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 161 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 15


Robert Nimmo, the new Veterans Administration chief, said today that some
Vietnam-era veterans had ''particular problems,'' but 95 percent were doing well
and that they had not been shortchanged by the Government.

The 59-year-old former World War II bomber pilot, who was sworn in today as the
agency's 11th administrator, disputed charges by some that the Vietnam veterans
had been treated with ''less sensitivity'' than other veterans.

''I disagree that the Vietnam veterans have been shortchanged,'' Mr. Nimmo said
in an interview on the NBC News show ''Today.'' ''Ninety-five percent of the
Vietnam-era veterans have integrated themselves into our society and are doing
well just as all other veterans have.

''We do have some who have particular problems, primarily related to the
so-called delayed stress syndrome, and we are addressing ourselves to that as
rapidly as we can.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS IN AN IOWA TOWN BEGIN ORGANIZING TO REACH THEIR GOALS

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1288 words

DATELINE: CLEAR LAKE, Iowa


Vietnam is a fading memory for most of this town's 8,000 citizens. At the corner
drugstore and the pool hall, talk runs to whether the bullheads in the lake are
biting, or the damage the hailstorm did.

Only for Vietnam veterans, sprinkled through the town's population like the
unwanted ''volunteer'' corn in a soybean field, is the war not over and done
with.

''We didn't get any recognition for a long time, and I guess what we're finally
doing is recognizing ourselves,'' said Larry Cookman, who served with the Air
Force in Vietnam and now drives a bread truck.

Eight years after the United States withdrawal from the war, Mr.  Cookman, who
is 32 years old, and other veterans have launched a loose organization called
Vietnam Veterans of Northern Iowa to fight for their interests, provide mutual
support and foster the sense of pride that they feel society has denied them.

'Worst Thing Is I'm Proud'

''This may sound funny, but the worst thing about Vietnam is that I'm proud of
it - trying not to be has really been hell,'' said Jeff Van Slyke, 31, who was
taken off the high school football team for smoking and who less than a year
later was serving in an ''ambushand-kill'' unit in Vietnam. ''Vietnam Veterans
Are Heroes Too,'' says the bumper sticker Mr. Van Slyke, now a boat salesman,
has on his battered pickup.

What is happening amid the rolling hills that Grant Wood made part of the
national imagination seems to be happpening in many places.  After years of
trying to forget or ignore the war, veterans find they no longer can, and recent
news events have brought this home forcefully. They yield to the conclusion that
Vietnam is part of their psyches and sometimes devastatingly so.

According to a 900-page, $2 million report submitted to Congress in March,
nearly a fourth of the veterans who saw heavy combat were later arrested for
criminal offenses, and of the 70 percent who returned to school, few finished.
Compared with the rest of the population, unemployment is higher, occupational
attainment lower and drug and alcohol abuse more prevalent. The incidence of
suicide is considerable.

It is 'Unfinished Business'

''The war is unfinished business,'' said Arthur Egenorf, a New York psychologist
and Vietnam veteran who was one of the report's authors.

There have been no suicides by Vietnam veterans in Clear Lake, but those here
report psychological problems, drug abuse and family strains. At the group's
first meeting two months ago, nine of the 10 who attended had been divorced;
almost all reported other personal difficulties, ranging from emotional coldness
to a tendency to become involved in barroom fights.

Barry Moen, who a decade earlier saw 12 members of his squad killed in less than
a minute, has recently had dreams of killing people for insignificant slights.
Mr. Moen, a 31-year-old construction worker, also dreams constantly of being
ordered back to Vietnam.

''Why do I have to have dreams like that?'' he asked.

Membership Has Quadrupled

The local group's membership has nearly quadrupled and now includes veterans
from such surrounding towns as Mason City, Britt and Garner. The Vietnam
Veterans of America, based in New York, has similarly seen its membership climb
to 6,000 since its inception a little more than a year ago, although many local
groups, including the one in Clear Lake, are not affiliated with it. Many
veterans say they have difficulty trusting large organizations.

The new activism of the veterans, mostly more low-key than the hunger strike
that began recently in Los Angeles and ended in Washington, was set off by
several factors.

Most veterans cite the treatment of the Iran hostages as heroes, making bitter
jokes about the inconvenience the baseball strike must be causing them because
they were given lifetime passes. They were incensed by White House efforts to
slash programs aimed specifically at Vietnam veterans, such as 91 storefront
counseling centers.

And they are getting older.  ''Ten years ago, we would have thrown a brick
through a window, or burned something on the streets,'' Mr. Van Slyke said. Now,
he is helping organize a car pool to travel the 111 miles to the Veterans
Administration hospital in Des Moines for tests to see whether he and others
were exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam.

They Discuss 'Stress Reaction'

Veterans in Clear Lake all seem aware of the term ''delayed stress reaction,''
coined by psychiatrists to describe the alienation, fear and lack of motivation
that many Vietnam veterans feel consumes them. It is a constant topic of
discussion.

''A lot of us don't give a damn if we work or not,'' said Larry Janssen, 35, a
Navy veteran who served two Vietnam tours. ''I love being a bum.'' Mr. Janssen
said he has made no effort to find parttime work for the more than two months
that he has been on strike from his production-line job.

''I don't have much for emotions,'' Mr. Cookman said. ''I find it hard to tell
my wife that I love her. I've had good friends die and haven't shed a tear.''

Gradually, veterans are trying to integrate themselves and their distresses into
the small-town life that surrounds them. Unlike some veterans who march in
Fourth of July parades, most here are not ready to don uniforms for any reason.
But they are moving in that direction: they have begun to hold picnics for
themselves and their families for which local businesses have donated food, beer
and soda. They are discussing a raffle.

And it seems just a matter of time until the majority meld into the traditional
veterans organizations, whose members are dying off.  At meetings of the Vietnam
group, a favorite topic is the night they decide to take over the local chapters
of the Veterans of Foreign Wars and the American Legion by joining in a group
and electing their own slate of officers.

''Sooner or later, we're going to take them over,'' Mr. Moen said.  ''That's
just the way it's going to be.'' No matter how much progress the Vietnam
veterans may make through their new organizations, many feel that they will
forever be limited by the time they have had to devote to coming to terms with a
war most people would prefer to forget. ''What's the point of extending the G.I.
Bill?'' Igor Borbrowsky, an official of the Vietnam Veterans of America, said,
although his organization is pushing for an extension. ''Do you want 40-year-old
associate degree graduates?'' he asked.

The veterans suggest that some of their number use the war as an excuse for
laziness and a variety of other character deficiencies.  ''Don't get me wrong,
there are a lot of loafers out there,'' Mr.  Moen said.

The war claimed victims beyond the veterans themselves. Larry Cookman's wife,
Mary, has made an appointment with the county mental health center to discuss
her frustrations.

''When I knew Larry before the war, he was kind and considerate,'' Mrs. Cookman
said. ''Now, a lot of the time, it's what he wants and to hell with everybody
else.''

At the end of Main Street on the lakeshore, a flagpole honors the only local
youth killed in Vietnam, John H. Wrisberg 3d, who died Jan. 16, 1968. Those who
lived feel that they do not receive any fraction of that gratitude. ''You just
don't tell people you're a Vietnam veteran,'' Mr. Janssen said. ''They might
spit at you, and I guarantee they won't say thank you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Northern Iowa showing Clear Lake

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA: STILL A SIDESHOW

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 361 words


Cambodia remains a victim state. To Americans during the Vietnam War, it was an
inconvenient sanctuary for the Vietcong, a target to be bombed and invaded. Thus
weakened, it then became a laboratary for the crackpot experiments of a
Chinese-backed zealot, Pol Pot. He in turn was overthrown in 1979 by the
Soviet-backed Vietnamese, moving imperially to visit fresh sorrows on that
trampled land.

Vietnam's crimes in Cambodia are real, and deserve the denunciations of a
special United Nations conference this week. But the accusers pass too quickly
over the crimes of Pol Pot, whose regime may have caused the deaths of three
million Cambodians. He is ''our'' monster in this propaganda battle and his
representative speaks for Cambodia at the U.N., thanks to an unholy
understanding between the United States and China.

For all the parties Cambodia is still a sideshow, a poignant testament to the
corruptions of geopolitics. No remedy will flow from this U.N. meeting, which
Moscow and Hanoi are boycotting. Vietnam obviously values control over Cambodia
more than it does the end of isolation in South Asia. And it values Soviet
support - in Cambodia and against China -more than the vague promise of normal
relations with the United States.

But that promise needs to be kept alive, as New Zealand has urged.  The
Indochina tangle can be untied only by focusing on real interests. If Vietnam
insists on dominating Cambodia at all costs, there may be no way to expel its
200,000 troops without superior force. But Hanoi's occupation is costly and may
be negotiable if something other than a Chinese puppet regime can be created in
Cambodia.

That would require wider security arrangements than have thus far been
discussed. They may appear out of reach at the moment, but South Asia has
witnessed other dramatic realignments in recent years.  Beyond denouncing the
Vietnamese and their Soviet sponsors, the United States' purpose in Cambodia
should be to keep seeking a formula that for once turns geopolitics to
Cambodians' benefit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC TROUBLES BESETTING NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By Michael Harrington

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 864 words


The revolution in Nicaragua is in deep economic trouble. If the crisis provokes
a political upheaval, one of the most constructive attempts at social change in
the third world today could be destroyed.

I spent only three days there last month as a member of the Socialist
International's committee to defend the Nicaraguan revolution. Obviously I could
not gather new information on the complex economic situation during such a brief
visit. (However, it was easy to see that the charges that the revolution is
Stalinist are nonsense. Under Stalinism, the employers' association would not
exist, much less hold a news conference denouncing the regime as Stalinist, as
it did while I was there.) But I did participate in a series of frank
discussions with the Sandinist leadership, including a two and a half hour
session with the political committee of the Sandinist National Liberation Front
itself. The Government leaders made no attempt to hide the gravity of the
situation.

In part, the crisis is one more consequence of a civil war that has destroyed
half a billion dollars in the industrial and social infrastructures. In part,
the crisis is the result of Nicaragua's position as a dependent economy in the
world market.

The cost of debt service and oil imports in 1981, to take but one striking
example, is expected to equal 90 percent of the total projected export income.

At the same time, Nicaragua suffers from a deterioration of the terms of trade,
an ailment that now afflicts most poor societies.  The country's exports this
year, it is now estimated, will fall $140 million short of the $680 million
target. Yet import needs will grow, both for new investment and basic
consumption. There is a similar Catch-22 elsewhere in the third world: If you
don't import, you can't build the economy and provide the basis for imports; if
you do import, you worsen the external debt and imperil future imports.

The Sandinists expect their international-trade deficit to worsen by 33.8
percent in comparison to the 1980 trade balance. If, as a result of the
Catch-22, production declines along with import capacity, inflation will then
increase at an annual rate of 27 percent and, the Sandinists openly admit, that
will mean a deterioration in the real income of the workers, even though the
poorest among them are supposed to get a 20 percent raise.

These trends are made worse by Washington's active hostility - it has cut off
aid, moved toward rightist regimes in Central America, condoned efforts by
supporters of the ousted Somoza regime to overthrow the Government - and that of
the Nicaraguan private sector. The Government in

Managua remains committed to a mixed economy, social pluralism, and democracy
(with elections to be held in 1985 and the electoral process to begin in 1984).
But these objectives have to be achieved within the context of a blatant
internal contradiction between a populist political system and a relatively
conservative economic system dominated by the private sector.

It is relatively easy for private businessmen to transfer resources out of the
country or to carry on a quiet strike of capital - the public sector reached 110
percent of its investment targets in 1980; the private sector, only 83 percent.

And there is the very real possibility of a United States-backed
counter-revolution. The Sandinists, in short, must act under intolerable
international and domestic restraints.

Yet Nicaraguan society remains remarkably, if not totally, open and pluralistic.
The tragic irony is that what could create a ''Marxist-Leninist'' dictatorship
in Managua is United States intransigence. Or else we could bring back not a
stable fascism but a repressive regime engaged in a permanent civil war against
its own people. In short, our policies are working well against our professed
values and in favor of everything that we claim to hate, either on the ''left''
or the right. The Economist, the English magazine, which is hardly a Castroite
organ, understands this and urges Washington to resume aid while there is still
time.

Finally, I must say I came back far more ashamed of my country than at any time
since the Vietnam War. The Nicaraguans are a generous people, a poor and often
hungry people, who want to make a truly democratic revolution, and it is we who
work to subvert their decency even as we demand more of it.

It is bad enough that our policy will not increase the genuine national security
of the United States. Worse, if I may be permitted to say it in these days of
official realpolitik, Washington's tactics constitute a flagrant act of
international immorality.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Michael Harrington is national chairman of the Democratic Socialist Organizing
Committee and author of the forthcoming book ''The Next America.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 16, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1217 words


Israel's divided Arabs seek to flex political muscle A2
Weinberger striving to publish se- cret data on Soviet missile A3
Vietnam hints it might talk with international panel A3
''Boat people'' are cool to Japa- nese offer of asylum A4
Around the World A5
For the Caribbean, a new ap- proach to problems A6
Vatican reports increased deficit for the Curia A7
Britain accepts Red Cross offer of Ulster fact-finding mission A10

Government/Politics
Governor asks disaster status in fruit-fly crisis A12
President says Mrs. O'Connor will be confirmed A14
Mobile rejects move to alter com- mission form of government 4 A16
Speaker O'Neill promises aid on budget, tax bill A17
20 cities appeal to Congress for transit assistance A19
Pierce, quiet no more, says ''balo- ney'' to his critics A20
Administration says new grant system will be fair A21
Senate ethics panel reviews tapes from Williams trial B2

General
Around the Nation A12
Federal judge orders 400 inmates released in Alabama A12
Judge denies bail for suspect in slaying in Atlanta A14
Newark shelves the red tape to re- pair its water pipeline fast B3
The London Underground runs a smooth system B3
Three seized after car chase in kidnapping in Manhattan B5
Home sellers scramble for inno- vative ways to attract buyers B8
Six in education indicted in visa fraud case B8

Home Section
Home Fake stone finishes on a realis- tic budget C1

Restoring a Victorian whimsy C1

Victorian doors are enjoying a revival C8

The gloss of patina on fine fur- niture C11
Home-mailing ads arousing in- quiries C1
Hers C2
Helpful Hardware C2
Home Beat C3
Museum, children and architec- ture C3
Home Improvement C4
Calendar of Events C5
Many books on garage sales C9
Design Notebook C10
Gardening C12
Dues plan divides women's cau- cus C13
Post home for sale for $20 million C14
How to grow plants using straw- berry jars C15
Free land keeps a school open C16

Arts/Entertainment
Museum catalogues offer varying perspectives on art C17
Alton G. Marshall elected chair- man of City Center board C17
Haydn, Rossini and Schubert at Mostly Mozart C20
Writers overwhelmingly ratify new TV-film contract C20
Biography of the folk singer Pete Seeger is reviewed C21
Larzer Ziff comments on ''fac- tion'' in literature C21
Williamstown Theater Festival, an actor's paradise C22
Boosey & Hawkes takes over Buf- fet, instrument maker C23
CBS announces new radio net- work for young adults C23
Anna Maria Razzi dances Juliet in U.S. debut C24

Sports
Secretary of Labor urges baseball negotiators to press talks B9
Palmer seeks to show his old form at British Open B9
Dave Anderson on Sandwich, spa- ghetti and beer B9
Coaches express mixed feelings about Ellenberger B9
Cosmos defeat Southampton, 2-1 B9
Giants, 84 strong, open training camp B10
Pat Bradley is eager to discard runner-up role B11
Turner tells House baseball trust exemption is unjust B11
Secretary of Labor makes hectic exit from talks B12
U.S. five takes Maccabiah title B13
Clauser, in catamaran, wins powerboat race B13

News Analysis
Steven Rattner assesses effects of riots on Britons' outlook A1

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A22

The Haitians and walrus courts Damaged assets Cambodia: still a sideshow Topics:
under the rainbow Letters A22
Anthony Lewis: escape from the extremes? A23
Michael Harrington: economic troubles besetting Nicaragua A23
Burton A. Weisbrod: social inse- curity A23
Hector Timerman and Tom A.  Bernstein: the Argentine gulag A23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS EXPORTER IS BELIEVED LINKED WITH ATTEMPT TO MURDER LIBYAN

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1410 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 16


Investigators looking into the attempted assassination of a Libyan student in
Colorado last year say they have found evidence that links the man accused of
the attack to a former agent for the Central Intelligence Agency. The former
agent, Edwin P. Wilson, is a fugitive from charges that he illegally exported
arms to Libya and trained terrorists there.

On the basis of the evidence, Federal investigators say they now believe Mr.
Wilson, who lives in Libya, may be responsible for arranging the attack against
the Libyan student, Faisal Zagallai, an outspoken critic of Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi, the leader of the militant Arab nation in North Africa. The evidence
is said to include entries in the personal telephone book of the suspect in the
shooting.

Investigators say they have also found evidence, including records of telephone
calls, that they say ties the suspect, Eugene A. Tafoya, to a civilian employee
at the Naval Weapons Center in China Lake, Calif.

Response by Scientist

The weapons center employee, Douglas H. Haden, a computer scientist, said in a
telephone interview today that he had met Mr.  Tafoya in 1978 while dating his
half-sister. But Mr. Haden denied any involvement in or knowledge of the October
1980 attack on Mr.  Zagallai, who was studying at Colorado State University.

The Naval Weapons Center conducts highly classified research in explosives and
electronics warfare. Four other civilians once employed there have been under
Federal investigation for possible criminal activity and links to Libya. Two of
them were indicted earlier this year on charges stemming from the theft of
military equipment from the center.

Federal investigators and prosecutors say they believe these cases are part of a
significant and growing national security problem involving the illegal
transportation of sophisticated United States technology to such countries as
Libya and the Soviet union. They also are increasingly concerned that Mr.
Wilson's work for Libya may have included widespread criminal activity inside
the United States.

Libyan authorities took responsibility for the attack on Mr.  Zagallai, who was
shot twice in the head at close range but survived. American officials believe
the attempted assassination was part of a concerted effort by Mr. Qaddafi to
eliminate opponents of his regime.

Roger S. Young, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said today
that the bureau was pursuing all leads involving Mr. Tafoya. However, senior
officers at the weapons center said they had not heard of the connection to Mr.
Haden until yesterday. They said they immediately asked the Naval Investigative
Service to open an inquiry.

Mr. Haden, who said his relationship with Mr. Tafoya was purely social and had
never involved discussions about Libya, said he had not been called by any
Federal investigators.

Mr. Young said that he could not comment on the specific question of whether the
F.B.I. was investigating Mr. Haden and his links to Mr. Tafoya.

Some Federal prosecutors have complained that the Justice Department's criminal
division has failed to organize an interagency group to pursue the numerous and
geographically disparate leads involving Mr. Wilson, the attack in Colorado, the
theft of military equipment from China Lake and other related cases.

Common Denominator in Cases

Within the last year, these cases, all of which have Libya as a common
denominator, have developed around the nation, but coordination between law
enforcement agencies has been, at best, for specific cases only, according to
Federal investigators.

For example, a Federal grand jury in Washington, which last year indicted Mr.
Wilson and another former C.I.A. agent, Francis E.  Terpil, on charges of
illegally exporting arms to Libya, is the main instrument for further
investigation of that case, even though many new investigative leads involve
possible criminal activity outside its jurisdiction.

The case against Mr. Tafoya is being handled by the Colorado state authorities
in a Colorado court, and the case involving stolen weapons from China Lake is
being prosecuted by the United States Attorney in Fresno, Calif.

Evidence Linking 2 Men

The evidence linking Mr. Wilson to Mr. Tafoya, who served with the Army Special
Forces, or Green Berets, in Vietnam, includes numerous references to Mr. Wilson,
as well as the former C.I.A. agent's associates and girlfriend, found in Mr.
Tafoya's personal telephone book, according to Federal law enforcement
officials. The book contained Mr. Wilson's telephone number in Libya, as well as
those of some of Mr. Wilson's associates there.

Officials said that there were also records of telephone calls that Mr. Tafoya
had made to Mr. Wilson or someone at his residence and business phones.

The indictment returned against Mr. Wilson and Mr. Terpil in April 1980 charged
them with conspiring to murder Umar Adullah Muhayshi, a Libyan critic of Colonel
Qaddafi who lives in Egypt. According to the indictment, Mr. Wilson and Mr.
Terpil offered an individual $1 million to carry out the assassination. The plan
was never carried out.

Curb in Colorado Case

Last week in Fort Collins, Colo., prosecutors in the Tafoya case attempted to
introduce this evidence in public court at a bail bond hearing concerning Mr.
Tafoya. Judge Robert Miller, however, upheld a defense objection to the
evidence, and issued an order banning public discussion of the case by lawyers
and investigators.

The evidence linking Mr. Tafoya to Mr. Haden also was found in Mr.  Tafoya's
telephone book, investigators said. Telephone company records disclosed several
calls from Mr. Tafoya to Mr. Haden's residence near the weapons center.

Mr. Haden said today that he had received a postal card from Mr.  Tafoya and
could recall one telephone call since he moved to the weapons center in early
1980. Mr. Haden said it was not until yesterday that he heard reports that Mr.
Tafoya had attacked Mr.  Zagallai. ''I'm not a newspaper reader,'' he said.

Denies Hearing of 2 Men

Mr. Haden added that he had never heard of Edwin Wilson or Frank Terpil. He said
he was not hiring a lawyer because ''I have nothng to hide.''

Mr. Haden is the fifth current or former weapons center employee who has been
linked directly or indirectly to Libya.  Two former civilian employees, Robert
E. Swallow and Dennis J.  Wilson, the latter no relation to Edwin P. Wilson,
took unpaid leaves from the center in late 1976 and early 1977 to go to Libya
where they worked in terrorist training camp organized by Edwin Wilson and Mr.
Terpil, according to Federal prosecutors.

They are under investigation but have not been charged with any crime. No United
States law prohibits Americans from training terrorists abroad.

The two other individuals, also former civilian employees at the center, are
James S. Nichols and Ralph E. Calvani. They were indicted along with three other
men in March on charges related to the theft of 10 Starlight nightscopes, a
low-light television camera and a small, remote control helicopter from the
center.

Questioned About Equipment

When first questioned by Federal investigators, Mr. Nichols said that the
equipment had been removed as part of a plot, sanctioned by the C.I.A., to
exchange American weapons in Libya for a piece of sophisticated Soviet radar
equipment. The intelligence agency has denied any involvement in this.

Edwin Wilson, before his indictment, lived on a large Virginia estate outside
Washington, ostensibly managing an export-import business. He opened the
business in the early 1970's while working as a consultant for a top-secret Navy
intelligence unit. As a contract agent for the C.I.A., he played a role in the
Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba and other undercover operations.

Five years ago, according to Federal prosecutors, Mr. Wilson and Mr. Terpil
concluded a business deal with Colonel Qaddafi to sell their expertise in
intelligence, arms and explosives to Libya for the training of terrorists.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW BRITISH PARTY SHOWS STRENGTH IN FIRST ELECTION

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Friday, July 17


The new Social Democratic Party, in the first electoral test of its campaign to
break the power monopoly of the two major parties, scored a symbolic victory
last night by coming within a hair's breadth of capturing the Warrington
constituency, which had been a Labor stronghold for more than half a century.

In one of the most vital by-elections in decades, Roy Jenkins, a former Labor
Home Secretary and Chancellor of the Exchequer, lost by only 1,759 votes to
Douglas Hoyle, a member of the Labor Party's left wing. In May 1979, Sir Thomas
Williams, now a judge, won the seat for Labor by 10,274 votes, one of the
largest majorities in that general election.

Neither the most optimistic Social Democratic workers, nor the public-opinion
polls, nor the leading British political commentators, had given Mr. Jenkins any
chance of approaching the 42 percent of the vote that he achieved. Exultant in
defeat, Mr. Jenkins said the result at Warrington, in northern England, would
result in ''a Social Democratic-Liberal government with a huge majority'' if it
were duplicated in a general election.

By-elections are treacherous guides to political trends, and exact
extrapolations are impossible. But Mr. Jenkins's showing reestablished him as a
major figure on the British political scene, gave his party badly needed
momentum and suggested the possibility that a major revolution in British
politics, comparable to the emergence of the Labor Party between the World Wars,
might lie over the horizon.

Conservative Finishes Third

The candidate of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Conservative Party, Stanley
Sorrell, a London bus driver, finished a badly beaten third, forfeiting his
electoral deposit by failing to gain 12.5 percent of the vote. The result was a
disaster for the Prime Minister.

Mr. Hoyle sought to highlight that aspect of the outcome in his post-election
comments, ignoring the fact that he received the lowest Labor vote in Warrington
since World War II. He said that Mrs. Thatcher had been humiliated as the voters
demonstrated ''what this country thinks of Thatcherism.''

''The monopoly of power that the Tory and Labor Parties have held since 1924 has
been busted in Warrington,'' said David Steel, the Liberal Party leader.
''Warrington has spoken for England. I suspect that it has also spoken for
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland tonight.''

In the view of most British politicians, it was the most dramatic result of a
British by-election in memory, comparable, in a sense, to the 1968 Democratic
Presidential primary in New Hampshire, when President Johnson defeated Eugene
McCarthy by so narrow a margin that Mr. McCarthy's anti-Vietnam crusade was
judged to have carried the day.

Jenkins Surpassed All Polls

No poll had shown Mr. Jenkins amassing more than 33 percent of the vote, and his
strategists, even in private late-night comments, had suggested that he would be
hard pressed to capture 35 percent.

The complete count gave Mr. Hoyle 14,280 votes or 48 percent, Mr.  Jenkins
12,521 or 42 percent, Mr. Sorrell 2,102 or 7 percent and others 605 or 2
percent.

The Social Democrats broke away from the Labor Party this spring because of
their inability to accept what they regarded as the party's increasingly extreme
views, including opposition to Britain's membership in the European Common
Market, advocacy of unilateral nuclear disarmament and an extensive program of
nationalization.

Warrington, a bedraggled industrial constituency in Cheshire situated midway
between Liverpool and Manchester, was considered highly unfavorable ground for
the Social Democrats. Their strength is mostly among middle-class voters, and
Warrington is almost exclusively a working-class town. It has been a safe Labor
seat for decades.

Aided by Liberal Party

Mr. Jenkins, who also served as president of the European Economic Community,
had campaigned rigorously. The Social Democratic effort was also aided by the
organizational skills of the long-established Liberal Party, a small centrist
group that supported the Social Democrats.

Dr. David Owen, a former Foreign Secretary, who like Mr. Jenkins is one of the
founders of the new party, said even before the returns were in that they would
demonstrate that Mrs. Thatcher had failed to show the ''breadth of vision and
understanding and sympathy that we expect from a Prime Minister when faced with
the social tension we have seen in the last fortnight.''

''You will be condemned by us and the people,'' Dr. Owen told Mrs.  Thatcher
during a debate in the House of Commons, ''until you show a similar capacity to
concentrate on the economic, unemployment and social problems that are troubling
our society.''

The Prime Minister took the onslaught calmly, remarking that ''it is not unknown
for midterm by-elections to cause most governments problems.'' She is apparently
relying on the fact that some governments in recent decades have had miserable
records in byelections but have been able to win subsequent general elections by
timing them carefully.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lord Scarman

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EX-OFFICER DENIES SPYING FOR SOVIET

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 406 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, Fla., July 16


A former Army warrant officer pleaded not guilty today to selling military
coding secrets to the Soviet Union, and a magistrate ordered him held in lieu of
$500,000 bond.

Led into court handcuffed and chained, Joseph George Helmich stood beside his
attorney in the 10-minute arraignment and answered, ''Yes, your honor,'' when
asked if he had discussed the charges with his attorney and understood the
maximum penalty, which is life in prison for each count.

The 44-year-old defendant pleaded not guilty to one count of conspiracy and
three of espionage through his court-appointed attorney, Peter Dearing.

United States Magistrate Howard T. Snyder ordered that bail remain at $500,000,
and he granted a prosecution request to investigate the origin of any bail if it
should be posted. Trial was set for Sept. 14 before Federal District Judge Susan
H. Black in Jacksonville.

Held at Undisclosed Place

Mr. Helmich, who is being held at an undisclosed place, was arrested yesterday
by agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation at his home in nearby
Jacksonville Beach.

A Federal grand jury indicted him Tuesday on charges of selling military coding
secrets to Soviet officials for $131,000 from January 1963 to July 1964. The
indictment contended that the conspiracy spanned 17 years, through August 1980.

Mr. Helmich, who joined the Army in Riviera Beach, Fla., in 1954, resigned in
1966. He has held various jobs on the East Coast since leaving the Army.

Meanwhile, family members and co-workers of Mr. Helmich painted conflicting
pictures of the defendant.  A former co-worker, Bob Wells, manager of a car
dealership in Aiken, S.C., said that Mr. Helmich had a collection of gruesome
photographs of Korean and Vietnam War victims.

Michael DeFraco, owner of a hardware store in Niagara Falls, N.Y., where Mr.
Helmich also worked, said that Mr. Helmich ''seemed to get pleasure out of
showing these'' photographs.

But Edith Butner, whose husband owns a tile company at Neptune Beach, Fla.,
where Mr. Helmich last worked, described him as a good employee and a ''very,
very nice gentleman.''

''We are in a complete state of shock,'' said Mr. Helmich's mother, Mrs. R.A.
Janin. ''I don't believe a word of it. There must be some mistake.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FULFILLMENT ELUDES SAUER, A FORMER JET

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTE, N.C.


George Sauer Jr. had just lost his job as an assistant coach with the Carolina
Chargers, a minor league football team that collapsed in a swirl of accusations,
bad debts and player demands. ''I guess,'' Sauer said, laughing, ''this is just
part of my personal unsuccess story at finding part-time jobs.''

It was also likely the final chapter in Sauer's search for a satisfactory and
secure niche in professional football, a search that began in 1965 with the Jets
in the American Football League.

Sauer, a 6-foot-2-inch, 200-pound University of Texas graduate, played six
seasons with the Jets and established himself as one of football's most
dependable wide receivers. In 1967 he caught 75 Joe Namath passes for 1,189
yards and six touchdowns to lead the A.F.L.

Over the course of his career he averaged 51 receptions per season, and, with
Pete Lammons, the tight end; Don Maynard, the flanker, and Joe Namath, the
quarterback, made up perhaps the most formidable passing attack of the 1960's.

In 1969 Sauer caught eight passes in the Jets' 16-7 Super Bowl III victory over
the Baltimore Colts. Yet even as he and his teammates reached the pinnacle of
their profession, the game's importance was beginning to fade for Sauer, a
native of Waco, Tex..

Finally, before the 1971 season, at the height of his career, Sauer announced
his retirement at the age of 27. Sauer said he was ''generally dissatisfied with
the game as it is played now,'' and went on to decry a system that ''treated
players like children'' and was, he said, designed ''to mold you into someone
easy to manipulate.''

He later revealed additional qualms about the N.F.L.'s willingness to equate
football with warfare, a stance he found particularly disturbing, coming as it
did in the midst of the controversy surrounding the Vietnam war.

'Tired of Playing'

''I think it just got kind of cheap,'' Sauer said recently. ''I got tired of
playing, I got tired of playing in the N.F.L. I got tired of the hyper
promotion. It was too much of a grotesque business. And the players were last on
the totem pole.''

But although Sauer was disillusioned with the N.F.L., he wanted to play pro
football. In 1974, when the World Football League was established, Sauer joined
the New York Stars. Suffering chronically low attendance, the Stars moved to
Charlotte, a city of 330,000. Here the team was renamed the Hornets and
attracted more than 20,000 fans per game.

But the franchise remained deeply in debt, and, one day when the team was on the
road, the Hornets' equipment was impounded. After the season, Sauer retired
again. The following fall, the W.F.L. died.

Stranded in Charlotte with no place he preferred to go, Sauer worked
sporadically, often as a carpenter, for the next four years.  He retained his
fondness for football, though, and, when the American Football Association
awarded Charlotte a franchise, Sauer joined the coaching staff.

Under the direction of its owner-head coach, Perry Moss, the Chargers had a 12-4
record, finishing second to the Jacksonville Firebirds. Playing at night in
summer heat, the team drew 6,500 fans per game, above the A.F.A. average and
apparently enough to insure success.

But Moss did not have the money to continue operating the team and he sold out
before the 1980 season to a group headed by Earl Todd, a Charlotte land
speculator. Then, just a week before the season, Moss, quit as head coach. Sauer
took his place. ''I only took the head coaching job because who else was going
to do it,'' Sauer said. ''It was one of the few philanthropic acts of my life.''

Sauer added a few variations of old Jets plays to the team's offensive
repertory, and the Chargers again finished 12-4, losing to the West Virginia
Rockets in the championship game.

Uncomfortable Moments

Sauer said he enjoyed coaching during games but didn't like ''having control
over that many people.'' He was especially uncomfortable, he said, when he had
to cut players or make them sit out a game so the team could make the league's
37-man roster limit.

After the 1980 season, Sauer took the job of assistant general manager. He wrote
news releases, manned the team office and recruited players.

Sauer also had a hand in convincing Mike Faulkiner, a former Giants (1980) and
Washington Redskins (1973-78) assistant, to take the coaching job. Strict and
quick-tempered, Faulkiner had trouble with some of the veterans. ''George is so
easygoing,'' said the team captain, Joe Crosby, ''if the world blew up right
now, he'd say, 'Well, that's the way it goes.' ''

When one of the defensive coaches quit just before the season, Sauer became the
linebacking coach.  Meanwhile, Todd and his backers were experiencing financial
difficulties. The Internal Revenue Service and the State of North Carolina took
a share of the gate receipts for back taxes after the Chargers' June 6 home
opener against West Virginia, a 20-10 loss before 3,121 fans. That night, the
players and assistant coaches - who were to be paid a 1 percent share of the
gate after stadium rentals and taxes were deducted - received $65 as their first
paychecks of the season. In previous years, they made about $175 per game.

On June 17, the players demanded guaranteed salaries of $100 a week and Todd's
ouster. They were turned down. The players then said they would quit unless
8,000 fans, worth about $350 per player, attended their June 20 home game
against the San Antonio Charros.

Faulkiner Is Dropped

The next day, Todd dismissed Faulkiner for ''instigating a player revolt,''
which Faulkiner denied. Gerald Hasty, an offensive assistant, became coach.

The Chargers defeated San Antonio, 51-39. Only 3,171 showed up.  More gate
receipts were confiscated for taxes. Each member of the team was paid $60. The
following week, despite an attempt by Commissioner Billy Kilmer to get a
compromise, the Chargers voted to walk out. After the vote, players accused of
pro-management bias were almost assaulted by teammates. Kilmer declared the
Charlotte franchise ''completely, absolutely dead.''

Finally, on July 7, the Chargers were disbanded.

'Hammer Some Nails'

Sauer emerged from the experience well regarded by all concerned.  Nevertheless,
he said he was broke and was ''going to hammer some nails for a friend'' and
then start working as a bartender. This fall he plans to get married for the
fourth time. And he said he is through with pro football, especially coaching.

''I don't have any great ambition to be a football coach,'' Sauer said. ''In
fact, I'll probably not do it again unless somebody threatens me at least with
death.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Sauer Jr.

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE TRUTH ABOUT THE CHINA-INDIA BORDER

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


To the Editor:

How stubborn is the persistence of ego-driven falsehood in international
affairs! In The Times of June 26, your New Delhi correspondent mirrors a
perennial Indian distortion of the truth on the Indian-Chinese border issue by
referring to ''the Chinese seizure of a piece of territory in northeastern
Kashmir known as Aksai Chin.''v.hen I was still in India a year ago, the last of
my 37 years in that tormented land, I made a final effort, as a naturalized
Indian, to help rectify that grievous lie but could find no newspaper with the
courage to publish my article on the border issue.

Now that I am seeking, in my native U.S.A., political asylum from Indira
Gandhi's decadent and devious regime, let me offer by way of refutation these
salient facts in the case, according to a formidable scholarly consensus:

Until 1954, the British Indian and Free Indian Governments admitted that the
frontier remained undefined, as their maps clearly showed.  The most-disputed
area, Aksai Chin, had not been seized from India and was entirely unoccupied,
being in fact ''uninhabitable.'' It had been claimed by China for centuries.

As India's foremost early diplomat, K.P.S. Menon, dared to point out, ''The
watershed principle on which we have heavily relied in other sectors of the
frontier is in the Aksai Chin area not in our favor... Moreover, it cannot be
forgotten that Aksai Chin is of no importance to India, whereas to China it is
of the utmost importance, because it is the link between two historically
troublesome regions, Tibet and Sinkiang.'' Mr. Menon was retired, his conscience
free.

Nevertheless, Prime Minister Nehru, having never consented to negotiate the
border issue, ordered in 1954 that henceforth the border be treated as defined,
and defended accordingly. India printed new maps.

Despite this high-handedness, in April of 1960 China's Prime Minister Zhou Enlai
offered to accept India's claims with respect to the bulk of the 2,500-mile
frontier, the eastern and central stretches, in return for recognition of
China's centuries-old claim to Aksai Chin. But Nehru ordered his generals to
drive out the Chinese by stages - his foolhardy ''Forward Policy'' - and the war
was on. The Indian army debacle ensued, whereupon China promptly withdrew to its
previous lines, as it had done in Korea and was to do in Vietnam.

For 19 years we have had this nonsensical refusal to acknowledge the truth on
this border issue, robbing the people of India and China of normal, creative,
mutually helpful relations.

It has long been a Soviet and Indian game to trumpet the charge that China is
the aggressor on the world scene. This has obviously become a matter for
American concern in these days of growing U.S.- Chinese teamwork in the face of
the Soviet hegemonistic thrust.  JAY HOLMES SMITH Canton, Ohio, July 7, 1981

The writer taught at the Leonard Theological College in Jabalpur and at the
International Center of Education of Sri Aurobindo Pondicherry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 17, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EARLIER REPUBLICANISM

BYLINE: By Marcus G.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


Raskin ,2WASHINGTON - Contrary to what President Reagan might think, he is
hardly following the defense and foreign policies of virtually any conservative
Republican leader of the 20th century.

The basic themes of conservative Presidents in foreign policy and defense have
been mediation and arms limitation. From Warren Harding's Washington Conference
of 1921, which limited naval armaments, to the Kellogg-Briand Pact of 1928,
which outlawed war as a way to settle disputes between nations, conservatives
believed that the United States could live most comfortably in the world by
supporting international law and world trade. Calvin Coolidge pressed for the
disarmament conference of 1927 to parallel work on that pact.

It may come as a surprise to liberals and radicals, but historically
conservatives have feared that large defense budgets would destroy capitalism,
even if a shot was not fired.

In 1932, at the Geneva disarmament conference, Herbert Hoover's representative
called for the curtailment of land and sea armaments and the abolition of
offensive weapons. A generation later, at the close of the Korean War, Senator
Robert Taft of Ohio - they used to call him Mr. Republican - insisted to Dwight
D. Eisenhower and his Cabinet that the defense budget be cut from some $69
billion to substantially less than $16 billion. Mr. Taft believed that large
defense budgets gave people in power ideas about things they could do with force
that the Korean War showed could not be done.

Furthermore, large military budgets were thought to be inflationary. As The Wall
Street Journal put it later, in 1980: ''Defense spending... .is the worst kind
of government outlay, since it eats up materials and other resources that
otherwise could be used to produce consumer goods.'' This was one reason that
Everett M.  Dirksen, Republican minority leader of the Senate for more a decade,
urged that America limit its military activity abroad, to the extent that it had
any, by relying on proxies.

In 1969, it was Richard M. Nixon who changed our military doctrine so that
instead of being able to fight 2 1/2 wars simultaneously (nuclear, general, and
local wars) we would be prepared to fight only 1 1/2 (nuclear and local), which
effectively put a cap on the defense budget. But by the mid-60's the Republicans
had bought the hawkish liberals' position on armaments. This sales campaign was
the major legacy of liberal Nelson A. Rockefellor to his Republican Party and
the nation.

The Reagan national-security budget - including intelligence and
covert-operations funds that have not been made public, and the nuclear-weapons
part of the Energy Department budget -will reach a trillion dollars for a
four-year period. In other words, Ronald Reagan is riding the Trojan horse of
military Keynesianism. The Administration's unwillingness to achieve some
measure of economic growth with fairness in our society, and its disregard of
fullemployment and reindustrialization measures for the civilian sector, have
left Mr. Reagan with the traditional statist method of keeping internal peace -
namely, by ballooning the defense budget.

Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger has disingenuously called for an
''intensified'' modernization of American conventional forces and the
defense-supply system - a $2 billion increase in fiscal 1981 and a $13.7 billion
increase in fiscal 1982 - ''as the Defense Department's contribution to the
revitalization of our industrial base.''

The Administration is in effect making the same fiscal and monetary mistakes
that during the Vietnam War by Lyndon B. Johnson and his budget director,
Charles L. Schultze. President Johnson refused to raise taxes or issue wage and
price controls in a period of high defense spending. The Johnson-Schultze error
began the modern era of inflation, unbalanced budgets, and misallocation of
expenditures and resources between the private and public sectors.

What about the execution of foreign policy? It is usually not recorded as such,
but it was Henry L. Stimson, Secretary of State under Mr. Hoover, who paved the
way for the Good Neighbor Policy. Mr. Hoover and Mr. Stimson believed in the
importance of ending our military presence in Latin America - namely, in
Nicaragua, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic.

One can hardly recognize a more different approach to foreign affairs than that
promulgated by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., Mr. Weinberger, and
Richard V. Allen, Mr. Reagan's national security adviser. These men can see no
limits to what American power can do, or for that matter any limits to the
American triumphal mission. How far away this view of reality is from that of
Coolidge, Kellogg, Stimson, Harding, Hoover, and Taft. They would never have
condoned language that suggested America's need for limitless military power.
They would never have argued that our nation suffered from an ''image of
weakened will and irresolution,'' as Mr.  Weinberger put it. They would not have
argued that we should pursue inflexible diplomatic policies and military
confrontation with the Soviet Union or other adversaries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Marcus G. Raskin is a senior fellow of the Institute for Policy Studies, a
research organization.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 18, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MANY IN SALVADOR DUBIOUS OF U.S. VOTE POLICY

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, July 17


Despite the Reagan Administration statement yesterday stressing the importance
of free elections in El Salvador, there is skepticism in many quarters here that
such elections are possible. And church leaders and some foreign diplomats here
still feel that any solution to the conflict must include negotiations with the
leftist guerrillas, a course that Washington continues to rule out.

''How can there be elections?'' a business leader said recently.  ''What are we
going to do? Campaign with loudspeakers mounted on top of our armored cars?''

The business leader said that while he was working to establish a political
party that will be more economically conservative than the Christian Democrats,
who control the civilian side of the junta, he is reluctant to be a candidate
himself. He said he fears violence from supporters of the Christian Democrats as
much as from leftists.

In what the State Department described as ''a clarification'' of United States
policy, Thomas O. Enders, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs, said in a speech yesterday that the United States supported a
''political solution,'' a phrase often used by Salvadoran Government leaders as
well. But in this country the phrase has two very different meanings. One
''political solution'' is elections; another is negotiations.

Mr. Enders made it clear that the United States supports elections and rejects
negotiation among the warring factions.  While pursuing the electoral solution,
he said, the United States will continue military and economic assistance to the
militarycivilian junta, which is fighting the leftist-led insurgency.

'Save Economy, Stop Violence'

In a recent interview, Ambassador Deane R. Hinton described the American goal in
El Salvador this way: ''Save the economy, stop the violence, have the elections
and ride into the sunset.''

''Pacification and elections - just like in Vietnam,'' is how one Latin American
diplomat characterized the United States policy.  Another Latin American
diplomat said: ''The United States accepts elections as the only solution. I say
any solution that is not violent.'' He added that several Latin American and
most European countries wanted negotiations.

Msgr. Arturo Rivera Damas, the senior Roman Catholic official in El Salvador,
also reiterated a few days ago that the church supports a negotiated settlement.


Some Favor Negotiations

Although Salvadoran Government leaders have said in public that they will not
negotiate with the leftists, a Cabinet minister said last week that some
Government officials would like to negotiate but that it was impossible because
the army was completely opposed.

If civilians in the Government ''started talking to the left, we wouldn't reach
the border,'' he said.  A senior Government official said last week that the
left wants negotiations. One of the conditions, according to the official, is a
cease-fire.

''The army will not agree to that,'' he said.  Salvadorans have not had a
democratically elected president for more than half a century and those who are
urging negotiations do so in part because they do not consider meaningful
elections possible at this time given the level of violence.

Voting Mandatory Over 18

Voting will be mandatory for everyone over the age of 18, but in a recent
interview the head of the Electoral Council, Dr. Jorge Bustamante, said that if
51 percent of those eligible voted, ''we will consider the election
successful.''

Dr. Bustamante acknowledged that what he called ''the ambience of violence''
primarily deprived peasants of their franchise. Peasants provide the leftist
revolutionary forces with a significant portion, if not most, of their support.

On the other end of the political spectrum, the Democratic Revolutionary Front,
a broad-based coalition that includes disaffected Christian Democrats, liberal
priests and Marxists, will not be allowed to participate in the election unless
it severs its relationship with the Farbundo Marti National Liberation Front, a
coalition of guerrilla units.

The president of the Democratic Revolutionary Front is Manuel Guillermo Ungo. In
1972 Mr. Ungo was elected vice president as the running mate of Jose Napoleon
Duarte, who is now the head of the junta. The army never allowed them to assume
their offices.

Opposed by the Army

A Cabinet minister said last week that the army would not allow Mr. Ungo to be a
candidate in new elections.  Mr. Enders said yesterday that the National
Revolutionary Movement, which is part of the Democratic Revolutionary Front
coalition and is also headed by Mr. Ungo, would be allowed to take part in the
voting. The National Revolutionary Movement is a ''small, insignificant'' party,
one diplomat said yesterday, and the attempt to involve it in the elections ''is
a maneuver to split the left,'' he said.

''If you were Mr. Ungo, would you participate in the elections?'' a senior
church official asked last week. He was alluding to events of last November,
when six Democratic Revolutionary Front leaders were killed after being seized
in the church's legal aid office in San Salvador.

Reacting to the speech by Mr. Enders, and particularly Washington's rejection of
a negotiated settlement of the civil war, a Latin American diplomat said
yesterday, ''There are no indications it will be a short war.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 18, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. RESOLUTION ON CAMBODIA KEEPS DOORS OPEN FOR POL POT

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 508 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., July 17


China succeeded today in blocking a United Nations conference on Cambodia from
placing obstacles in the path of a possible return to power by the deposed Pol
Pot faction.

A gathering of 92 nations ended its weeklong deliberations here with a
declaration acknowledging that the Pol Pot group and other insurgent factions
can keep their arms. The document implicitly permits the return of the Pol Pot
group to administer Phnom Penh if and when United Nations-supervised elections
are ever held there.

The conference, however, had a marked air of unreality. It was designed to open
the way for negotiations on withdrawal of the 200,000 Vietnamese troops who now
occupy Cambodia and on free elections. But neither Vietnam, whose soldiers
deposed Pol Pot in 1979, nor its ally, the Soviet Union, attended. They called
the meeting illegal and one-sided.

The only practical result of the week of talk appears to be the creation of a
committee of seven nations charged with ''maintaining contact with the parties
to the conflict.'' The hope is that they will draw Vietnam into talks.

Door Is Left Ajar

Outside the meeting, Ha Van Lau, Hanoi's delegate to the United Nations, said he
would not recognize any committee created by the conference. But he pointedly
refused to say that Vietnam would not meet with the group if it dropped its
conference label, and he thus left the door slightly ajar for talks.

China's success in defending the rights of the Pol Pot faction, which it backs
with weapons and aid, was all the more remarkable because China was backed only
by Chile and Pakistan, diplomats said.

China maintains that the Pol Pot group, which sits in Cambodia's seat in the
United Nations, is the victim of Vietnam's aggression and that it is the
legitimate government of Cambodia.

The Southeast Asian countries, led by Singapore, had tried to hamper a
restoration of power to the Pol Pot group, which is accused of actions while it
was in power that took perhaps three million Cambodian lives. Singapore drafted
a declaration that would disarm all factions in Cambodia and provide an interim
or neutral administration when elections are held.

But the final draft, a product of long bargaining, only urges ''appropriate
measures to insure that armed factions'' will not disrupt elections or coerce
voters once Vietnam's troops pull out.

This would give the Pol Pot faction, with about 25,000 guerrillas, a great
advantage. Its only armed rival, led by the non-Communist Son Sann, claims about
2,500 guerrillas. According to the Pol Pot group, the Son Sann forces are
engaged more in smuggling than fighting the Vietnamese.

Instead of Singapore's call for a neutral administrator during elections, the
final document merely urges ''appropriate measures for the maintenance of law
and order.'' That could let an armed Pol Pot group be present in the capital
during the vote.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 18, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Patents;
New Radio Pinpoints Crash Sites

BYLINE: By Stacy V. Jones

SECTION: Section 2; Page 38, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


WASHINGTON A NEW survival radio for pilots whose planes have been forced down in
inhospitable terrain will guide a rescue craft to within 14 feet of a crash
victim. The ranging system has been invented by Edward J.  Nossen, an engineer
in the RCA Government Systems division at Camden, N.J.

The system, covered by patent 4,278,977, received by the RCA Corporation this
week, was developed under contract with the Air Force, which is conducting
flight tests with the unit.

Existing radios send out constant signals that show direction but not distance,
and search planes may have difficulty pinpointing the crash site.

The new equipment consists of a pilot's radio and another in the search craft.
The pilot's radio responds to an interrogation signal from the search craft, and
the time delay between the two signals is converted to distance.

The system allows the radio signals to be encoded in any of 16 million codes.
This wide selection makes it almost impossible for an enemy to exploit the
system. Such enemy operations, taking advantage of old radio rescue systems,
were carried out during the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 18, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 48, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 577 words


Questions appear on page 12.

1. The alligator, known as Albert, escaped from the Denver Zoo and took refuge
in a pond, only occasionally poking its snout above the surface. Zookeepers
captured it after 28 days and nights.

2. The decentralization of government.  3. Burglary.  4. Conoco Inc., for which
E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, the Mobil Corporation and Joseph E. Seagram &
Sons are in a multibillion-dollar bidding war.

5. The economic summit meetings of seven major industrialized democracies. Since
the talks in Venice last summer, new leaders have taken office in the United
States, Japan, France and Italy.

6. Approval of a new sugar substitute, aspartame.  7. Antitrust laws. The Court
ruled that baseball was not interstate commerce and was therefore not subject to
antitrust laws.  8. Less.  9. A pesticide that is being sprayed in parts of
California in an effort to destroy Mediterranean fruit flies.  10. Chairman of
the board of the City Center of Music and Drama.  11. Ben Plucknett; his two
recent world records for the discus throw were annulled after tests revealed
traces of anabolic steroids, synthetically produced male hormones that promote
muscle growth, in his blood.

12. He is the President's nominee for director of the Bureau of the Census.  13.
The Mobil Oil Corporation said the increases on each gallon of gasoline, diesel
fuel and jet fuel sold in New York State were necessitated by state taxes
recently levied on oil companies as part of the package to aid mass transit.

14. The Woman's Building at the Columbian Exposition in Chicago.  15. The
election for the leadership of the Polish Communist Party, which, for the first
time in the Soviet bloc, will be done by secret ballot with a choice of
contenders.

16. William J. Casey, the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and Max
C. Hugel, who resigned as the agency's Deputy Director of Operations. A recent
Federal Court decision said Mr.  Casey had knowingly participated in an
investment offering in 1968 that ''omitted and misrepresented facts'' to
investors. Mr. Hugel was accused of participating in fraudulent securities
transations when he managed an electronics business in the 1970's.

17. The bog turtle. Although it is on New York State's endangered species list,
the Federal Government does not consider it endangered.  18. The Mills Brothers.
19. Secretary of the Interior James G. Watt proposed canceling an order that
bars such vehicles on Federal property when it has been determined that they
damage soil, vegetation, wildlife or other resources.

20. Frank Shorter and Bill Rodgers. Shorter won by nearly 100 yards over
Rodgers, who took second place in a field of 1,125 finishers.  21. Cambodia,
where Vietnamese troops are stationed. The comment referred to the absence of
Vietnam and the Soviet Union at the conference, which made negotiations
impossible.

22. The telephone industry and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Theater;
THE RISE AND RISE OF SWOOSIE KURTZ

BYLINE: By ROBERT BERKVIST

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1602 words


Her dressing table is awash in all the tools and talismans of the theatrical
trade, from cold cream to congratulatory telegrams, from artful wig to
throat-soothing yogurt and herb tea. There are, however, some mementos that
instantly mark this island of clutter as belonging to one, and only one, New
York actress. Three inscribed certificates - from the Outer Critics' Circle, the
Drama Desk and the Tony Awards - attest to the very special gifts of the
inimitably named Swoosie Kurtz.

Miss Kurtz made her clean sweep of Broadway's major prizes at the New Apollo,
where she is in residence in Lanford Wilson's bittersweet comedy ''Fifth of
July.'' As Gwen Landis, a pill-popping copper heiress cum rock singer with a
vocabulary as colorful as her frizzy mop of flame-red hair, she is by turns
brassily funny, vulnerable, sexy and unexpectedly moving.

''Gawd,'' she exclaims at one point, teetering out onto a farmhouse porch to
wash down a restorative tranquilizer with a gulp of wine, ''smell that goddamn
air.'' Her performance has garnered a set of reviews that any stage mother would
be proud to have cast in bronze.  Although she is fond of describing herself as
''a late bloomer,'' it has been obvious for some time that Miss Kurtz's career
is nothing if not in full flower.

''It's such a miracle we're here,'' she said to a recent visitor as she stirred
a mug of tea. ''Let's face it, it's a miracle to have a straight play on
Broadway for more than two nights, especially when it's not British. Besides,
I've been in too many plays where I've gotten love letters from the critics and
then the play has gone pffft.'' Mr. Wilson's play, about the reunion of a group
of 60's activists, one of whom has been crippled in Vietnam, opened on Broadway
to a mixed reception last fall. However, the show was favorably re-reviewed
after a major cast change several months later -Richard Thomas replaced
Christopher Reeve as the Vietnam veteran - and now seems destined for a lengthy
run.

Miss Kurtz - her first name rhymes with Lucy, not woozy, and comes from the
nickname of the bomber her father flew during World War II, a wearisome
explanation she has almost resorted to having printed on business cards - looks
at the flamboyant role of Gwen as almost a therapeutic experience. ''It gives me
the nerve to say and do things I would never have the nerve for otherwise,'' she
said, giggling.  ''I'm much too cautious and circumspect and basically shy. But
Gwen just opens the floodgates so I can do outrageous things. You know, if
something comes into her head, it comes right out her mouth.''

She says she doesn't particularly identify with Gwen, nor, in fact, does she
find it necessary to dredge up parallel feelings within herself in order to
bring off a successful stage portrait. ''I was never into drugs or the Berkeley
type of campus demonstration,'' she explained. ''I was sheltered from that, or
maybe just too ignorant to know what was going on in the world. In any case, I
assimilate a part all at once. It just comes in at me.

''I work from the outside in, which is not to say I work externally. That's very
looked down upon by a lot of actors.'' Miss Kurtz paused, frowned and intoned,
'' 'Hmmmm. You mean she doesn't start with the inside feelings?' '' and then
laughed delightedly. ''I learned a lot from my two years in England, where I
studied at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art,'' she said. ''I learned
to get right on with it in rehearsal, to simply 'have a bash.' So that's what I
do, with total commitment. And then I work backward, to figure out how and why
things happen to my character and the others.

Miss Kurtz, who is more articulate than many actors about the mechanics of her
craft, says she is not much for elaborate theories and emotional analyses.
''It's whatever works for you,'' she said with a shrug. ''I think that's true of
a lot of the younger actors these days. We're more eclectic, and we're fairly
respectful of each other's methods. I'm a great one for the rhythm and the
physicalization of character. I can't just sit and mull over how I'm supposed to
feel. If I do that, nothing happens. But if I can get the way a character walks
or talks, or even sometimes if I can see my costume, then I'm on my way.''

She recalled rehearsing ''Tartuffe'' with John Wood in 1977. Cast as Mariane,
daughter of Tartuffe's chief victim, Miss Kurtz was having trouble entering the
world of Moliere. Finally, she said, the director Stephen Porter told her to
imagine herself moving about on a little wheel, instead of feet. ''As soon as I
tried it, I knew it was the handle I needed,'' she said.

The 1977-78 season was a crucial one for Miss Kurtz. Having made a memorable
impression in ''Tartuffe,'' she moved on to the play that brought her before a
mass audience. As a sex-obsessed would-be writer in the Phoenix Theater
production of Wendy Wasserstein's ''Uncommon Women and Others,'' Miss Kurtz very
nearly stole the show from an uncommonly gifted cast. The play drew
standing-room audiences to the tiny Marymount Manhattan and was later shown on
public television. ''People still stop me on the streets to talk about that
show,'' she says. ''Everybody loved that character. I'd have to say that
'Uncommon Women' was the play that really flipped things over for me.''

Miss Kurtz closed out that season in Christopher Durang's musical spoof, ''A
History of the American Film.'' The show quickly joined her pffft! category, but
once again her own reviews were first class. Her season's labors brought her a
Tony nomination for ''Tartuffe,'' an Obie and a Drama Desk nomination for
''Uncommon Women'' and a Drama Desk Award for her singing, dancing and acting in
''American Film.'' ''It was sort of a first for an actress,'' she says modestly.

In the spring of 1980, she journeyed to the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven to
play the secondary role of Honey in Edward Albee's ''Who's Afraid of Virginia
Woolf?,'' a revival that starred Mike Nichols and Elaine May. ''It was,'' she
says, ''one of the greatest experiences of my life.'' Miss Kurtz cites that
performance, in particular, as convincing evidence of her dramatic range. ''I'm
not a comedienne,'' she says, ''I'm an actress.''

She relished the challenges of that play and ''Tartuffe'' and looks forward to
performing in more classics. ''I'd like to do some Shakespeare, especially,''
she said. ''I never had any interest in the roles everybody wants to play -
Juliet, for example - but I would like to play one of King Lear's daughters, or
maybe do 'The Taming of the Shrew.' On the other hand, I don't have a list of
roles in mind as landmarks for me to hit. I just take on each one as it comes
along.

''I just missed the ingenue trap, and then suddenly this whole different side of
me flared up and I've done a string of neurotic, foul-mouthed women. But people
tell me I'm almost unrecognizable from role to role, that they don't see Swoosie
up there, but Gwen or some other character. That may actually keep me from
becoming a recognizable star, but it's exciting to me. Every time I manage to
tap something I didn't know was there, I realize that the gap between me and any
given role becomes less and less over the years.''

Was her two-year training stint in England worthwhile? Yes and no, says Miss
Kurtz. Training abroad meant a certain estrangement from the American theater
scene and that, she says, was a ''tremendous disadvantage'' for a beginner such
as herself. ''When I came back to New York from London, I knew no one,'' she
said, ''and no one knew me.'' On every hand, it seemed to her, the plum acting
jobs were going to graduates from Juilliard or the Yale Drama School. She
watched the soaring careers of others and thought, bitterly, ''They know all the
directors, and they all know each other. I know zilch.''

''It took me a long time to catch up,'' she said. ''But I'd always had this
dream about going to an English drama school. And I really don't think you can
get that training anywhere in America - the training in voice, diction and
movement. But then, I'm like a sponge. I'll take advice from anybody. If an
usher tells me, 'Gee, Miss Kurtz, I really liked the way you did that scene
tonight,' I'll listen to what he's saying and maybe it will be something I can
use.

''My performance is an amalgam of a lot of people making suggestions. There are
only a few really great directors, you know, but I've been lucky enough to work
with three or four absolutely brilliant ones. And I never throw away the notes
they've given me, to apply to other plays. I still have the notes Brian Murray
gave me when he directed me in Tom Stoppard's 'Enter a Free Man' back in 1974.''

Miss Kurtz recently finished work on a small part in the film version of ''The
World According to Garp,'' in which she says she plays ''a hot-pants hooker, a
real cliche New York whore.'' She is hoping for another film role soon,
''something major'' that would do for her on a mass-audience basis what ''Kramer
vs. Kramer'' did for her friend and fellow New York actress Meryl Streep.

''It'll happen,'' she said, flashing her best Swoosie smile. ''It's just a
question of when, and I think it will be soon.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Swoosie Kurtz in "Fifth of July"

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Other World Events;
U.N. Addresses Absent Vietnamese

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 106 words


Vietnam hinted last week that it might be willing to talk to other countries
about Cambodia, provided they leave their United Nations credentials at home. A
conference on Cambodia at the world organization named seven countries -
Thailand, Malaysia, Japan, Sri Lanka, Nigeria, Senegal and the Sudan - to urge
Hanoi to pull its 200,000 troops out of Cambodia. Vietnam and the Soviet Union
boycotted the conference, making it possible for China to insist on a
declaration that would permit its favorite Cambodians, the Pol Pot regime, and
other insurgents to keep their weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOTALITARIANISM HAS THE EDGE IN REPREHENSIBILITY

BYLINE: ''Free to Go to the Devil,'' Op-Ed, July 6

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 465 words


To the Editor:

While it would be difficult to find fault with Hans Koning's contention

Ed, July 6) that manifestations of human-rights violations in the larger sense
are more prevalent in authoritarian than in totalitarian states and that, since
Communist regimes do not ''play ball'' with the financial community,
human-rights violations behind the Iron Curtain seemingly get more attention
than similar actions in so-called ''friendly countries,'' which share our belief
in anti-Communism and God, his contention that Communists run their countries
for the good of 90 percent of their population cannot be accepted on its merit.
It lacks historical perspective.

For the most part, today's Communist states are well beyond the revolutionary
stage. Ruling Communist parties are no longer remaking their societies (though
some are reforming them). Order has largely been achieved by means of force,
repression and intimidation.

What types of anti-regime behavior will be tolerated is widely understood and
rarely challenged.  Within most of these countries, well-entrenched elites have
emerged, whose power cannot be measured by monetary assets and whose actions
cannot be explained by ideology. These elites are concerned with preserving
their own positions, and they are able to do so by maintaining a minimum
standard of living for the mass and by actively preventing the formation of
potential opposition.

No authoritarian state has ever committed genocide. Totalitarian regimes,
whether of the left or of the right, attempt to establish a monopoly of power
and communication within their countries. If successful, they are able to
eliminate opposition.

Authoritarian governments do not seek to reorder their societies to the same
degree as totalitarian governments. Traditional interest groups, such as the
church, the military, the bureaucracy and the business community, continue to
exercise some influence, though they are usually pre-empted by the rulers. As a
result, manifestations of dissatisfaction with a given regime are of a different
scope from that in totalitarian countries.

While it is true that self-declared Communist regimes have over time raised the
standard of living of the vast majority of their population

(though often after killing elites or forcing them to flee abroad), some
revolutionary states, such as Vietnam and Ethiopia, have not been able to
satisfy even the basic needs of their people. Ignoring the well-being of the
mass is not a feature peculiar to right-wing authoritarian regimes.

To examine human rights with anything less than a universal standard is
hypocritical; to equate successful repression with acceptance of a social system
as fulfilling the needs of a people is fallacious.
ETHAN S. BURGER, Great Neck, L.I., July 8, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon of a smiling Adolph Hitler

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN, MRS. THATCHER, AND ULSTER

BYLINE: By Tim Pat Coogan

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: DUBLIN


The time has come for President Reagan to use the ''special relationship''
between the United States and Britain to advise Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher
to disengage from Northern Ireland.

In the overall Anglo-Irish context, the Ulster situation is like that of an
off-course airplane in a tailspin. It must be pulled out of the tailspin but the
course must also be corrected.

Mrs. Thatcher's unemployment-fueled riots in England differ from Northern
Ireland's riots insofar as the United States is concerned, because the English
riots don't have any fund-raising spinoff in the United States.

British policy on Ulster is in ruins. Britain tried to criminalize the Irish
Republican Army so as to cut across its doctrine of historical justification,
which is that the Provisional I.R.A.  represents the most recent attempt in the
800-year-old battle to get the British out of Ireland. In their attempt to make
the Maze Prison hunger strikers appear to be ordinary criminals, the British
have overlooked Irish, and particularly Irish-American, psychology and history.
Because of this history, I.R.A prisoners in the Irish Republic are accorded the
prisoner-of-war status now being sought in Northern Ireland. They can wear their
own clothes and abstain from prison work.

The ideological tenacity of the hunger strikers, who refuse to be considered
criminals and insist instead upon prisoner-of-war status, and of their families,
has made nonsense of ''criminalization.'' It has led to the electoral defeat of
the last Irish Government, led by Charles Haughey, and already has involved the
two-party coalition led by his successor, Dr. Garrett FitzGerald, in serious
controversy with Mrs. Thatcher over the contemptuous treatment of the peace
efforts of the Irish Bishops' Commission for Justice and Peace and the death of
a hunger striker, Joe McDonnell

Four hours after Mr. McDonnell died, on July 7, the British sent an unidentified
civil servant to read ''settlement'' proposals to Mr. McDonnell's starving
comrades that were derisory in themselves and, in the circumstances, highly
inflammatory. A few days later, on July 12, yet another hunger striker, Martin
Hurson, died. A hunger striker who may die soon is Ciaran Doherty, an elected
member of the Dail, the Parliament - one of the deputies elected in abstentia -
who made the crucial difference to Mr. Haughey in the June election, denying him
needed parliamentary support. And behind him on a conveyor belt of death loom
the spectral figures of several other hunger strikers.

The United States has a greater responsibility for what is happening in Ireland
than merely to supply the I.R.A. with carbines unofficially, or officially to
rest content with occasional statements on Ireland from politicians, even those
as eminent and respected as ''the four horsemen,'' Thomas P. O'Neill, Edward M.
Kennedy, Daniel P. Moynihan, and Hugh Carey. Moreover, the Irish-American
''clout'' is diffused because of the American political feud between this
grouping and that led by Representative Mario Biaggi, the chairman of the Ad Hoc
Congressional Committee for Irish Affairs. Healing this split should be a
priority for friends of Ireland.

What is needed is for the White House to interest itself - actively. Not merely
because President Reagan is of Irish descent, but because Northern Ireland has
become destabilized as a result of British policies, and the ingredients for all
Ireland to become a Western European ''Cuba'' are there, too. The last three
Irish administrations have all fallen because of the political strife in the
North.

Mrs. Thatcher has proved to be the I.R.A.'s best fund-raiser in America in its
history, but must this mean only guns and bombs? The answer is: It must, if
official America does nothing. Nature abhors a vacuum.

I believe that the United States has a nobler and constructive role to play.
Surely the ''special relationship'' between America and England allows Mr.
Reagan, who admires Mrs. Thatcher, to politely point out to his friend that
Ulster has become John Bull's ''Vietnam.'' Only, instead of monks setting
themselves ablaze to die in an instant in agony, in Ireland young men are
voluntarily dying by centimeters over a period of months.

America should help Britain to apply the lessons of Vietnam.  Britain must
withdraw, prudently, step by step. A civil war is not inevitable but one could
occur without proper planning. A precipitous pullout such as that of Belgium
from the Congo would be utterly wrong. Britain must not only set a timetable for
departure; it must set up the necessary shock-absorber mechanism.

The sort of steps England must take are as follows: A community police force
acceptable to Roman Catholics should be established to patrol districts where
the Royal Ulster Constabulary, the Ulster police force, which is hated by many,
is barred today and where crime flourishes. The Republic, the European Economic
Community, and again, most essentially, the United States, must reach an
agreement about a way to provide financial aid to help the North survive
economically without Britain's presence.

This is no pipedream. With all its problems, the Republic has become a thriving
Western European democracy; the North, a political slum in which, literally, the
only growth industry is prison building. The only benign outside force that can
help extract the situation from the poisoned political aspic of the moment is
the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Tim Pat Coogan is editor of The Irish Press, a daily newspaper, and author of
''On the Blanket,'' a book about the H-block protest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sinn Fein flag greeting Eamon DeValera in
Dublin, in 1917

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEMOIRS OF A NEW CHINA HAND

BYLINE: A.M. Rosenthal; A.M. Rosenthal is the executive editor of The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 8138 words


For years, I had avoided going to China. It is possible, even likely, that the
Chinese Government and masses were not aware of this deprivation.

After all, they had not lacked for foreign company, journalistic or touristic.
Platoons of American editors and publishers had been to China, permanent offices
were established and bureau chiefs were already pleading with the Chinese for
visas for more reporters and for bigger apartments. Shelves of books revealing
the essential truths about China and the Chinese had marched quickly from
typewriters to remainder bins, and in scores of newspaper series, television
specials and magazine articles, poor China had been richly and repeatedly
dissected, analyzed, praised, scolded, condemned and beatified.

As for tourists, China had been booked solid for years, and one unfortunate
planeload of travelers had been whipped from airport to Great Wall to Forbidden
City to Summer Palace without rest until it was revealed to them that there were
no hotel rooms in Peking that night, so back to the tarmac, the plane and
overnight in another town.

There had been ordinary tourists, political tourists, professional groups and
hobby groups. Even the garden-club tours were well under way before I got there,
and it was becoming a little chic not to go to China, like not wearing designer
labels.

My reluctance to go to China puzzled me a bit. I had spent six years as a
foreign correspondent in India and Japan, and the East had been my particular
interest and fascination for decades. In my reportorial youth, I had daydreamed
of a China assignment, but when it did open to American journalists in the early
1970's and the opportunity came, I avoided even a visit.

Of course, the reason was there in my mind all along, and when I did decide to
go it popped to the surface.  I had avoided China because I had become bored to
death by MarxistLeninistliberationist jargon. Nine early years at the United
Nations, two years in Poland, dinner encounters in New York with the Maoist
chic, the years of reading solemn Western explanations of the glories of the
Great Leap Forward and how those intellectuals were really benefiting from
shoveling manure during the Cultural Revolution -and then reading the quick,
unembarrassed reversals - all this made my brain glaze over. And the very
thought of listening to more tiresome propaganda, the prospect of long days with
frozen smiles on my weary face, made my muscles twitch.

I reveal here for the first time that the great intellectual weapon of the
Communists is their superb ability, honed by decades of practice, to induce
boredom. They say the same trite things over and over with such total
conviction, with such sublime deafness to countervailing argument, that the
opposing mind, debilitated by years of logic, retreats or succumbs.  So, it must
be said at the beginning that when curiosity finally triumphed over slogan
sickness, I traveled to China with one suitcase, a duffel bag and an awful lot
of other baggage in my mind.

Everybody travels with some kind of baggage in the brain, and I lay out for
inspection what I took with me: Totalitarianism and authoritarianism are
repugnant to my soul; dictatorships, left or right, are blood kin; Communism is
organized mismanagement; apologists for third-world tyrannies are racist and
contemptuous of the people they profess to support; freedom of expression is not
simply the property of the well-fed but can be understood by the poor and even
the hungry.

I once believed parliamentary democracy had a chance at triumphing in the poor
nations, but Indira Gandhi's scornful assumption of power, riding over the
cravenness of the Indian press and judiciary and civil service in 1975, gave me
strong doubts. Eventually, she was thrown out through the democratic process and
returned through the democratic process, but her coup d'etat had torn the fabric
of faith, and that is her legacy.

I do not believe increased production necessarily means increased liberalization
- see Soviet Union.  But I do believe that the fate, future and duty of people
who live in the grace of liberty lie in fighting for and supporting those who
loosen the bonds instead of tightening them. Even to suggest that cherished
freedoms are not really necessary for others seems to me spiritually unbecoming.

I did not go politically bland about China. I felt that Mao had been revealed to
be not only tyrannical but possessed of a lunatic destructiveness still being
measured in lost decades and lost lives and dreams for China.

I believed also that his successors were trying to rescue China from the Maoist
debacle. But they seemed to be pulling back on their tentative experiments with
freedoms and were themselves haunted by the specter of the return of Maoists.

And I knew I would not be dealing with a bunch of Chinese libertarians but with
dedicated Communists searching for something more workable, less oppressive than
Maoism.

I wanted to see how they were doing, what they were doing.  I went as a man
blessed by full freedom but understanding that some liberty is better than none
and wondering whether the Chinese, at last, were getting a taste of life's sweet
fruit. Suddenly, I was eager for China. wish I were a poet, because poets are
the best reporters. They tell you what counts and they do it with few words.
They tell the truth so plainly that every reader is struck immediately by the
reality of truth and doesn't need facts and figures to back it up. Someday a
poet will write the best about China as the poets write best eventually about
everything, damn them.

If I were a poet, I would write about the looks I saw on some Chinese faces,
because they remain with me even before I consult all those notes and tapes I
have on my desk.

There was that fine, sly, triumphant look on the face of the commune official in
a county seat in Inner Mongolia, when he caught my little political thrust and
returned it.

In the previous week, I had been hearing a lot about the Gang of Four -Mao's
widow and her hapless cohorts -and how they were responsible for ruining China,
for fire, flood and general all-round misery. The official was giving me a
little lecture on the economy of sheepherding in Inner Mongolia and was talking
about the wolf problem. Lots of wolves around, and the herdsmen were organizing
wolf hunts.

''Tell me,'' I said, ''were there more wolves in Mongolia during the rule of the
Gang of Four?'' He thought a brief moment after the translation, held up a
finger, grinned and said, ''Yes, there were. That was because wolf hunts were
poorly organized during the rule of the Gang of Four.''

There was the quick, tough look on the face of the Mayor of Shanghai, replacing
official aloofness, when he made it clear that he didn't give freedom of
expression very high priority, but that the old days of repression were not
going to come back either.

I remember the flash of anguish and then the mask that dropped over the face of
the girl in the reformatory when she told me why she was there - ''for having
affairs with boys.''

There was the look of amazement, utter amazement, on the face of the old fellow
near the market in Xian as he stared at me in my Red Flag, a fancy Communist
limousine, and we took each other's picture, I with a camera.

I would write more about faces that suddenly looked up from work and smiled with
total warmth at a total stranger, and I would write a lot about hands and feet
and backs.

There are machines in China, but what counts is the hand and the arm, the load
on the back, walking down the road, pulling or carrying or pushing. Digging,
chopping, hewing - a country powered by muscle and fueled by sweat.

If I were a poet, I would write about love in China and Chinese brides. I think
I will, anyway, later.  I was in China something less than four weeks, and much
of it was quite official - officially greeted, official guides everywhere,
official policy expounded virtually always, officials met and officials
interviewed.

And yet, I did not feel harried, hounded or particularly constrained. I was in a
controlled society whose officials were behaving as openly as they safely could,
which was not very.

I was in a country that wanted friends - everywhere there was a rather touching
boast on a poster: ''We have friends all over the world!''

But I was in a country where officials were uncertain about the future and
worried that the past might be lying in wait for the overly candid.

Nobody was taking chances. But I picked my own itinerary: Peking, to find out
what the Chinese thought they should tell me; the mining town of Datong, an
overnight train ride from the capital, to see the Buddhist caves; Inner
Mongolia, because it sounded romantic; Xian, to get into the interior and see
some archeological digs; Chongqing, because it was in the huge province of
Sichuan, a world of 100 million; the Yangtze River, to see the gorges; Yichang,
to visit the nearby dam; Wuhan, to find out about flood and drought, China's
twin demons, and Shanghai and Canton. No ground broken, but no place refused.

I traveled on a private visit, but I was part of a Chinese ''unit.'' Everybody
in China is part of a unit - commune, shop, office, factory or street unit. The
unit governs life - rations, apartments, jobs, housing, pay, marriage, travel.
And the unit exercises political control. or purposes of my visit, I was
attached as a guest to a Foreign Affairs Ministry unit. That meant an official
of the Foreign Affairs Ministry, who traveled with me as pleasant shepherd and
translator, arranged for my tickets and hotels and rendered punctilious,
to-the-penny accounts at every stop.

You don't just hop on a plane or a train in China; permission to travel from
city to city has to be granted first, then transportation and hotels have to be
arranged.

It's all done through the unit.  (Some units have more clout than others. In
Peking, I was told, it was better to be a guest of a municipal unit of some kind
than of the foreign office, because the local government controls the best hotel
and is likely to pay more attention to requests from the equivalent of Ed Koch's
office than to the equivalent of Al Haig's.It took a little doing, but I got
in.)

In each city, there was a conference about what I would do. If I wanted to see a
politician, I saw a politician. Communes were produced, and so were model
workers and museums and a factory (one; all I wished) and a dreadful visit to a
university. Nothing much volunteered by the Government, little declined. All
quite correct and pleasant.

But anybody who visits China journalistically or diplomatically or touristically
and dreams of ''breaking away'' is not entirely realistic.

The political system does not permit it. And the Chinese simply do not have the
plane room, train room, hotel room or any other kind of room to let lots of
foreigners wander around at will. Scarcity itself becomes an instrument of
control - for Chinese as well as for foreigners.

But if I wanted to stop and talk to somebody, or if James Sterba, the Peking
correspondent of The Times, with whom I traveled, wanted to talk to a soda-pop
salesman about pushcart capitalism, nobody objected. If I wanted to walk by
myself, I did.

A foreigner is never really alone in China - he is too interesting to the
Chinese. It is impossible, for instance, just to drop in to any restaurant for a
meal.

It was a small but annoying restriction. Like all restrictions, it tells
something.

When I insisted on dining away from the hotel, there was a great deal of back
and forth on the phone, and when I arrived at the restaurant, I found we were
almost always curtained off from the Chinese diners.

In part, this was to ''protect'' us from the unwavering stares of the crowds our
arrival brought. In part, it was because the Chinese thought their countrymen
might not be couth enough for our sensitive natures. It was not pleasant being
surrounded by white curtains, whatever the motive, and the Chinese listened
courteously when I said so - but the white curtains stayed up.

It would have been foolish of me to expect Chinese officialdom to unburden
itself to me.  It would have been foolish of the Chinese not to realize that any
experienced journalist accepts this, discards that, weighs what he sees and
hears against a lifetime of traveling and comparing and comes up with his own
reactions and judgments.

It was a structured visit, but within the structure quite possible to see, hear
and think.  Just as the Chinese do, in their units, I imagine.  In Peking, a
fairly drab city coated with the dust of the Mongolian plains, I began the
search that was to occupy me until I left Canton by train for Hong Kong, and in
a sense occupies me still: the search for a frame of reference for and
population: If it were not for birth control, people would be fighting for a
place to stand in China. Then you comprehend that free contraception and the
availability of free abortion are not matters of ideology here but of keeping
China a place where a person can breathe and walk. o, China uses delayed
marriages, public pledges and peer pressures on bride and groom to keep them to
one child. It is official policy to give a bonus to couples pledging to have
only one child; the bonus must be returned if they have more. And there are
other penalties for having more: Rations and housing are provided on the basis
of a two-child family. That means that if a third child comes along, everybody
in the family has to get along with less of whatever foods or goods are being
rationed.

Chinese children are loved, hugged, pampered, kissed and kissed.  They always
have been, I am told.  There is a special poignancy in seeing a young mother
kiss a child, because you know that in all likelihood it will be her only child.
Someday there will be hundreds of millions of families with only one child.
This must have a profound impact on the nation, because it will affect the
deepest of relations, between parent and child. Will good old sibling rivalry be
put out of business? And how will the nation's psyche be affected, as it must?
In time, there will be hundreds of millions of children growing up as the sole
belonging to the Government, of course, but they don't really count.  China
moves by foot, lives by the roadside. If you have vegetables to sell, for
yourself or your commune, you sit down by the road and sell them.

If you are in the army and the unit commissar wants to give you a lecture,
chances are he'll line you up in formation just off the road and talk at you,
which is pretty good entertainment for the kids hanging around.

You bike along the roads or you just walk; you pull a cart or push it; you beat
the donkeys, hoping to excite them to a state of lethargy; you gossip and argue
and get your hair cut; you fix things - pots, shoes, bikes - by the road, and
you eat your rice, steamed bread or noodles.

If you have a pig to sell or to take to the slaughterhouse, you tie it to the
back of your bike and off you go. And if you are a foreigner, then you become
part of it, at least voyeuristically, and more if you stop and look or stop and
talk. You become quite an attraction and a bit of entertainment yourself, not
just a drop of water.

When it comes to tourism, the Chinese Government fully understands the profit
motive. Food and hotels are fairly reasonable, but for everything else, the
Chinese are going on the sock-it-to-them theory of price setting.

Souvenirs, arts and crafts, ''antiques'' 50 or 70 years old are comically
overpriced, and prices vary from city to city by as much as 100 percent.

But there are always some tourists who are willing to pay any ticket price, so
maybe the Chinese know something. Thousands of tourists from all over do travel
through China as economically as possible - earnest, interested, noncaricature
tourists full of good will but terribly, terribly tired.

''Here,'' said an American at a museum near Xian, to his wife.  ''Stand here for
a picture.'' ''Honey,'' she said, almost weeping, ''I just can't smile
anymore.''

While I'm at it, another travel note -for reporters. The foreign correspondent's
kit, which until now has consisted of a shortwave radio, a portable typewriter
and a pocket tape recorder, now includes a Sony Walkman. If you are a
correspondent, you spend a lot of time in airports, waiting for planes that have
a habit of being four hours late. Jumping into an envelope of music can be
comforting.

I didn't understand that until I waited the requisite four hours in Xian for the
plane to Chongqing. Here I am, stretched out on a sofa, where this note is being
scribbled, listening privately and happily on a Walkman borrowed from Sterba to
a pirated Taiwan tape of Bluegrass music. I am tired and feel grungy, but my
feet are jiggling merrily. There's nothing quite like Bluegrass in Xian.

The Concise, Revised, Consensus History of Post-Revolutionary China in One
Volume (Peking, 1981; Loose-leaf) I was in China in May. It turned out to be
quite an interesting month, politically. The Chinese Government was just coming
to the end of one of its most dangerous and difficult tasks - dealing with the
Mao problem.

This was the situation: Mao's picture had come down almost everywhere in China,
except for holidays, and even then the pictures were a lot smaller and scarcer
than they used to be. But, officially, Mao was still a hero.

Sooner or later, the party would have to decide what to do about him. Dead, he
was still a problem. The party had to decide how responsible he had been for
China's tragedies, how to judge his place in history, how large a niche to
provide for his bust.
he man now in charge in China, Deng Xiaoping - who kept the amusingly modest
title of Deputy Prime Minister when he climbed to power -had himself been
disgraced and thrown out by Mao, not just once but twice, and couldn't return
finally until after Mao died in 1976.

China had gone hugely, spectacularly wrong for two decades, beginning in the
late 1950's. Obviously, some of this must have had to do with what Mao and the
party did after they took power in 1949.  But nobody talked about that at all,
because it would involve the very foundation of the Chinese Communist society.

But certainly, sooner of later, responsibility had to be fixed for the Great
Leap Forward of 1958-60, that crash economic program so dear to the hearts of
foreign admirers of Mao - all those of foreign admirers of Mao - all those
enchanting backyard furnaces, all those eager Chinese workers laboring day and
night, all those inspiring goals set, all those giant communes made up of
peasant cooperatives.

Not all the Chinese were enchanted. The Great Leap Forward became a huge leap
backward. The goals were not met, the furnaces died, the great communes stumbled
in mismanagement, the land sickened, the people were exhausted and China bled.

Then there was the Cultural Revolution of 1966-76, that totally mad revolution
within a revolution, when Mao and his entourage decided that what China needed
most was perpetual turmoil, that the enemies were within, that there had to be
purification through fire, that danger lurked in the minds of scholars, that
beauty and learning were evils to be rooted out; the universities were closed,
millions exiled to the countryside, China isolated from the world, civic and
family life destroyed and how many people killed nobody knows or probably will
ever know.

Paranoia was elevated to policy; Red Guard thug gangs roamed the land and the
prison camps were choked.  Ever since Mao's death and the return of Deng, all
these disasters had been officially acknowledged but blamed on the Mao entourage
- the Gang of Four. But it couldn't last.

For one thing, everybody knew better, and, for another, Deng wanted to eliminate
from influence a few of his old foes still clinging to top posts, like Chairman
Hua Guofeng.

Mostly, Deng had to put Chinese history in his own perspective; explaining the
past was essential to mapping the future. Explaining the past meant cutting Mao
down substantially. But to strike too hard at him might raise unthinkable
questions about the early years and the Communist system itself. That,
obviously, could not be permitted or left to chance.

So for more than a year the party leadership had been wrangling and debating and
bargaining in secret. All the officials in Peking and all the diplomats knew the
debate was taking place and had spent their time speculating on the outcome.

History was involved, but so were lives and careers and power and the future.
Hardly anything was more important.  One day in Peking I was told that I was to
see an important official - no name - and would I care to submit a list of
topics I wanted to discuss? My list included some questions on foreign affairs
but pointedly raised the matter of evaluating Mao - what was the party going to
say and when?

There was a warm-up visit with a Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs, clearly
arranged to look me over, and the next day I was asked to visit the important
official, who turned out to be Huang Hua, the Foreign Minister. He had recently
been given the extra title of Deputy Prime Minister.

Mr. Huang had been around - he had been around a lot. He was one of the few
Chinese diplomats who had been allowed by the Maoists to stay abroad during the
bad years, and here he was now, a man of significance in the new era, stronger
than ever.

I had met him in New York at a dinner party in his honor - it turned out our
encounter was not engraved on his memory - where his toast was a lengthy
prepared speech. He was obviously not a man given to sudden, ungovernable urges
to take political risks, but he was also obviously a man who could, if he
wished, tell a visitor what reality was as seen from the offices of the Chinese
Politburo.

Mr. Huang sat back in his stuffed chair, and I asked a question. He looked at
me, nodded, and began to talk. He talked about Chinese modern history from the
early days of the Communist victory. He talked and he talked and he talked. He
talked for about one hour and 15 minutes, including interpretation time. No more
questions.

At first I did not understand what was taking place. I was astonished and
irritated. It was plain he had not been interested in my question, that I would
have gotten the same lecture if I had asked first about the weather.

Some of the Chinese journalists who had been invited dropped off to sleep, which
made me even more irritated. If I could stay awake, they could at least pinch
themselves alive.  Finally, Mr. Huang paused for a few seconds. That was meant
to indicate the end of the preliminaries.  Then, without a piece of paper in
front of him, he proceeded to tick off every topic I had presented on my list.
He had memorized every subject I was interested in, decided what he was going to
say and said it, after giving a historical preamble for the record keepers.

For another hour, Mr. Huang spoke. First, he marched from one foreign-affairs
topic to another.  Then, another pause, a brief stare and he got to the heart of
what he knew really interested both of us most - how the party was going to deal
with the dilemma of evaluating the Maoist past without tarnishing the revolution
and the system itself.

Mr. Huang announced carefully and slowly that the party had reached a consensus:
Mao had made some serious mistakes, but he had been a great leader and thinker,
so great, in fact, that his thought still had to be studied, analyzed and
pondered. The present party leadership was strong, never stronger, and intended
to remain that way.

I rather admired all that. Mr. Huang did not have to spell it out much fur-ther.
It meant that the leadership had carved out an intricate decision - to blame Mao
squarely for some of the important errors, but to keep his place in history as a
thinker and leader and revolutionary hero.  Thus, there would be no Mao cult but
no unpleasant questions raised as to whether the very system Mao had helped
create might have been at fault. And, as for the future, the party would decide
what the great thoughts of Mao really meant as it went along; history was to be
a looseleaf book.

The hard-liners of the ''left'' would have to swallow a partial demystification
of Mao. There was to be no widespread purge of the kind Mao loved so dearly.
They could keep their jobs for the most part, but demoting Hua Guofeng would put
them on notice that their days of power were to be over if Mr. Deng had his way
and that he intended to have it.

As for the intellectuals and free-expression dreamers of the ''right,'' they
were to understand that open, brutal repression was no longer in style. But Mao,
who had thrown their kind into prison camps by the millions and had coined the
catchy official phrase ''stinking intellectuals,'' was to be retained in history
as a great philosopher, a founder, a man of brilliance. That should be enough to
keep them walking delicately and not getting too many fancy ideas.

On June 30, the official consensus declaration on Mao was published. Every word
will be studied, minutely, in China. It took 35,000 words for the party to say
what Mr. Huang had said in a few minutes, in his own good time. And when he did,
the Chinese journalists in that room had come wide awake.  I wonder why
Americans and Chinese get along so well. We do.  Only rarely have we been on the
same side of history. I know about the sailing ships and the missionaries, but
not many Chinese or Americans are moved by historical memories of either, these
days.

There is so much that should divide us, and has.  For centuries, China was the
world's favorite victim. She was the victim of her own arrogant dynasties, with
their xenophobic delusions of superiority, then the victim of the European
powers, who removed delusions with gunboats and carved up China nicely, pausing
to put up signs in Shanghai that the Chinese would not allow themselves or
foreigners to forget: No dogs, no Chinese.

Then came the Japanese to torture China, and along the way there were warlords
and bandits and Sun Yat-sen's hopes destroyed in the chaos of the Nationalist
regime, dreadful civil war and Maoist rule.

The United States was not a leading victimizer, although we took a little here
and there, nothing too big, and we did stand together during World War II.

But essentially the United States was on the other side - the rich side of the
fence - for most of history. And during the Korean War
the Chinese army gave us absolute living hell.  The Chinese were a main supplier
of our enemy during Vietnam - how they regret that now; $20 billion of aid to
those lackeys of the Russians, all for nothing - and during the decades of the
long freeze, China and the United States painted each other ugly.  But it is not
sentimental to say that you simply cannot be an American in China for more than
a few days without feeling you are in friendly territory.

Every American in China has anecdotes of warmth to tell.  One of mine now is
about the young man and the old man outside the movie theater in Shanghai. We
were all hang-ing around, looking at the billboards of the next week's American
Film Festival.

Some pretty good ones were chosen by the Chinese - ''Snow White,'' ''Shane,''
''Black Stallion,'' ''Singin' in the Rain,'' ''Guess Who's Coming to Dinner'' -
nothing that would start riots in the streets or show the United States of 1981,
but pretty good oldies.

The young man, one of China's determined English-practicers, told me he had
learned English on the side while working as a mechanic and would see every film
because he wanted to know more about my country, which he said he thought was a
good friend of China's.

The old man who joined in spoke much better English. There was a still picture
of Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy. A fine actress, Hepburn, the old man
said - he had first seen her at the Shanghai Roxy in ''Little Women.'' Perhaps
not quite as good as Garbo but very good anyway, and he was sorry to hear Tracy
was dead, when did it happen?

There was a little talk about life in the United States and cars, and wasn't it
good that the President escaped, and how are things generally? Not very
significant, but terribly warm and friendly, a scene repeated often around China
one way or another - the use of a little bond, some English, to make human
contact.

Part of the feeling of friendliness must come from the fact that Chinese and
Americans have the same sense of humor.  I can prove it. I was in a fine mood in
China. I was running around asking questions and learning things and feeling 10
years younger. It is a scientific fact that running around and learning things
makes the body cells, from the head bone to the ankle bone, younger. I made a
lot of jokes and the Chinese thought almost every one of them funny and a couple
were real thigh slappers. Now, can you tell me that people who laugh at your
jokes are not intelligent, warmhearted and, all told, pretty terrific?  There's
a poignant irony about China and foreigners, China and the rest of the world.
Throughout its millenniums, China acted as though the rest of the world either
did not exist or was trivia or could be swallowed up.

Yet it has been China's fate to be overwhelmed by the world it tried to ignore.
The Great Wall, stretching from the sea and built of stone and the bodies of
hundreds of thousands of slaves, is an awesome and a bitter sight.

China was overwhelmed by invaders of Genghis Khan, by the West, by the Japanese.
Then when it did reach out, after the Chinese Communist victory in 1949, it
discovered that the Russian hand it grasped was, to hear the Chinese tell it,
full of nettles.

Now, after Mao's attempt to make China an isolation cell brought chaos to the
country, cost it that most precious and irreplaceable resource, time, the
Government of Deng Xiaoping is reaching out again to the rest of the world -
reaching out, drawing back, reaching out.  It's a fascinating thing to watch the
Deng Government. It's on a high wire, like those wonderful Chinese acrobats, but
the safety wire isn't quite visible.

The Deng people know that the great crime of previous dynasties, including the
Mao, was to fail to bring China into the world of contemporary knowledge.
Ancient Chinese invented movable type, but they kept knowledge the property of
the very few. Compared to countries less ancient but more adventuresome,
brilliant, arrogant China was really a fortress of ignorance for centuries.

Mao destroyed the intellectuals, wiped out the universities and set China back,
who knows, perhaps 20 years, perhaps half a century, perhaps more, because the
world went forward while China took the great leap backward.

Deng has opened the door, it is plain, but he and his people are fearful of what
might enter.They stand there and say, yes, technology, come right in, and this
investment but not that, this idea is all right, but this one is too capitalist,
too self-indulgent, a little foreign culture, yes, but nothing gaudy or
dangerous, some careful book exhibitions and movies, but remember art and
literature must serve the people, and how are we going to keep the artists and
writers in line if too many wild ideas get in, and how are capitalists going to
wander around and get things done and make profits without impinging on the
socialist theology, and we know private initiative is necessary because we've
seen it work the past few years - privately operated plots outproducing
Government acreage, and little stalls recently permitted to open to sell
vegetables or cook fast dishes doing just fine - but shouldn't we pull them back
a little, and it gets all mixed up, foreign influence good and bad affecting
domestic policy, and how are we going to let new ideas in and control one
billion people, and how are we going to shut them out and still feed one billion
people and protect them, and all the while the millions of bureaucrats who did
profit from Maoism and had their lives invested in it are waiting for just one
slip and they will cut our heads right off.

So I become Mr. Deng. What do I do?  I have taken my risks, challenged Mao's
hard-line successors, thrown them into jail, turned villains into heroes and the
other way around, cautiously dealt with Mao's history so as to appease the
knives on the ''left'' a little and not let the intellectuals on the ''right''
get too many fancy ideas. I've let foreign capital in, I've taken a lot of
chances, I've got enemies at home and enemies abroad, and I can't let the
country go back or it and I will go down, and I can't rush forward too fast
because it might destroy socialism, and I am a believing Marxist-Leninist, not a
cryptocapitalist, so what do I do?  I play it careful, cautious, easy, smart, a
step forward and a step back and a step sideways to confuse things a bit - a
step, a step, a step.

It is a difficult, dangerous act, and Deng has had some delicate moments when
his footwork seemed to slip.  For a while, the Deng group overextended itself,
heady with the realization that Mao's death grip, which had prevented
modernization, had loosened and eager to capitalize on the destruction of the
Gang of Four. (That is supposed to mean Mao's widow and aides but really could
be the gang of four million or 14 million or 20 million, who knows, all those
who supported the isolation-cell philosophy of government.)

Too many industrial projects, too many debts looming, too much sudden
nonplanning - rich for the stomach of a controlled society, like feeding steak
to a starving man. Peking began to worry.

Expansion and a little loosening up were all right, but nobody in Peking had any
desire to lose control, because to lose control is very, very dangerous.

So ''readjustment'' began. The Communists, like a lot of other rulers, like
words that sound bland but mean a lot. Readjustment means pull in, cut back,
spend on target goals only, make sure the targets are politically right.

Heavy industry was assigned lower priority, behind agriculture and increased
production of consumer goods - plain, simple goods, for the most part, but
things that Mao would have denounced as germs injected into society by
capitalist running dogs - more bikes, radios, cloth, food, even private
television sets.

Factories were cut back. (A management type in a Peking steel plant acted as if
the cut-back orders were just wonderful.) And unemployment had to be
acknowledged for the first time in China. That gave Deng the chance to allow
some private initiative to take up the slack.

Nothing as wild as capital formation, mind you, or even private property. But it
became permissible for people who couldn't get jobs - particularly youngsters
out of school - to scrounge up a little work on their own.

A few of them could get together in a collective or partnership.  Nobody could
hire anybody and make a profit on labor. But a few ''partners'' could open a
little restaurant or a bike-repair stall, or a young fellow could get some
shirts from a factory, haul them over to a ''free market'' and sell them at a
profit. These selfemployed are all over China, adding the salt of choice, the
pepper of variety, to the Communist consumer stew.

Indeed, factories are now supposed to make a profit. That was something of a
revolutionary idea. Before, what counted was production. A factory manager was
judged on how much he produced over quota, and it didn't matter if those shoes
or spare parts or whatever piled up in the factory. How many were produced was
what counted. Now, he is expected actually to produce things that sell and are
wanted.

And then the farmers were to get something, too - a tiny plot of land where they
could grow, theoretically, what they wanted, after the unit met its quota, and
sell it at free markets. (Some commune commissars don't like that term and call
them ''country fairs.'')

Some of this worked, some didn't, some worked all too well. Some factory
managers really began to believe that they were free of central planning and, to
hear Peking tell it, started to spend money like water.

The private plots worked, they worked all right, and so did the free markets in
which their produce was sold. They worked so well that Government-run food
stalls in some cities were obliged to move to the free markets because that's
where the people were - the old capitalist marketing technique of following the
crowds.

And Deng found out what every leader who doesn't want to rely totally on the
threat of terror found out: It is one thing to give an order and another to make
a bureaucrat a thousand miles away jump to it.

Many of the communes are run by bureaucrats who have their doubts about
private-plot nonsense. When I asked a couple how the expansion of the private
plots was going, they looked a bit blank. Yes, they agreed, Peking had said
something to the effect that upwards of 7 percent of the land should be in
private plots, but in time, in time.

So Deng and his people are going forward and backward, adjusting, readjusting.
What the Chinese people really feel about all this is a question.  Pragmatically
- a new favorite word in China -they would seem to like it because it means more
food on the shelves, a chance for the unemployed son or daughter to pick up a
few yuan, and, judging by the crowds in the free markets, the peasants are
making pretty good money selling their products. They charge a little over state
prices, but they have the goods the consumers want. Variety and availability.

Foreign businessmen sit around the indoor cafe of the Peking Hotel and the Peace
Hotel in Shanghai and grumble wearily about the difficulty of cutting a deal in
China.

Given the fact that the Chinese Communist officials have only been cutting deals
for a few years and that every one of them knows that if the Maoists return to
power someday, having traded with foreign businessmen at all may mean death,
disgrace, oblivion, it must indeed be pretty difficult. Still, the businessmen
stick around because even a little penetration of that billion-mouth,
two-billionfeet market would be just lovely.

Probably the kindest thing ever said to me about private initiative in China was
said quite innocently by a Chinese official in Canton.  There are a lot of
restaurants and food stalls in Canton, and he said you could always tell the
private ones - they were open earlier and the dishes were ladled out faster.

''The Iron Rice Bowl,'' he explained. That's shorthand for if you have a
lifetime job with the Government, and there is no reward for extra work and no
penalty for goofing off - who cares, the Iron Rice Bowl can't be broken.

If he survives, Deng at least will go down in Chinese history as the man who
knew that the stew would taste better with a little spice of profit. That is
pragmatic.

We stayed in a yurt in Inner Mongolia. Sterba, my traveling companion, was
grumpy because he thought it was a touristy yurt, since other travelers had been
brought to the same sheepherder brigade, but I was more charitable. How many
brigades and how many yurts can the Mongolians provide, out there on the
grasslands?

The yurt is a round tent covered with felt against the wind. The deputy brigade
leader, a sheepherder who obviously had executive abilities, gave me a rundown
on the advantages and drawbacks of yurts.

Advantages: quick to put up and quick to take down when the time comes to follow
that movable feast - the sheep -to new grasslands.  Round, so the winds don't
blow them down easily, and a hole in the top so that the smoke can escape. Also,
they are earthquake-proof, although there hasn't been an earthquake recently.

Drawbacks: not very warm, because the hole that lets the smoke out lets the wind
in. Also, they are built right on the ground and are not very good for
sheepherders or sheepherders' wives inclined to rheumatism. As a matter of fact,
sheepherders suffer a lot from rheumatism and maybe the yurt is the cause of it
all.

A depressing Saturday afternoon visit in Shanghai. My Chinese guides felt I was
wrong to be so downcast. Maybe they were right.  We were taken to a ''work and
study'' school, a reformatory for youngsters in their teens who had been accused
of ''light crimes'' - stealing, chronic misbehavior or ''sexual offenses.''

It was in an outlying district of Shanghai: 200 boys in one school, 50 girls in
another a mile away.  They slept in neat dormitories in neat double-tiered decks
and their toothbrushes were neatly slanted in their cups, all in the same
direction.

The principal, an earnest and obviously devoted man of 38, said that when the
youngsters got in trouble, their teachers recommended that they be sent to the
school for a year or so for ''education and training.'' If the parents approved,
off to the school with no further hearing. If the parents did not approve, the
youngsters would have to face police justice.

The idea, the principal said, was to teach these young people their errors
through criticism and discussion, to teach them good work habits, to save them
before they got into further trouble.

At any time the school can shorten the sentence - or prolong it or, in unruly
cases, call in the police.  It didn't look like heaven and it wasn't meant to
be. But as a citizen of a country where reform schools are training depots for
criminals and where youngsters are beaten and raped by other inmates, I could
hardly sneer at the concept.

Every day, three hours of labor. In one classroom, into which I wandered when I
was pointed in another direction, boys in their teens were separating knotted
balls of thread in silence. Pointless, numbing work, designed to teach them
humility and to make them eager to be rewarded with less mind-crushing work.

In other workshops, boys were patching up old boxes collected from factories so
they could be used again -dull, but useful in a country where Government shops
will buy up old bottles and rags and cans because nothing should be wasted.

There was a shop where boys were assembling bikes, and that was meticulous,
useful work for which they were paid. The road from pulling threads out of balls
to assembling bikes was laid out clearly before the boys. There didn't seem to
be any cruelty, so who was I to carp?

Then we drove to the girls' school. It was getting on toward evening and in a
couple of hours the children who had behaved during the week would be allowed to
go home for Saturday night and Sunday evening.

We walked up a flight of stairs and entered a room where a dozen girls were
fixing boxes. We were applauded on cue and, a little embarrassed, I turned to
one of the girls and asked her, through an interpreter, why she was there.

She stood up immediately, looked straight at me with pain and said loudly and
firmly, ''My name is Ma Xiulan. I am 18 years old. I am here because I had
affairs with boys.'' Then the mask slid over her face and she had done her job
correctly - to confess, to blame herself without showing improper emotion. To
show grief might imply that the Government's decision to put her in the reform
school was wrong.

In another room, girls at sewing machines. Again applause, embarrassment, the
mindless question to the nearest girl. She stood up, looked at me, and said,
''My name is Li Shanxing. I am 19 years old. I am here because I had an affair
with a boy.''

''What happened to the boy?'' ''I don't know,'' she said, looking down and
trying hard, but not as successfully as Ma Xiulan, not to show grief.  I told
the principal I had no more questions and wanted to leave at once. He was a bit
surprised, but downstairs I told him I did not feel it was right to ask
questions of children who could not tell me they didn't want to answer.

Later, I was told that ''most'' of the girls were there for having ''affairs''
with boys - not prostitution, but the crime of sex without sanction.

In the car driving back, I was sad and silent for a long while.  Finally I
turned to one of the Chinese and said that if having sex were a crime in my
country, half the youngsters would be in jail and the other half would be trying
to get in. That was one joke nobody laughed at, and I guess it wasn't all that
funny.

To a foreigner, modern China is prudish and almost nonsensual. The only place
the Chinese express sensuality is in their food.  Desensualization - I know no
better word for it - for decades had been part of life - or antilife - in China.
Men and women dressed almost identically in the same colors -blue, green, gray.

Cosmetics or a touch of color here and there were discouraged severely during
Mao's rule. Mao, who had four wives himself, did his best to eliminate outward
differences between men and women, to make the country almost asexual in
appearance and in conduct.

What made Mao insist on this desensualization? It was not population control:
Abortion was available on demand and free birthcontrol devices were everywhere.
Economic penalties and social pressures against large families had been built
into Chinese society and there was no real need to decree physical dreariness,
to try to wipe out any expression of sexual differentiation, any connection
between sex and beauty, sex and pleasure. This went deeper.

It struck me as having more to do with people control - part of the general
leveling out and neuterization that Maoism seemed to need. There is a distaste
among Chinese, particularly in the countryside, for open displays of sexuality,
but Mao carried it deeper and further - he made it part of the approved vision
of life.

This reflects strange tastes, or distastes, among the Maoists. It seems to me
that leaders who try to desensualize their people, who try to make them as drab
as possible, who find display of sexuality of any kind offensive, have problems
of their own.

There is still an air of desexualization, but a bit of warmth is creeping in -
girls can curl their hair if they wish, wear other colors if they can be found,
and white hats blossom in the springtime.

Occasionally, open affection breaks through and you feel like cheering. Shanghai
is for lovers, because boys and girls actually walk hand in hand in public. I
once saw a boy with his arm around a girl's waist in Shanghai. In a few cities,
hotel waitresses grinned flirtatiously at Sterba.

And Chinese brides now seem to want to be treated like brides. It is permissible
to have decent wedding feasts. The brides get all dressed up in rented wedding
gowns to have their pictures taken, and they see to it that their grooms rent
tuxedos for the occasion. I've seen brides cling to their boys' arms in parks
for snapshots. One girl even pinned on a piece of costume jewelry. The boys
looked a little uncomfortable, but the girls were determined, so who knows,
maybe romance will make a comeback.

But I think about Ma Xiulan and Li Shanxing, still.  It's a small topic, though.
I suppose it doesn't help much in trying to figure things out.

Always in my mind, from the day I arrived in Peking, as I traveled first north,
then west and south, as I looked and talked and made notes, when I rode the
train from shabby, bouncy Canton to shining, bouncy Hong Kong, four hours and a
world away, ever since and even now, and probably always, will be the question
of the frame of reference.

How do you come to conclusions for yourself on China? Against what background,
what frame of reference, what set of values? How do you pull your thoughts
together logically?

Is what counts to compare what is taking place to the hideousness of Chinese
history - and isn't this better? Do you say to yourself that the truth is that
Mao, for whatever compulsions of his own, almost succeeded in destroying China?
That Deng is far better than Mao and that really is what counts? Is historical
comparison reality or condescension?

Is what counts that the Chinese have rather more to eat, a little more hope of a
little more comfort? Or is what really counts the degree to which men and women
can talk and write and think a little more freely? And in which direction is
that going?

Can you separate the judgments from the system? Is it correct to say that there
was a good Mao period and a bad Mao period, as the Deng Government does? Or was
bad Mao rooted in good Mao and were both the result of the system, Communism?
Why does a country where land is so valuable waste millions of acres of
farmland? What does China need from us and we from China?

How does a new China hand make any attempt to separate the empathy he feels for
China after just a few weeks from the decades of distaste he has felt for
authoritarianism or totalitarianism, take your pick? Or should he? China doesn't
care, but the new China hand does.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Chinese students (Page 44) Map of China (Page
18) Photo of a farm women (Page 17) Photo of a free market (Page 17) Photo of a
yurt in Inner Mongolia (Page 16) Photo of a scene near Xian (Page 16) Photo of
an old man (Page 15) Photo of Peking (Page 15) Photo of a deputy brigade leader
(Page 14)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words


A WOMAN'S AGE, by Rachel Billington. (Bantam, $3.50.) England's changing times
from 1905 to 1975, and how four generations of upperclass women responded to
them - eccentric Eleanor, who spent most of her time on a deserted island with
lovers and husbands; her daughter Vi, who became a member of Parliament; her
granddaughter Violet, who wrote children's books, and her great-granddaughter
Ethne, who returned to the island's ''simple life.'' An absorbing old-fashioned
novel by a woman who knows at firsthand whereof she writes.

SHOW PEOPLE, by Kenneth Tynan. (Berkley, $2.95.) Profiles of five stars of the
entertainment world - the actor Ralph Richardson, the television talk-show host
Johnny Carson, the comedian/producer Mel Brooks, the playwright Tom Stoppard and
the actress Louise Brooks - whom the critic Kenneth Tynan would invite to ''an
ideal dinner party.'' Our reviewer Jack Richardson remarked that ''the thoughts,
feelings and humor Mr. Tynan slips into his sketches make the party a huge
success.''

THE JANUS IMPERATIVE, by Evelyn Anthony. (NAL/Signet, $2.95.) A journalist hears
a German politician whisper a certain word as he's assassinated at a Paris
hotel, a word he had heard cried a generation earlier outside Hitler's Berlin
bunker. Before he completes his investigation, the journalist has brushes with
ex-Nazis who hold prominent positions, hired assassins, Russians and the C.I.A.
In Newgate Callendar's view, Evelyn Anthony tells this espionage romance with a
skill worthy of Helen MacInnes.

NOAH'S ARK, by Peter Spier. (Doubleday/Zephyr, $3.95.) Peter Spier translates a
fine 17th-century poem recounting the biblical story of Noah's ark, then
illustrates it with some 70 colored wash drawings of great delicacy and wit.
This album for listeners-and-lookers aged 3 to 6 won the Caldecott Medal in
1978.

CHRISTIANITY, SOCIAL TOLERANCE, AND HOMOSEXUALITY, by John Boswell. (University
of Chicago Press, $9.95.) An account of the experience of homosexuals in Western
Europe from the start of the Christian era to the 14th century that indicates
there was no prejudice against them until the strictures of St. Thomas Aquinas
and a concurrent rise of prejudice against heretics, Jews, Moslems and other
minorities. This 1981 winner of the American Book Award for history was praised
by Paul Robinson for its ''unrelenting scholarship and high intellectual
drama.''

LABORS OF LOVE, by R.V. Cassill. (Pinnacle, $2.75.) Troy Slater, textbook editor
and failed writer, is enduring a summer of middleaged discontent on Cape Cod -
vexed by a restless, ambitious wife, a young mistress about to desert him for a
religious cult figure and a successful popular novelist spearheading a plot to
take over the American publishing industry. Julian Moynahan called this ''a
bright, malicious novel, wickedly entertaining.''

365 DAYS, by Ronald J. Glasser, M.D. (George Braziller, $5.95.) An American
physician who served in a burn ward in a hospital in Japan during the Vietnam
war records what young casualties - troopers, chopper pilots and grunts - told
him about the 365 physically and emotionally devastating days that comprised
their tours of duty. A factually precise, quietly eloquent picture of war's
horrors in our time.

THE TANGLEWOOD MURDER, by Lucille Kallen. (Ballantine, $2.25.) A series of very
odd happenings in the course of the Boston Symphony Orchestra's summer season at
Tanglewood is climaxed by the sudden death of a master violinist - and it falls
to smalltown newspaper publisher C.B. Greenfield and his chief reporter Maggie
Rome to get to the bottom of it all. The second whodunit by a writer
distinguished for her deft plots and brittle humor.

THREE FARMS, by Mark Kramer. (Bantam, $3.95.) A young man who himself has tried
the agrarian life describes the daily routine and economic pressures prevalent
on farms that represent the past (a 100-acre New England farm), the present (a
500-acre Iowa corn-hog farm) and the future (a 21,000-acre California corporate
farm). Mark Kramer's easy-going style makes a complicated story fascinating; his
depiction of the forces currently at work in ''agribusiness'' becomes a
compelling plea for the salvation of the smaller independent farmer.

THE FOLDED LEAF, by William Maxwell. (David R. Godine, $7.95.) Between Lymie, a
quiet, studious chap, and Spud, a handsome athletic extrovert, an uncommon
friendship develops in high school that continues in college - until they both
fall in love with the same girl, with near-tragic consequences. This first novel
by a longtime New Yorker magazine editor was hailed for its sympathetic
understanding of human relationships and admirably controlled style when it was
published in 1945; for this new paperback edition, the author has made slight
revisions.

NUCLEAR NIGHTMARES, by Nigel Calder. (Penguin, $3.95.) A leading British science
writer describes in language any layman can comprehend four routes to nuclear
warfare that the world may take during the next decade. Sane, informative and,
as the author acknowledges, cheerless.

ASPECTS OF THE PRESENT, by Margaret Mead and Rhoda Metraux.  (Morrow/Quill,
$6.95.) Two score essays on such questions as peace, the survival of the
American family, the environment and the celebration of the past that Margaret
Mead (1901-78) wrote during the last decade of her life in collaboration with
Rhoda Metraux, a friend and fellow anthropologist. All are clearly and
succinctly expressed and addressed to the young women who compose the readership
of Redbook, the magazine in which they were originally published.
with pic . . .
MODERN LOAFER, by Futzie Nutzle. (Thames and Hudson, $4.95.) This album of 123
cartoons marks the debut between book covers of a lanky, mustachioed, balding
northern Californian, whose drawings up to now have appeared mostly in Rolling
Stone Magazine. As B. Kliban remarks in the introduction, Futzie Nutztle is ''an
artist who produces works of great surgical precision, like lenses which allow
us to peek at his neurons and synapses.'' Like many contemporary cartoonists,
Mr. Nutzle also has a penchant for playing with words, as he does in the sketch
reproduced here, showing a ''moo moo in a muu-muu.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon of a cat

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 19, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK TALK

BYLINE: By Ray Walters

SECTION: Section 7; Page 23, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


New styles in romance. ''There's no place closer to the American heartland than
Kansas City - which is why market researchers so often use it to gauge changing
fashions in popular taste.'' Vivien Lee Jennings, who told us this, has reason
to feel that way -she is president of Rainy Day Books, a five-store chain based
in Fairway, Kan., a suburb of Kansas City. Partly for business, partly for
pleasure, Mrs. Jennings reads 50 books a week, most of them ''romance novels,''
stories centering on the relationship of a man and a woman told from the woman's
point of view, and discusses them with customers in her stores. She reports her
findings in a nationally circulated weekly newsletter called Boy Meets Girl.

When we talked with her recently, Mrs. Jennings had just returned from Houston,
where she had compared notes with many of the 670 writers, editors and agents
from all parts of the country who attended the first conference of the Romance
Writers of America.

Mrs. Jennings ventured a few generalizations. During the past several years, the
''romance'' genre -which is now said to account for $100 million a year in
sales, more than one-quarter of all paperbacks sold -has proliferated. There are
now eight sub-genres, ranging in sophistication from ''soft romances'' for
teen-age girls to ''sensual romances'' for their mothers and grandmothers. Many
are marketed like brands of corn flakes, bearing such names as Harlequin,
Silhouette, Candlelight Ecstasy and Second Chance at Love.

Readers' tastes are fast-changing. For example:

- ''Bodice-rippers,'' those stories featuring rape and violence that crowded the
best-seller list not long ago, are definitely out.  In eclipse too are
''Gothics,'' novels whose covers show a young woman fleeing across the moors
from a mansion with one lighted window.

- Certain historical periods - especially the British Regency - still enchant
readers, but contemporary settings and situations are increasingly favored.

- The roles played by men and women are being more and more equalized. Today's
heroes are less ''macho,'' more sensitive. They are not always handsome or
physically perfect. In one recent book, the hero had lost a hand through service
in Vietnam. Heroines no longer have to be ''gorgeous,'' merely ''cute.'' Even
''an ugly stepsister'' has a chance.

- When the principal characters are truly in love, they remain faithful to each
other. This, Mrs. Jennings suggests, may be a reflection of the current ''new
morality.''

- A light touch, a bit of humor now and then, is very much appreciated by
readers.  Mrs. Jennings added that these changes in taste will first be
reflected in books published in late 1982. The stories that will reach the racks
before then have already been written and, for the most part, edited.

Dream conference. Speaking of the Romance Writers of America conference, how did
it go? It far exceeded the fondest dreams of its founders, Rita Estrada, a
Houston woman who writes romances under the name of Rita Clay, and Vivian
Stephens, a former Houstonian who now edits Dell's Candlelight Romances in New
York. The turn-out was three times as great as they hoped for when they
projected it three years ago. Sixty percent of the registrants were published
authors. Almost all of these were women in their middle years. A half-dozen were
men. Nearly all the writers, men and women, use pseudonyms. Every major
paperback house had an editor present, several had small delegations. So many
conferees told Mrs. Estrada that they were pleased with the information they
exchanged that she's planning another get-together next year, ''somewhere in
California.''

Commitment. Are you in the mood for an inspiring tale? Then consider the case of
Charles E. Wetherall, a veteran Minneapolis newspaper and public relations man,
who wrote a small book about how to quit smoking. He had it printed in a 3
1/2-by-2 1/4-inch format, exactly the size of a pack of cigarettes. Its cover
was a dead-ringer for a pack of cigarettes, except for the title - ''Quit: Read
This Book and Stop Smoking.'' It invited its readers to always carry it with
them, in their pockets or handbag in place of cigarettes, so that they might
consult it whenever they felt the need of reassurance.

Several publishers were sufficiently impressed by Mr. Wetherall's book to offer
to distribute it for him. Self-publishing, they warned, means seven workdays a
week, packing boxes, typing invoices, making deals, waiting for slow suppliers
and even slower-paying booksellers.

But Mr. Wetherall felt the same sort of commitment to his ambition to learn the
publishing business that he urges smokers to show when they want to quit. After
turning down the publishers' offers, he found that all the anguish about which
they warned him was quite true. ''But it was well worth it,'' he insists. In the
past 15 months, he has sold 225,000 $1.95 copies of ''Quit,'' and it's still
selling as briskly as ever.

To renew his commitment, Mr. Wetherall has just published a second book, with
the same diminutive format and the same basic message as his first. ''Diet: Read
This Book and Stay Slim Forever'' (Wetherall Publishing Co., Minneapolis, $1.95)
advises readers to pick a permanent weight-loss diet from among those rated in
''Diets '81'' (Consumer Guide, $2.50) and a form of exercise evaluated in
Consumer Guide's ''Rating the Exercises'' (Penguin, $3.95) and then to stick
with them through thick and thin. Most of the book elaborates Mr.  Wetherall's
tricks and devices for strengthening that commitment. It makes a small, cheering
footnote to Richard Smith's survey of the current crop of diet-and-health books
on page 11.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Remains Brought From Laos Turned Over to U.S. in Hawaii

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 86 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, July 19


Skeletal remains believed to be those of four United States servicemen who died
in Laos arrived today from Thailand.

Lieut. Col. Bill Frensley of the Army said there was no ceremony upon the
arrival because of the lack of documentation. He described the remains as ''just
bone fragments.''

The remains had been turned over to the Joint Casualty Resolution Center in
Bangkok, reportedly by an American citizen identified as Robert Schwab.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. ADDING 42 CENTERS FOR VETERANS OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By PETER KIHSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 782 words


The storefront counseling program for Vietnam-era veterans, a target of
President Reagan's initial budget-cutting plans, is now to be expanded under
pressure from veterans' organizations and their supporters in Congress.

The Vet Center Counseling Service for Vietnam Era Veterans will get 42 new
centers in addition to the 91 already functioning, according to Robert P. Nimmo,
who was sworn in July 15 as the new Administrator of Veterans Affairs.

In a three-year extension of the program, its budget was actually increased in
the recent budget reconciliation process, from $21 million in the current fiscal
year, to $29.6 million for the fiscal year starting Oct. 1.

To Open in 3 or 4 Months

Mr. Nimmo, a 59-year-old World War II bomber pilot, said he hoped to have all
the new centers operating ''within three to four months.'' They will include new
centers in the Nassau-Suffolk, Westchester, Albany and Trenton areas. Nine are
now operating in the New York-New Jersey-Connecticut region.

Stratton Appleman, assistant veterans administrator for public information, said
yesterday that the program had been authorized by Congress in 1979 for two
years, ending this Sept. 30.

A typical center has three to five persons ready to talk with Vietnam-era
veterans experiencing emotional or other readjustment problems. Some of the
counselors are psychologists or social workers, but Mr. Appleman said that their
key role was ''to be able to identify with the vet, to rap with him on whatever
happens to be bothering him.''

Some are helped simply by listening, Mr. Appleman said. Others receive aid
involving educational benefits, training or jobs. Those with medical problems,
which might include drug abuse or emotional stress, might be persuaded to go to
a Veterans Administration clinic.

About 72,000 veterans have reportedly been helped since early 1980. Mr. Nimmo
said the expectation was that 12,000 more might be aided by the new centers in
their first year.

Pressure From Several Groups

Protests over closing plans began last March when Representative Robert W.
Edgar, Democrat of Pennsylvania, reported that budget cuts would also include
heavy slashes in veterans' medical programs.

The American Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, Vietnam Veterans of America,
Amvets and Disabled American Veterans started a campaign against the cuts.
Congressional leaders of what turned out to be a successful fight for retaining
the readjustment program included Representative G.V. (Sonny) Montgomery of
Mississippi and Senator Alan Cranston of California, both Democrats. They and
Republican allies eventually reached an agreement with the Reagan
Administration.

Centers already operating in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut are at 166
West 75th Street in Manhattan; 226 East Fordham Road, the Bronx; 165 Cadman
Plaza East, Brooklyn; 148-43 Hillside Avenue, Jamaica, Queens; 114 Elmwood
Avenue, Buffalo; 626 Newark Avenue, Jersey City; 601 Broad Street, Newark, N.J.;
170 Market Street, Hartford, and 363 Whalley Avenue, New Haven.

Other areas scheduled to get new centers include: NORTHEAST; Springfield, Mass.;
Windsor, Vt.; Bangor, Me., and Philadelphia, Pittsburgh and Harrisburg, Pa.
SOUTHEAST: Orlando and Tampa, Fla.; Charlotte, N.C.; Greenville, S.C.; Atlanta;
Mobile, Ala.; Knoxville, Tenn.; Lexington, Ky.; Richmond, Va., and Morgantown,
W.Va.

CENTRAL: Chicago Heights and Peoria, Ill.; Evansville, Ind.; Sioux City, Iowa.;
Tulsa, Okla.; Lincoln, Neb.; Grand Rapids, Mich.; Minot, N.D.; Rapid City, S.D.,
and Madison, Wis.

WEST: Contra Costa County, Fresno and Riverside, Calif.; Eugene, Oreg.; Spokane,
Wash.; Fort Worth and San Antonio; Colorado Springs; Window Rock, N.M., and
Fairbanks, Alaska.

Two Centers Already Opened

Two of the 42 new centers have already opened, in Reno, Nev., and Tucson, Ariz.
While they primarily serve Vietnam-era veterans, Mr. Appleman said, the
counseling centers do not turn away others from earlier wars.  Soldiers who
served in Vietnam, at an average age of about 19, were suddenly thrown into
combat, and studies indicate that many suffered delayed stress.

Besides saving the readjustment centers, the veterans' campaign also averted
feared layoffs in the medical program, which Mr.  Appleman said would have about
$1 billion more in the next fiscal year than currently.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert Nimmo

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IF THERE WERE NO K.G.B., WOULD THE SCALE AND INTENSITY OF TERRORISM BE
DIMINISHED?

BYLINE: By Harry Rositzke

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1123 words

DATELINE: MIDDLEBURG, Va.


In addition to reviving the standard image of the Soviet Union as a military
juggernaut, Washington has also resurrected the old idea that the Soviet Union
is managing a worldwide conspiracy. ''International terrorism'' apparently has
replaced human rights as a major concern of United States foreign policy. A
Senate subcommittee is investigating ''Soviet and surrogate support for
international terrorism.'' The Central Intelligence Agency's 1981 report on
terrorism has added a new category of terrorist acts: ''conspiracy.''

The underlying thesis, a novel one for most of us in the counterintelligence
business, is both simple and vague: Moscow is somehow responsible for
encouraging and aiding world-wide terrorism.

Though its proponents do not go so far as to picture Moscow directing individual
terrorist groups or actions, the thesis has overtones of the old image of
international Communism run by a mastermind who employes puppets in a global
conspiracy against the capitalist world. The instruments are no longer Communist
parties and fronts, but the Soviet Committee for State Security (K.G.B.),
working secretly with the intelligence services of Libya, Cuba, Syria, and
Southern Yemen.

Though the conspiracy theory is bolstered by several random facts, such as the
meeting of a Basque terrorist leader with a K.G.B.  official and the use of a
safehouse in Prague by Italian terrorists, its persuasiveness rests mainly upon
a mechanical application of the master-puppet notion and a blurring of the
distinction between ordinary terrorism and wars of national liberation.

There is no question about the close operating relationships among the European
(and other) terrorist groups themselves, nor about the support they receive from
Libya, Southern Yemen, and Cuba. The question is: To what degree are the
Russians involved?

The case for a Moscow connection can be made only on the assumption that the
K.G.B. is somehow in total charge in Tripoli, Aden, and Havana. The regimes
there, the argument runs, are Soviet clients or surrogates, their intelligence
services tightly controlled by the K.G.B., and their training camps
''supervised'' by K.G.B. officials.

With all due respect for the K.G.B., no service can totally control and
manipulate a dozen regimes and security services, including such men of spirit
as Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, and Fidel Castro.

However limited or extensive the K.G.B. role may be, the key question is a
simple one: If there were no K.G.B. at work anywhere, would the scale and
intensity of terrorism be diminished? I seriously doubt it.

The ''training, funding, and equipping'' of global terrorism that Moscow is
officially charged with by Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr. does not
need the Kremlin. Oil dollars count today, not rubles. Small-arms and explosives
training is a simple two-week exercise. The required materiel (Soviet, American,
Swiss) is available to all comers with cash.

A politically more damaging error is the equating of terrorism with wars of
national liberation. An editorial dictum in The Wall Street Journal demands that
''no one should be allowed to say without challenge that Soviet support for
national liberation movements is by definition different from Soviet support of
terrorism.''

The two are different, both in definition and in practice, both in Moscow's eyes
and, I hope, in Washington's. Anyone should hesitate to equate the
''liberation'' of South Vietnam and Angola with the actions of the Red Brigades
in Italy or the wholesale slaughter in the bombing of the Islamic Republican
Party's headquarters in Teheran last month.

For Moscow, terrorist acts with no realistic political purpose - terrorism in
the old sense of random hijackings, killings, kidnappings, and bombings - are
irrational. For the Russians, simple terrorism - that is, a terrorist act that
is not a step in transforming society but rather is its own justification - is
considered anarchic, and they deplore it as pointlessly destructive.  The
Russians are serious about violence - they still consider themselves a
revolutionary power, and it is the last weapon in their arsenal - but violence
as a deliberate political instrument, as a means of seizing power.

The ''just'' wars of national liberation that the Soviet Union has supported in
the last 30 years have met both success (Vietnam, Laos, Angola) and failure
(South Korea, the Philippines, the Congo), and there is little prospect that
Moscow will stop supporting such ''just'' wars. The Russians continue to select
and train guerrilla units in a score of camps from Czechoslovakia to North
Korea, as the Cubans do outside Havana. They are committed to the support of the
Palestinian, Namibian (South-West African), and South African guerrillas. Not
unreasonably, they anticipate further successes.

Terrorist acts are a natural ingredient in these liberation wars, as in Vietnam
and in the Palestine Liberation Organization's strategy, and they are justified
in Moscow's eyes as contributions to the guerrillas' eventual seizure of power.

Confusing simple terrorism with serious revolutionary ''wars'' will create
problems for United States policy makers. Are all terrorist acts to be charged
to Moscow's account as further cases of ''misbehavior'' that must cease before
Washington is willing to talk about arms limitation or credits? If a superstate
is the ''source'' of all violence, what can we do about it?

The conspiracy thesis can only divert us from the long-term Soviet revolutionary
threat. The main covert vehicle for expanding Soviet influence in the third
world will continue to be wars of national liberation.

Rather than getting lost in the fog of ''international terrorism,'' the Reagan
Administration would do well to focus its energies on devising political and
economic strategies that will reduce the prospects for success of these
liberation efforts in South-West Africa, and South Africa, in the Middle East,
and in Central and, inevitably, South America.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Harry Rositzke, who retired from the Central Intelligence Agency in 1970 after
working for it and its predecessors for 25 years, mainly on Soviet operations,
is author of the forthcoming book ''The K.G.B.: The Eyes of Russia.'' This is
the first of three articles.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 960 words


INTERNATIONAL Israel could not join a cease-fire in Lebanon as long as
Palestinian groups continue their attacks on Israel. Prime Minister Menachem
Begin reportedly told Philip C. Habib, the American special envoy in the Middle
East. Israeli officials said Mr. Begin told Mr. Habib during the course of two
meetings that a halt in the fighting was not a solution to the more basic
problem of a Palestinian Liberation Organization arms buildup within striking
distance of Israel's northern settlements. He reportedly stressed that Israel
could agree to a cease-fire only the context of a border peace arrangement.
(Page A1, Column 6)
Shipment of more U.S. jets to Israel would be affected by Israel's cooperation
in reducing the level of violence in Lebanon, Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig said in a television interview. (A3:3-6.)
Poles face a 110 percent rise in prices of basic necessities and a wage freeze.
Prime Minister Wojciech Jaruzelski said both were needed to deal with the
country's economic problems in a speech at the special congress of the Polish
Communist Party. He starkly outlined the nation's problems and said that
overcoming them would require "superhuman force" and "profound economic
reforms." The price rise would affect food, coal, natural gas and housing. Wage
increases, which have averaged 23 percent during the past year, while industrial
productivity declined 10 percent, will have to be stopped, the Prime Minister
said. (A1:3)
High U.S. interest rates and their effect abroad is one of the key issues
President Reagan will have to deal with at the economic conference of the seven
industrial democracies that began in Ottawa.  Shortly after his arrival, the
President held separate meetings with Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of West Germany
and President Francois Mitterrand of France. Earlier, Mr. Schmidt, in a
broadcast, said that, "many countries in the world are suffering from the high
interest rates in the United States." (A1:4-5)
Salvadoran conservatives stepped up efforts to change the makeup of the
civilian-military Government headed by President Jose Napoleon Duarte.
Encouraged by what they say are clear signs of support from the Reagan
Administration, the conservatives, led by businessmen, want the right to name at
least one additional member to the ruling junta and several Cabinet ministers.
The junta led by Mr. Duarte now consists of four members. (A1:6.)
Bill Rogers won the British Open golf championship on Sandwich, England, by four
strokes with a 72-hole score of 276, four under par. It was the first major
title for the 29-year-old Texan. Bernard Langer of West Germany finished second
at 280. (C1:1-6.)
NATIONAL Dancers on a walkway suspended over the lobby of the Hyatt Regency
Hotel in Kansas City might have weakened the cables on one of them, experts
said, causing it to collapse, taking another below with it in its fall to the
lobby, killing 111 people at a dance there Friday night.  Two others who were
struck by the debris died in a hospital.  Witnesses said the walkways swayed
under the dancers' movements and that one "got to swaying and bouncing up and
down." (A1:1-2.)
A new U.S. immigration policy is expected to be announced in Washington this
week. The announcement has been delayed by disputes among President Reagan's
advisers over a proposed national identity card and other controversial aspects
of the new policy. The final proposal is expected to include most of the
recommendations of an 11-member Cabinet-level advisory committee, but probably
will not include the identity card. The identity card issue should be dealt with
by Congress, Administration officials said. (A1:1-2.)
Expansion of storefront counseling for Vietnam veterans was announced by the
Veterans Administration. The agency's new chief, Robert Nimmo, said the
counseling service would expand by adding 42 new "Vet Centers" within three to
four months to a total of 133. Veterans' lobbying ended plans to cut the program
in the Reagan budget.  (A6:1-2.)
The postal union negotiators said that "no significant progress" had been made.
Both sides were working under a strike deadline at 12:01 A.M. tonight. An
official statement from the two major union leaders said "we are no closer to an
agreement than when we started three weeks ago." (A7:1-3.)
METROPOLITAN Air-cooled subway cars and buses will continue to be scarce in New
York City this summer. A Transit Authority survey found that a passenger has a
1-in-3 chance of getting on an air-conditioned subway car and and 1-in-7 chance
of getting on an air-conditioned bus.  No improvement was in view. A transit
official said only 600 of the city's 4,000 buses had airconditioning units that
were cooling properly. More than half of the air-conditioned subway care were
reported working properly, but only 44 percent of 6,000 cars are air-cooled.
(A1:3-5.)
New York City's fiscal health is still delicate in some respects, despite the
"substantial progress" it has made since it was almost bankrupt six years ago,
the city said in offering the documents accompanying last week's sale of $100
million of municipal bonds.  Prospective buyers were provided with an unusually
detailed insight into the municipal structure in language that was unusually
simple and free of jargon and politics. (B6:1-6.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WAR EXERCISE TURNS FORT DRUM INTO A DUTCH PLAIN

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words

DATELINE: FORT DRUM, N.Y., July 19


Beneath the pine forests and through the dewy brush of this North Country Army
base, the combined air, naval and land forces of New York State held off an
''enemy'' advance for two days and nights of arduous battle, dust and sore feet.

But when the last chopper attack had ended and a column of tanks and armored
vehicles had clanked home on wretched roads, there were no casualties and not a
bullet had been fired. It was all an exercise for 15,000 citizen soldiers, and
this 107,000-acre base outside Watertown, near the Canadian border, had been
transformed into a Netherlands plain.

According to the mock battle orders, Russian troops had breached the defenses of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and the 42d (Rainbow) Division, based in
New York City, had been called up to help.

There were simulated bombing runs over the Adirondacks, an amphibious landing in
Buffalo, a simulated convoy to Europe and airsupported tank and infantry
skirmishes - backed by more than 500 jet fighter missions, a hundred tracked
vehicles and a hundred helicopters.

For Maj. Gen. Vito J. Castellano, chief of staff to Governor Carey and commander
of the state's organized militia, it was the largest joint military reserve
exercise ever held in New York State. For the bankers, policemen, architects,
clerks, mechanics, commercial pilots and factory workers who donned camouflage
gear and painted their faces green with grease, it was an experience in the
camaraderie and confusion of war.

''It's good,'' said Sgt. Robert Sunshine of the infantry, a retired police
officer, as a counterattack was about to begin this morning.  ''But
entertaining? Sloshing in the mud is not entertaining.'' Michael Noon, a
landscaper from Buffalo who served in a tank crew, said: ''It's a great escape
from tree trimming. This is the part that really makes me click.''

And Maj. Gen. Joseph A. Healey Jr., commander of the 42d Division and president
of the New York City Chamber of Commerce and Industry, concluded that the
''troops made a highly creditable performance.''

''The morale is way up,'' he said. Many in the field said the Guard was better
equipped and had better morale than it did three or four years ago, when
enlistments were declining following the Vietnam War and the end of the draft.

Representative Peter A. Peyser of the Bronx observed the exercise, along with
two other Representatives, eight State Assemblymen, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato
and visiting generals. Representative Peyser concluded that the staff planning
and field operations ''were outstanding'' and would compare favorably with those
in NATO units he had toured recently.

Many Guard Units Involved

The field maneuvers, which brought together many state Guard units that normally
train separately at Fort Drum, involved a carefully timed scenario that had the
42d Infantry Division embarking for embattled Europe months after the imaginary
conflict had begun.

Working by schedule, the New York State Naval Militia, began planning the
takeover of civilian ships and the plotting and managing of a convoy. The New
York Air Guard began conducting ''softening up missions'' before the start of
the ground engagement, and the public affairs unit published daily field
bulletins of ''developments'' in Europe as the war moved closer.

Early yesterday, under cover of night, the ''enemy'' - a contingent of Marine
reserves from Long Island and upstate - was flown to Fort Drum and positioned
stealthily on ''hostile'' ground. Tanks, troops and half-tracks containing
mobile command posts were in place by morning, and the probes, air attacks, tank
advances and helicopter assaults began.

Infantrymen and tank crews fired blanks, and flashing artillery simulators and
flares lighted the sky at night. Sentries stood guard, challenging anyone who
approached, and each headquarters unit was strung with barbed wire.

And as the battle progressed, a tank engagement brought fighters swooping down,
along with a small group of clattering attack helicopters. There were missile
launchers, mined roads, blockades and simulated chemical attacks.

Equipment Called Good

Commanders who recalled complaining about broken-down tanks and radios only a
few years ago said their equipment today was as good as that used in the regular
forces. Portable radar units in the field monitored and controlled all air
traffic over the battlefield.

The battle and its outcome were planned by a reserve unit in Birmingham, Ala.,
that specializes in field exercises. Field commanders had much initiative in
planning troop and tank movements and in calling for air and artillery support.
The only restriction was that infantry units were kept 100 yards apart.

Col. Eugene Sample, a forester from Birmingham, said that the object was to
''keep the Marines and Army from having fistfights and head crackers.''

''We all help to save the nation, so we are not going to hurt each other,'' he
said. There was one mishap. A helicopter crash-landed on Saturday after the
engine apparently failed at an altitude of 75 feet, and two artillery observers
were injured.  Command Sgt. Maj.  Harry T. Dwyer of Brooklyn broke a rib, and
Maj. Pasquale A. Alesia of Valley Stream, L.I., received a head concussion. Both
were listed in good condition today at the base hospital.

Guardsmen serve one weekend a month and two week during the summer after an
initial six-month tour of active duty. They earn a regular day's Army pay for
each day worked, or about $900 a year for a private in the Guard and $3,000 for
a captain, according to figures supplied by the division.

As for who won the war at Camp Drum, Maj. George Hawes, a former helicopter
pilot in the Vietnam War and now a Citibank vice president in the government
bond department, said: ''It's not who's winning, it's not how it ends - it's the
process.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 2 photos of war games photo of a soilder (Page B7)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 22, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAEL LINKS TRUCE TO DEEP PULLBACK BY FORCES OF P.L.O.

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1209 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Wednesday, July 22


Israel yesterday rejected a United States appeal for an immediate cease-fire and
reiterated its longstanding refusal to deal with the Palestine Liberation
Organization. But it authorized Philip C. Habib, the American special envoy, to
act as an intermediary in talks with Lebanon.

Today in Beirut, the Palestinian press agency reported two major Israeli attacks
in southern Lebanon, one against a bridge near Beaufort Castle, a Palestinian
stronghold, and the other from the Mediterranean Sea against Zahrani, a coastal
oil refinery site.

The agency said the attack near the castle reportedly involved a
battalion-strong ground force supported by tanks and other armored vehicles.
Helicopters and gunboats were said to be attacking the oil refinery. (Page A10.)

A Israeli military spokesman later denied that the reported ground action had
taken place. He said, however, that Israeli gunboats shelled guerrilla positions
between Tyre and Sidon during the night.  Northern towns were attacked again by
rockets, he said, but no casualties were reported.

Begin Seeks Broader Solution

A well-placed Israeli official said Mr. Habib, in a meeting with Prime Minister
Menachem Begin yesterday, argued that he needed a cease-fire to pursue his peace
negotiations in Beirut.

Mr. Begin was reported to have insisted that a cease-fire be linked to a broader
solution, at least a withdrawal of Palestinian positions as far north as the
Beirut-Damascus highway.

Mr. Begin told the American envoy that Israel wanted the Palestinian forces to
leave all of Lebanon, but that a minimum condition for a cease-fire would be
withdrawal to the highway. This would put the guerrillas 35 to 55 miles from
Israel. Some of their positions are now less than five miles from the border.

Artillery Emplacements Hit

Otherwise, Mr. Begin contended, the Palestinians would simply use the respite to
rearm and reorganize, bringing in more of the heavy artillery and mobile rocket
launchers that have bombarded Israel's northern settlements.

Some of the Palestinian artillery emplacements in Lebanon, near Nabatiye and
Rachidiye, were hit yesterday by Israeli planes, a military communique said.
Sporadic shelling and rocket attacks against Israel continued, with one person
reported lightly wounded.

Palestinian ammunition supplies are reported dwindling in the wake of air
strikes destroying nine bridges carrying north-south roads across the Zahrani
and Litani rivers. One Israeli official said, however, that the guerrillas were
bringing in ammunition at night using horses to ford the shallow rivers.

A spokesman for the United Nations peacekeeping force in southern Lebanon said
that Israeli artiillery inside Lebanese territory shelled Rachidiye yesterday
with high explosive and white phosphorus shells. Shelling of Beaufort Castle, a
Crusader fortress overlooking the northern Israeli panhandle, was also reported.
Monday night, United Nations troops intercepted two guerrilla squads attempting
to reach the border, the spokesman said.

An Israeli official said that, after an air strike against Palestinian command
centers in Beirut last Friday, the guerrillas were moving other headquarters
within the city. The Israelis have information about 20 such command centers,
and two were picked as targets in the Friday raid.

Israeli planners had not expected civilian casualties to be as high as they
were, according to a well-placed military officer. He said a mechanical
malfunction had caused two bombs to stray off target, hitting a large apartment
house and a third headquarters that had not been a target.

An aide described Mr. Begin as distressed by the casualties among civilians.
Although Lebanese authorities estimated the death toll at 300, Israeli
intelligence puts it at 150 to 160, including 40 to 50 Palestinians.

Populated Areas No Longer Safe

Mr. Begin said Friday that, under a new policy, guerrilla installations in
populated areas would no longer be avoided. The aim, aides said, is to put
pressure on the Lebanese Government and, through it, on Syria to curb
Palestinian military activities in Lebanon. The Israelis recognize, however,
that the chaotic situation brought about by the Lebanese civil war has made the
Government incapable of controlling events in most of the country.

Mr. Begin was described by an aide as having rejected suggestions that
Palestinian refugee camps be hit in retaliation for attacks on Israeli
settlements. The argument was reportedly made that assaults on civilians would
strike at the Palestinians' weak point.

After meeting this evening with Mr. Habib, Mr. Begin read a Cabinet communique
to reporters, but made no comment on President Reagan's decision yesterday to
continue suspension of F-16 jet fighters that had been scheduled for delivery.
Four planes were held up after Israel's attack on Iraq's nuclear reactor on June
7, and six more were delayed after the bombing of Beirut.

An aide quoted Mr. Begin as having said: ''I don't want to hear anything from
the Americans about hitting civilian targets. I know exactly what Americans did
in Vietnam.''

Other officials were sanguine about relations with the United States, indicating
that Washington had expressed regret at the political and diplomatic need to
delay the shipment of the planes.

Mordechai Zipori, the Deputy Defense Minister, described it as a family
disagreement.  ''I'm very unhappy, but I hope that we shall overcome it and
everything will be settled,'' he said. ''It is not a crisis. In every good
family, from time to time, there are some arguments.''

Israel's offer to negotiate indirectly with Lebanon, through Mr.  Habib, was not
expected to produce any breakthrough. Mr. Begin has said before that he is
willing to talk with President Elias Sarkis of Lebanon.

''The Government agrees,'' the Israeli communique said, ''that Mr.  Philip Habib
embark upon contacts with the President of Lebanon, Mr.  Sarkis, and with the
Government of Lebanon with the aim of establishing peaceful relations between
Israel and Lebanon, from where the terrorist organizations incessantly attack
the territory of Israel and murder and maim its citizens.''

In rejecting contact with the Palestine Liberation Organization, the communique
said: ''The Government of Israel will, under no circumstances, conduct
negotiations, directly or indirectly, with the Arab terrorist organizations
whose declared aim is the destruction of Israel and its people, and who
intentionally turn their arms, which are supplied to them in large quantities by
the Soviet Union, Syria and Libya, against the Jewish civilian population.

''Likewise, the Government of Israel will not authorize anybody to conduct
negotiations with the aforementioned terrorist organizations.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Prime Minister Menachem Begin with Philip C.
Habib

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 22, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MORE MUSCLE FOR THE NAVY;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 976 words


The Navy intends to expand the offensive capacity of the fleet with phased
introduction of 150 surface ships armed with Harpoon and Tomahawk missiles that
supplement the power of carrier battle groups, according to Adm.

Thomas B. Hayward, Chief of Naval Operations. In a recent interview, the admiral
said that the increase in offensive abilities would enable the Navy to ''take
on'' the Soviet Navy in what he foresees as a global contest.

''You just can't separate naval warfare,'' he said. ''You must think in terms of
a global conflict. Do you think that if the carrier battle groups in the Indian
Ocean were losing to a Russian attack that forces in the western Pacific or the
Indian Ocean would not come to their aid?''

The Navy is pushing for an overall expansion of the fleet, including
construction of two nuclear-powered aircraft carriers of the Nimitz class. But
until these and other ships are deployed, Admiral Hayward emphasized that sea
forces would be ''stretched'' by responsibilities in the Indian Ocean, the North
Atlantic, including support for Norway in the event of war, the Mediterranean
and the West Pacific.

Just how stretched the surface Navy is at the moment was shown by the recent
diversion of the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk and its seven escorts from
deployment in the Indian Ocean for exercises with the Australian Navy off
western Australia. The carrier America was left on watch in the Indian Ocean and
the Navy's assumption is that the Kitty Hawk group could return in a crisis
within five or six days.  This pattern of detachment may well become more
frequent as the Navy's responsibilities in the Western Pacific and Indian Ocean
expand.

Navy Must 'Pick and Choose'

The present forces and missions of the Navy, Admiral Hayward said, make it
certain that the fleet ''will have to follow a sequential strategy and pick and
choose among missions.''

Other senior officers have said that the Navy, at its present strength, cannot
protect Europe and at the same time provide resources to support a landing by
American, British and Dutch marines to reinforce Norway in the event of a Soviet
invasion.

This Norwegian operation has loomed large in Atlantic alliance planning for a
decade. But the withdrawal of a carrier battle group from the Mediterranean to
the Indian Ocean has refocused attention on the situation in the Mediterranean.

The Russians, Admiral Hayward said, cannot be allowed freedom of operation in
the eastern Mediterranean because ''Turkey is the linchpin of the strategic
situation in that area.''

Emphasis on the importance of Turkey has grown with the development of the
Soviet threat to Southwest Asia. American and allied planners regard a strong
army and air force in Turkey as deterrents to Soviet actions in that area
because eastern Turkey flanks any Soviet move south into Iran.

Challenges in Gulf Area

Although the Joint Chiefs of Staff periodically reassess the stationing of two
carrier battle groups to the Indian Ocean, Admiral Hayward gave an impression
that no early change in this deployment could be expected. The problem at the
moment, he said, is as much the war between Iran and Iraq as it is the Soviet
presence in Afghanistan.

''No one can say what the Iranians might do in the Persian Gulf or in the Strait
of Hormuz,'' he said.  In view of the Navy's global tasks, the admiral said,
what it needs most now is ''flexibility.'' He said that the addition of two
Nimitzclass aircraft carriers and four old battleships would give the Navy ''a
quarter more flexibility than it has today.''

Old Battleships Back to Sea

Congress has provided money for modernization of two World War II battleships,
the Iowa and the New Jersey. Admiral Hayward hopes money will be obtained to
modernize two others, the Missouri and the Wisconsin. ''We would be more
comfortable then,'' he said.

The deployment of surface warships with offensive capacity is another dividend
the Navy hopes to get from the Reagan Administration's budgets. The fleet hopes
to receive 2,500 Tomahawk cruise missiles and is already deploying the Harpoon
cruise missile.

Clearly, however, Admiral Hayward and his staff put a high priority on the
addition of two Nimitz-class carriers.  Conscious of Congressional opposition to
the huge carriers and support for 30,000-ton carriers, he argued vehemently for
the larger ships.

''Neither the small carrier nor the large carrier is 'invisible' at sea,'' he
said. ''But the smaller carriers don't have the defensive capability, the damage
control arrangements. One hit and it's gone.''

3 Strategic Concerns for Navy

The Navy's global preoccupations are symbolized by the admiral's concern with
three strategic situations, separated by thousands of miles but basically
interrelated.

In the Western Pacific, the admiral said, the Seventh Fleet is ''outnumbered''
and the ''quality of the Russian Pacific Fleet has improved.''

Like senior officers of all services, the admiral says he is worried by a Soviet
buildup at Vietnam's Cam Ranh Bay The stationing of strong forces there, he
said, would enable the Soviet Pacific Fleet to escape its geographical
constraints. To reach the open Pacific from the naval base at Vladivostok,
Soviet surface ships and submarines have to pass through two straits.

Problems in Mediterranean

The second situation causing concern is in the eastern Mediterranean, where the
Sixth Fleet, with only one carrier battle group, has to carry a heavier burden
than usual.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 22, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM CASUALTIES IDENTIFIED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 192 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 21


The Defense Department today identified three Navy and Air Force airmen whose
remains were turned over by Vietnam two weeks ago.

All had been shot down over North Vietnam. They were: Comdr. Ronald W. Dodge of
Olympia, Wash., a Navy man who was shot down on May 17, 1967. His nearest
relatives now live in San Diego.  Lieut. Stephen O. Musselman of Texarkana,
Tex., a Navy man whose plane was downed on Sept. 10, 1972. His next of kin also
live in San Diego.

Capt. Richard H. Van Dyke of Salt Lake City, an Air Force man shot down Sept.
11, 1968. Captain Van Dyke's relatives still live in Salt Lake City.

All had been administratively declared dead by the armed services after boards
investigated.  The remains were turned over to a United States delegation in
Hanoi July 7 during a periodic visit to stimulate Vietnamese searches for the
bodies of Americans unaccounted for since the end of the war eight years ago.

Identification followed examination at a military laboratory in Hawaii.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 23, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Coffin with remains of a U.S. serviceman killed in Vietnam arriving at Travis
Air Force Base, Calif., from Hawaii The State Department said yesterday that it
had serious questions to ask the Vietnamese Government about the belated return
of the bodies of three missing servicemen.

BYLINE: United Press International

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 4; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HIT BIT OF SHAVIAN WIT

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 756 words


FROM the moment a wild-eyed Anthony Heald springs onto the stage, jut-jawed and
swinging a very large gun at stiff arm's length - a clerk bent on swift murder
and suicide on his afternoon off - he has the audience bursting into loud and
prolonged laughter. In George Bernard Shaw's ''Misalliance,'' directed by
Stephen Porter and presented by the Roundabout Theater Company, the young actor
has succeeded in turning the relatively small part of Gunner into a comic tour
de force.

Writing in The New York Times, Frank Rich had this to say about Mr. Heald's
performance: ''A whiny soapbox radical, he soon falls apart to become, in rapid
succession, a clownish loser, a sobbing child and, finally, a disarming (and
disarmed) sentimental drunk. We understand why he melts.''

Mr. Heald (pronounced ''Hee-ld'') speaks of his role as a ''spectacular arc of
emotion to go through, and then I leave.'' He adds, ''It's the intensity of the
role that I like.'' He is a shortish man, powerfully built, with fluffy hair
parted in an oldfashioned way down the middle for the turn-of-the-century play.
The 36-year-old actor has performed in ''Misalliance'' twice before in repertory
in Milwaukee, but in other parts, and ''I envied the actor who played Gunner,''
he said.

Although Mr. Heald grew up in New York City suburbs and knew he wanted to be in
the theater from the age of 10, he obtained much of his experience elsewhere in
the country, mostly in the Middle West, Florida and Connecticut. He wanted it
that way. The incident that caused him to leave at the age of 18 was a murder at
Massapequa High School on Long Island. ''A member of a Long Island gang shot
another boy, saying, 'This is for you, you creep,' '' Mr. Heald recalled.  ''My
friends were strung out on drugs and alcohol. They were in prison or dead. I got
into Michigan State University at East Lansing, and I swore I'd never come back
to New York.''

Intellectual, Academic, Diplomat

From early on, this middle child of three was the intellectual, the academic
achiever, ''the diplomat, the responsible one,'' he said. On his mother's side
he is the great-grandson of S.S. McClure, the publishing titan who printed the
books of such muckrakers as Upton Sinclair and Frank Norris. His father, the son
of an English colonial official in Egypt, was educated at Cambridge and has long
been an editor at Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Mr. Heald's parents met at a Barnard College party just after the father had
obtained a fellowship in Elizabethan literature at Columbia University.
''Minutes later he was reciting poetry to her,'' the actor said. ''I think it's
such a romantic story.''

Once at college, Anthony Heald plunged into the theater. He was named best actor
of the year three times at Michigan State and spent three summers acting and
directing in Midwestern summer stock. He left college temporarily to accept a
position at the Asolo Theater Festival in Sarasota, Fla. In the late 1960's he
became immersed in the campaigns against the Vietnam War and for women's rights,
organizing rallies and demonstrations and acting, directing and writing plays
for a touring street theater company.

At the Hartford Stage Company in Connecticut, he performed leading roles with
Sada Thompson in ''The Matchmaker'' and with Alexander Scourby in ''Galileo.''

The New York Classroom

Three years ago, he moved back to New York because ''the artist in me was
shrinking as I took on more administrative duties.'' But he felt that New York
''was like a classroom with 50,000 students, and they're all raising their
hands.'' Despite the competition, he got roles. He appeared as Tom in an Off
Broadway production of ''The Glass Menagerie'' and last season in a small role
as the homosexual client in the Roundabout's staging of ''Inadmissible
Evidence'' with Nicol Williamson, for which he received much critical praise.

Now, it takes Mr. Heald's breath away to work with Philip Bosco, who stars in
''Misalliance'' as the underwear magnate John Tarleton.''He's the American Ralph
Richardson,'' Mr. Heald declares. ''He's been doing it for bloody ever, all
those roles. He has a marvelous way of making the part more important than the
actor.''

As for himself, Mr. Heald said, ''My character comes on late and leaves early -
and makes a big impression.'' And he grinned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Anthony Heald in "Misalliance"

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 24, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Books of the Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 944 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
THE BEAST. By Jonathan Fast. 290 pages.  Random House. $12.95.  THE MONTAUK
FAULT. By Herbert Mit- gang. 285 pages. Arbor House. $12.95.

FOR ages, writers have tried to take Hollywood seriously, and it has rarely
worked. In his fourth novel, ''The Beast,'' Jonathan Fast tries a different
approach. He treats Hollywood as a fairy tale. I don't know if he has said
anything new or profound about the place, but he has certainly come up with a
sassy, good-natured story that hums with vitality from beginning to end.

The gimmick that Mr. Fast has employed could not be simpler or more traditional.
He begins his novel with the opening passages of ''Beauty and the Beast,''
taking the fairy tale from the merchant's departure from his three daughters up
to the point in his return trip where he is wandering lost and horseless in the
darkness of the enchanted forest.

Fade now to Leslie Horowitz, plumpish Hollywood superagent, who is tooling over
the Mojave Desert in his big white Lincoln Continental.  Leslie has just been to
Death Valley to settle some on-location problems for his favorite client, the
budding film star Rebecca Weiss. He is looking forward to eating a late
Thanksgiving dinner with his roommate and lover, Tommy Troy.

Suddenly, Leslie's car breaks down. Though he waits by the road all day, no one
comes along to help him. After dark, he spots a light in the distance, tries to
hike to its source, falls down and knocks himself out. In the morning, he comes
to and beholds ''a Palladianstyle manor, a massive stone structure of
extraordinary balance and symmetry, simplicity and refinement.

''A man in livery was coming to greet him.  ''B-movie heaven, Leslie thought
ruefully, and passed out.'' He has found the great house in the midst of the
forest.

An Air of the Fabulous

The fun of this gimmick doesn't lie only in discovering who is who in the more
realistic version of the fairy tale - that Leslie is the merchant, that Rebecca
Weiss is Beauty, that her sexy roommate, Victoria Dunbarr, is the wicked old
sister or that the masked deformity who presides over the desert mansion, Henry
Wallace Beeze 3d, is the Beast. The fun also lies in the witty and surprising
ways that Mr. Fast manages to parallel the fairy tale, often without the
reader's recognizing them until they've happened.

But still more important, the framing tale lends an air of the fabulous to the
story within. This allows the author to blend hokiness with realism in a way
that captures the Hollywood atmosphere perfectly. Moreover, the absolute
morality of the fairytale structure sheds an amusing light on the novel's cast
of cynics, opportunists, careerists and womanizers.

There are, to be sure, a couple of spots where the story drags. And I'm not sure
I understand why the only happy love story has to be a homosexual one, although
I may have misread the point, just as it took me a while to understand the not
superficial ending. But all in all, ''The Beast'' is a delightful adaptation.
Even Jean Cocteau, a forerunner of Mr. Fast, might have been amused.

In Herbert Mitgang's doomsday thriller, ''The Montauk Fault,'' the Russians have
discovered how to set off earthquakes, while the Americans have hit on a way to
boil away lakes. The problem for Henry H. (Hap) Chorley, civilian director of
the United States Air Force Security Service, is to slip the word to Moscow that
we know what they have and we'll boil if they quake.

Now, why Hap doesn't simply tell the President to get on the hot line is
something that I never quite figured out. But it's O.K.  Instead, Hap uses as a
go-between his old buddy Sam Linkum, a journalist who has just been rendered
obsolete by a television company's takeover of his employer, ''the last real
newspaper in town.'' And Sam Linkum gives Mr. Mitgang a chance to have some fun
at the expense of the television news mentality, as well as to draw on his
diverse experience as a correspondent for The New York Times.

Hotter Heads Prevail

After reluctantly accepting Hap's assignment, Sam makes contact with an old
Russian associate of his, Andrei Glazunov, who is now curator of the Hermitage
Museum of Art in Leningrad. For a while, it looks as if these two liberal
humanists are going to accomplish something in the way of easing cold war
tensions. For as Sam tells Andrei: ''There's your side, and there's my side. But
you're you, and I'm still me.''

But in the long run, hotter heads prevail, and America, to its regret, discovers
where the fault with Montauk lies. Still, Sam Linkum is not discouraged. In the
novel's final scene, set in the graveyard where the son he lost in Vietnam is
buried, Sam makes up his mind to carry on.

''After all this time, he had found that he could still be touched with a noble
anger: to have tried instead of standing aside was a kind of decency. The effort
to brake the dying time over the horizon could go on. Dammit, in his own
cockeyed way Hap Chorley had tried to break through the battlements of
irrationality around him. Close, but no cigar. Still, he knew he would have to
be part of it. In the roseate light of that late afternoon, Linkum had no
regrets about being a man engaged again.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ONE ORDEAL AMONG HUNDREDS ENDS AT ARLINGTON

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 24


Today, more than 14 years after he was listed as missing in action over North
Vietnam, Comdr. Ronald W. Dodge of the Navy was buried in Arlington National
Cemetery.

His family wept as three volleys fired by an honor guard shattered the quiet
above his final resting place. The mournful, distant sound of taps brought back
memories of long-ago, happier times.

Commander Dodge's remains, with those of two other pilots missing in Vietnam,
were turned over to American authorities two weeks ago by the Vietnamese
Government. The burial provided an answer, at last, to the question that had
been nagging Janis Dodge and her children since May 1967.

Their ordeal ended, in a sense, at 3:30 this afternoon, as a band played
''America the Beautiful,'' Mrs. Dodge stepped forward and laid a single yellow
rose on the silver-gray military coffin wherein rested all that was left of
Ronald Dodge.

Ordeal of Families Goes On

But for the families of the 2,456 servicemen still listed as missing in action
in Southeast Asia - the so-called MIAs -the ordeal goes on. Many of the families
are beginning to wonder whether there ever will be a final answer to the
question that, for them, will not go away: ''Is he still alive?'' During
Commander Dodge's funeral, the chaplain seemed to look to the heavens for an
answer, calling on God to ''grant Thy great mercy on all MIAs.''

Officials of the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing
in Southeast Asia place primary blame for the long delay on Vietnamese
authorities. They call the Vietnamese callous, cruel and unconcerned. But the
league also asserts that American officials have not done enough.

''The U.S. Government really hasn't scratched the surface on this thing,''
George L. Brooks, a league director from Newburgh, N.Y., said as he watched
gravediggers lower Commander Dodge's coffin into a grassy hillside behind the
Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.

''They'e got about 30 people working on it when they should have 300,'' he
added. ''But I'll admit that under Reagan they're doing more than they used
to.''

Officer Reported Seen Alive

Mr. Brooks is the father of Lieut. Nicholas Brooks, a Navy pilot whose A-6 jet
went down over Laos on Jan. 2, 1970. Mr. Brooks speaks of him in the present
tense - ''he's 38, now'' - because the family has been told that some Laotians
saw the lieutenant alive on the ground.

The official position of the State Department and the Department of Defense is
that almost all of the missing men are ''presumed dead'' since combat ended for
Americans almost a decade ago.  Government officials assert, further, that all
that can be done is being done to persuade the Vietnamese to find and return
bodies.

Privately, some Government officials have serious doubts that all of the men are
dead. At least one behind-the-lines search mission reportedly has been mounted -
it apparently turned up nothing - and the director of the Defense Intelligence
Agency, Lieut. Gen. Eugene F. Tighe, recently told Congress he was
''personally'' convinced that some were still alive because of the stream of
''live sighting'' reports from refugees. As a result of those reports, the
Defense Department's staff concerned with the missing has been doubled, to about
three dozen people.

Military Authorities Working

''We work at it constantly,'' said Lieut. Col. John Fer, of the Air Force, the
Defense Department's principal adviser on missing-inaction affairs.

''We send a constant stream of information and questions to the Vietnamese,'' he
continued, ''but they mainly approach it on a 'Don't call us, we'll call you'
basis.''

Thus far, after eight years of intermittent meetings and discussions, the
remains of 78 servicemen have been returned. Besides the body of Commander
Dodge, a native of Olympia, Wash., who would have been 45 years old last month,
the latest turnover included the remains of Capt. Richard H. Van Dyke of the Air
Force, a pilot from Salt Lake City, and the remains of Lieut. Stephen O.
Musselman of the Air Force, a pilot from Texarkana, Tex.

Defense Department officials said the death certificates accompanying the bodies
asserted that the men had died when their planes went down. No other information
was provided, not even an explanation as to what happened to Commander Dodge,
who was photographed alive after being downed. That picture appeared in many
publications in the late 1960's, and both lifted and depressed the Dodge family.

The denial of information ''is the same sort of thing the Vietnamese did with
the French after they pulled out of Vietnam,'' Gladys Brooks, Lieutenant
Brooks's mother, said this afternoon. ''It just tears at you.''

However, officials of the League of Families report that most relatives of
missing men are not suffering serious psychological or economic hardship. ''The
military has death benefits and all that and a lot of the children were too
young when their daddies went down to remember much,'' said Carol Bates, the
league's director of public affairs.

What Was Dad Like?

''But,'' she added, ''how do you reorder your life if you don't really know
whether your husband is dead, or how do you grow up without wondering a lot what
your dad was really like? That's what's happening. They're the things that are
bothering people.''

The wondering has intensified even more as refugees and other travelers continue
to bring out reports. '' League officials say they have been told privately by
officials that some of the people providing information have passed lie detector
tests on their stories of seeing Americans held in jungle camps.

''We've even got a good report that they're holding 400 bodies in Hanoi,''
George Brooks said as he left Commander Dodge's gravesite.  The coffin had been
lowered into a vault and the sound of another firing squad was echoing off the
hillsides.

''Will I ever see Nick again?'' he asked, musing as a fresh summer rain fell.
''I don't know. I don't know whether he's alive. Worse, I don't know whether
he's dead.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Ronald Dodge's military funeral

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Mitchell Is Not Liable On Charges of Malice

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 177 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 24


A Federal appeals court ruled today that former Attorney General John Mitchell
has absolute immunity from charges of malicious prosecution in the arrest of
antiwar demonstrators 10 years ago.

The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia said that Mr.
Mitchell could not be prosecuted on charges of conspiring with Capitol police to
prosecute people arrested for demonstrating on the steps of the Capitol
building.

The three-judge panel split 2 to 1.  Judge J. Skelley Wright, speaking for the
majority, said the Supreme Court had held in a separate case that denying
complete immunity in such situations would ''prevent the vigorous and fearless
performance of a prosecutor's duty that is essential to the proper functioning
of the criminal justice system.''

In dissent, Judge Harry T. Edwards said that it was well established that the
Attorney General ''is not always entitled to absolute immunity.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ROLE IN EDUCATION IS AT ISSUE

BYLINE: By Leslie Bennetts

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2639 words


THE RIGHTS OF CHILDREN: A DECADE OF CHANGE Last of five articles

Perhaps the greatest advances in children's rights in the last decade have been
in the area of education.  A body of Federal legislation has been created
guaranteeing the rights of children to money and service in such areas as aid to
the handicapped, the disadvantaged and bilingual education.  However, the Reagan
Administration's attitude on this approach has now raised the question of
whether Washington or the states and localities should have jurisdiction over
these rights.

In the last five days, Congress has retained many of the existing statutes and
has dismantled others.  As part of a complex legislative process, House and
Senate conferees, while negotiating the budget bill, resolved many of the 200
outstanding differences affecting educational legislation.

To some on Capital Hill, these actions by Congress have preserved important
programs and financing levels, insuring a continuing Federal role in education.
But to others the proposed education package is a major setback because Federal
statutes have been dismantled or revised.  They see this as a major shift that
will have far-reaching effects, weakening Government's role in bringing
previously neglected children into the educational system by stressing their
rights to money and services.

"It's a whole different ball game," said Bette E. Hamilton, education director
of the Children's Defense Fund in Washington.  "It's a disaster for poor
children and minority children and for those with special needs.  The
Administration has changed decades of social legislation in a budget bill,
without public hearings and disregarding the normal Congressional process."

'A New Ball Game'

"To some degree it's a new ball game, but certainly it's not a disaster," said
Senator Robert E. Stafford, Republican of Vermont, the chairman of the Senate
Education Subcommittee, who played a key role in the conference.  "I'm
reasonably satisfied we got all the money we could for education - and more than
what we thought we could get when we started out.  I'm gratified that we could
preserve the two major programs that affect children's education in this
country." He referred to programs for education of handicapped and of
disadvantaged children.

The Reagan Administration first proposed cuts of $1,315 billion of the $5,26
billion in continuing spending for three areas: elementary and secondary
education of children for poor families, the education of the handicapped, and
vocational education - a reduction of 25% for the 1981-82 school year.

It also originally proposed that all Federal funds for elementary and secondary
education be placed in block grants, allowing states to spend the money as they
saw fit without conforming to Federal regulations.  This called for the repeal
of such Federal mandates as the 1975 Education for All Handicapped Children Act
and provisions for the education of the economically disadvantaged.

The House and Senate conferees reconciled their differences and adopted far less
drastic ctus of $110 million for the three areas.  Several important programs,
including aid to handicapped children and bilingual education, were exempted
from block granting, as was vocational education, though money for that was cut
by $44 million.

Congress's new Education Consolidation and Improvement Act of 1981 would
incorporate much of the previous Elementary and Secondary Education Act.  A
streamlined new Title I has replaced many of the specific provisions of the
former Title I programs for the education of lower-income children.  A new Title
II consolidates 50 educational support and improvement programs.

Power to the States

The Reagan Administration's policies reflect the President's belief in the
necessity of cuts in Federal spending and the importance of returning power to
the states.  "In the long haul, block grants are better in insuring the rights
of children," and Secretary of Education T. H. Bell.  "In many cases now there
is an administrative nightmare on the local level.  We need block grants to give
the states more latitude, so the specific requirements in Federal programs can
be harmonized with local programs.  That will make the money go farther, and
benefit many children."

Critics of the new ligislation charge that there is less accountability in the
new Title I provisions, saying they do not require local school districts to
keep records on spending, and that the public has a diminished right of access
to oversee how the money is used.

"The Federal regulations created monitoring, enforcement and targeting of funds
to protect the rights of the minorities and the poor," said Dr. Hamilton.
"We'll be right back to the kind of situation where we were in 1965, when local
school boards could take Federal money and build things like swimming pools or
buildings, instead of assuring that the monies go to the children."

"The provisions in our block grant have adequate safeguards to prevent abuses
from happening," and Secretary Bell. "I strongly take exception to those who
imply that local school officials do not have to conscience and moral persuasion
to be sensitive to children.  In the few exceptional cases we have adequate
enforcement provisions."

Millions Are Beneficiaries

Millions of American children are the beneficiaries of a children's rights
movement that has helped bring profound changes to the American educational
system.  For example, 10 years ago over a million children with serious
handicaps were excluded from the public school system. Today most of the four
million handicapped American children are in school, and most are receiving
instruction considered appropriate to their needs, as mandated by the 1975 act.

That law was one of many in a network of court decisions and Federal and state
legislation that has vastly expanded definitions of the services and rights to
which schoolchildren are entitled.

Most advocates of children's educational rights trace the origins of their
movement to the 1954 Supreme Court decision in Brown V.  Board of Education,
which launched modern efforts to integrate public school systems.  "Brown
indicated that the courts do have a role in broadly regulating the most
egregious problems in the schools," said Peter Roos, director of education
litigation for the Mexican-American Legal Defense and Education Fund.

The decision that said that separate educational systems for black and white
children violated the 14th Amendment presumed the right of all children to equal
protection under the law.  By the 1970's that premise was being construed to
encompass a wide range of corollary rights, from instruction in the Spanish
language and culture to the provision of sign-language interpreters for deaf
children.

Today, however, proponents of such programs as education for the handicapped and
bilingual instruction see their gains threatened by financial cuts, by
curtailment of the Federal role in insuring such services and dwindling interest
in the enforcement of civil rights procedures.  Many advocates of children's
rights fear that while such programs may survive this year, they have been
designated for extinction.

Some believe the Reagan proposals signaled a reversal of the principles and
priorities that have infused a generation's worth of gains in children's rights.
It's the end of an era," said Albert Shanker, president of the United Federation
of Teachers.

Administration officials say, however, that cuts in Federal spending and the
return of power to the states should take precedence over other considerations.

Bell Defense Policies

Secretary Bell has defended the Administration's block grant proposals as a
means of giving states and local school districts flexibility to use Federal
funds.  He has argued that this will reduce overhead cost, thus making the money
stretch further.  "We have faith and confidence in local units of government,"
he said.  "I believe that elected boards on the state and local level have an
awareness and social conscience about equality of opportunity."

Fighting the Administration's plans has been a broad range of groups that
represent different constituencies but have lobbied together on educational
issues.  Federation of Teachers, with whom our past relations have been somewhat
strained," said Jane Stern, chief staff counsel to Advocates for Children in New
York.  "But we all see that our destinies are now together."

Controversy over civil liberties for children in the schools began in the
1960's.  "As a legal and political movement it was called students' rights in
the beginning," said Ira Glasser, executive director of the American Civil
Liberties Union.

Many of the early disputes concerned confrontations between school officials
asserting traditional prerogatives and students who maintained that schools had
no right to dictate hair sytles or political opinions. Often a seemingly trivial
issue would grow into a battle with larger implications when students were
suspended for offenses ranging from violations of dress codes to publishing
articles in student newspapers criticizing administrators.

A Turning Point

A turning point was a 1969 case, Tinker v. Des Moines, involving students
suspended for wearing black armbands to protest the Vietnam War. The Supreme
Court ruled that the suspensions violated the students' rights to free speech
under the First Amendment.

Other cases established students' rights to due process in suspension hearings,
confidentiality of records and the right to privacy in searches of school
lockers, among other matters.  As a result school boards began to develop codes
defining permissible procedures.

Rights advocates found that compliance did not automatically follow the
articulation of policy; most complain that violations of rights in the schools
remain pervasive.  Many school administrators tell a different story, however.
They feel that the movement has gone too far and that judges, ignorant of the
demands of running a large school with a diverse student body, have often made
what Thomas Shannon, executive director of the National School Boards
Association, calls bad law.

"There's too much lcense," Mr. Shannon said.  "In the whole area of grooming and
dress and free speech, especially in junior high schools, a lot of those cases
are just plain wrong, and the consequence is the breakdown of discipline.
There's a breakdown in respect for authority when the courts and the legislators
render school administrators impotent." Mr. Shanker said: "They've gone all the
way fromone system where there were no rights for kids to a system where the
authorities are paralyzed and there's no rights for a kid who's been stabbed
because of the pressures on the principal not to do anything about it and
because of the futility of the process."

In the meantime the initial declarations of children's rights have been joined
by assertions of the rights of specific populations to services not provided in
the past.  "Beginning with minority and poor children, moving to bilingual and
ultimately to handicapped children, Congress enacted Federal statutory programs
aimed at providing appropriate educations to children whom the school system
found difficult to educate and whom in many cases they had not even tried to
educate," said Daniel Yohalem of the Children's Defense Fund.

Fred Weintraub, assistant executive director of the Council for Exceptional
Children, a national association of professionals involved with handicapped or
gifted children, said: "In the early 1970's the estimates were that
approximately one million handicapped children of school age were totally
excluded from participation in public education.  You have to look hard to find
children who are excluded these days."

Such instruction is expensive: of a total of about $100 billion spent on public
school education last year, $17 billion went for education for the handicapped,
most of it borne by states and local school districts, many of which are already
strapped for funds and distressed over the imposition of further burdens.
Questions of competing rights have also been raised when funds are diverted from
regular classes to serve children with special needs.

Many proponents of bilingual educaiton regard its long-range prospects as dire,
although it is relatively inexpensive, with Federal and state outlays in the
1979-80 school year totaling $160 million.  "Bilingual education is near death
nationwide," said William Rosser, co-director of the Chicano Educaiton Project
in Colorado, the largest privately financed Hispanic education organization in
the country.

A 1970 Memorandum

On assuming office, the Reagan Administration revoked regulations proposed by
the Carter Admiistration that would have required public schools to teach
foreign-speaking students in their native languages; Secretary Bell assailed the
regulations as "harsh, inflexible, burdensome, unworkable and incredibly
costly."

Other controversies have been generated by the development of tracking systems
to separate students by ability, special educaiton programs, testing procedures
and large-scale use of suspensions and expulsions. Critics assert that such
practices have often been used to resegregate minority students or push them out
of the educational system.

School financing is the subject of several lawsuits.  Elliott C.Lichtman, a
partner at Rauh, Silard & Lichtman, a Washingotn law firm that has represented
the plaintiffs in several cases, said, "Since school districts vary enormously
in what kind of tax base they have, that translates into big differences in
actual spending per pupil.  What these cases have held is that the state is
responsible for the education of all children and can't permit these large
differences to exist."

Dwindling resources have been a factor in recent years.  "Most people would say,
'The handicapped have been denied an education, that's terrible, let's educate
them,'" Mr. Shanker said.  "But as these rights were established in the 70's
withno new money, putting them into effect meant depriving somebody else of
money.  And whenever you extend someone's rights at someone else's expense,
you're going to get a fight.I don't think the general public has gone against
children's rights per se, but they're no longer gung-ho.  They're questioning."

Few of the children's advocates in education are optimistic about the short-term
future of their goals.  "The progress is at least on hold, and could be rolled
back" said Hayes Mizell, director of the Southeastern Public Education Project,
an advocacy organization for low-income children and members of minority groups.

However, most acknowledge that substantive changes have been made.  "Standards
and law have been established," Mr. Mizell said.  "There may not be a lot of new
laws made, but the basic existing law is not going to go away.  It's the
application and enforcement of the law that may get watered down in day-to-day
situations."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of bilingual education class photo of crippled
child boarding bus

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DE GUSTIBUS;
COOLING FOODS FOR SUMMER

BYLINE: By MIMI SHERATON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 877 words


Summer, more than any other season, provokes controversy over the kind of food
best suited to the weather.  Few will argue that winter's cold is best warded
off by hot and lusty soups and stews, steaming porridge, cocoa and toddies, or
that the mild days of spring suggest foods equally mild in temperature and
flavor such as fresh greens, steamed new potatoes and young salmon, grilled lamb
and tiny chickens, and much anticipated firsts such as asparagus, strawberries
and pungent rhubarb. Even autumn with its harvests of vegetables and game has
its own menu, and the first crackling cold days of fall inspire bracing dishes
not quite as complex and heavy as those of deepest winter.

But because the withering effects of summer's heat and humidity tend to diminish
and even stultify appetites, and because many still harbor traces of the
old-fashioned notion that skipping a meal is a signal of illness if not imminent
demise, various theories have been advanced in various cultures to get people to
eat when they don't feel like doing so.

Uncomfortable Prescription

In addition to piquing jaded appetites, hot-weather foods are recommended for
their properties as coolers. One of the most enduring notions, and in my
experience the most erroneous, is that boiling hot, thick and heavy soups, tea,
coffee and alcoholic beverages are efficacious because they induce perspiration,
eventually leaving the eater feeling cool, much the way a malarial fever is
followed by a shivery chill. The cure has always seemed a good deal more
uncomfortable than the illness.

But hotly seasoned foods are something else again and really do seem to mitigate
the effects of midsummer heat waves. Hot chilies and peppery spices used in the
cuisines of India, Thailand, Vietnam, Malaysia, Mexico and Korea titillate
heat-dazed palates and start gastric juices flowing.

Contrast is the keynote of most of those cuisines, in which the more fiery
ingredients are counterpointed by sweet and cooling mint, parsley, basil,
aromatic coriander, sesame oil and the cooling crunch of cucumbers. Textural
contrasts add interest, too, with crispness perhaps the most pleasing texture at
this season and sogginess its polar opposite. Greasiness, milkiness and a
general sense of thickness are equally uninviting prospects in hot weather.

Cold Soups With Chili

Some cuisines include masterpieces that combine sharp and pungent seasonings
with cool temperatures. Among such are the chili-fired Korean cold soups thickly
adrift with barely blanched leafy vegetables, given nutritional substance with
bean thread or rice noodles and satiny pillows of bean curd.

One of the most satisfying dishes to consider as August does its worst is
Japanese bean curd served on ice, to be livened by a sprinkling of astringent
ginger, bonito flakes and dried seaweed.  Also Japanese are the buckwheat
noodles, soba and the slender wheat vermicelli, suomen, both served iced with a
soy and fish stock sauce sparked with scallions and the heady green horseradish,
wasabi. Cold Italian pasta salads are less inviting, especially if their olive
oil dressing has congealed.

Thailand's Salads

Thailand's salads are that country's leading contribution to hotweather menus,
with shrimp, sausage, pork, beef, squid or shrimp marinated in lime juice and
chili oil, then layered on lettuce and topped with onion rings and leaves of
coriander or basil.

The crackling tacos, tostadas and burritos of Mexico, heaped with ground beef
flavored with guacamole, jalapeno peppers as hot as firecrackers, onions and
cheese also awaken sluggish appetites, although to my taste the mash of refried
black beans usually served with those dishes is out of place in shimmering heat.

Even northern Europe makes a contribution to the hot-weather kitchen with winy
fruit soups of cherries, plums and blueberries. The Danes favor the whipped cold
buttermilk soup, kaernemjolkskoldskal, sunny with lemon and garnished with crisp
oatmeal biscuits.

Fresh Green Herbs

Cool flavors to be relied on include all fresh green herbs, but most especially
dill and parsley, cucumbers and green peppers, celery, and ripe tomatoes tossed
with coarse salt that has been rubbed with basil leaves and cut cloves of
garlic. Cold rare roasted lamb and beef accented by Dijon mustard and nut-brown
roasted chicken served at room temperature are the most felicitous sources of
protein in summer, along with any kind of fish or seafood as long as it is
served a little below room temperature after being lightly poached.  Clear
bright colors, such as the reds and yellows in Spanish paella and Indian
curries, are welcome at this season.

Green being the color of coolness, try a fruit platter combining greengage
plums, green grapes, Bartlett pears and figs with the soft white Italian fresh
basket cheese. And though ice creams and sherbets are obvious choices for
cooling final touches, somehow chilled watermelon seems to be the coolest food
of all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon of diner seated in refrigerator

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 25, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE VIETNAM WAR'S SILENT MAJORITY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 316 words


To the Editor:

Robert Nimmo, the new head of the Veterans Administration, says that ''95
percent (of Vietnam veterans) have integrated themselves into our society ...''
and that they have not been shortchanged by the Government (news story July 16).

Mr. Nimmo undoubtedly considers me to be one of the 95 percent, for I have made
no visible protest, gone on no hunger strikes, brought no lawsuit over Agent
Orange and have never asked the Government or society to help with my problems.
Lacking such negative indications, he feels that he can speak, in small part,
for me and report that I have integrated, etc.

If Mr. Nimmo believes this, there is a certain bridge, in good condition save
for a few weak cables, that I would like to sell him.  Perhaps the tooth fairy
will co-sign the note.

Mr. Nimmo, my problems stemming from the war were largely caused by a gutless
Government and a totally selfish society. I will not ask them for help now. When
one is mugged, he doesn't ask the mugger to help him recover the loss.

I have chosen a quiet path, to live at the edge of your society and to ignore
your weathervane Government, for there is nothing in either that I can trust.
But, Mr. Nimmo, do not presume to speak for me, to construe my silence as
approval. Still less should you attempt, in the name of the V.A., to take credit
for a ''reintegration'' that simply has not happened.

My marriage broke up in 11 months; my A.A. meetings are going quite well, thank
you; I have a chronic health condition which is - but which I cannot prove to be
- a result of combat, and I live with a white anger that 12 years have not
dimmed. I decidedly do not approve, and I strongly doubt that I am unique.

You have been appointed to do a job. Do it. I give you the advice that my drill
sergeant gave to me: ''Soldier, shut up and soldier.''
DAVID W. MURRAY, Pine Beach, N.J., July 16, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: cartoon of soldier going into grinder

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR THE U.S. AND ISRAEL, RUDE AWAKENINGS

BYLINE: By TERENCE SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 933 words


WASHINGTON LOOKING back on it a year or two from now, the Israeli air strike
into the heart of Beirut may well be seen as a turning point in the Reagan
Administration's appreciation of the complexities of the Middle East and the
difficulties of dealing with an independent and headstrong ally such as Menachem
Begin.

For six months, the Middle East was left to simmer on a back burner while the
Administration concentrated on other priorities.  Fundamental decisions were
postponed on the ground that nothing useful could be accomplished before the
June 30 Israeli elections.  Even Israel's attack on an Iraqi nuclear reactor,
while startling, had limited effect. The Administration's main response was a
suspension of deliveries of F-16 aircraft that both sides expected would be
short-lived.

But the Beirut bombing was of another magnitude. The scale of the attack, the
300 civilians killed, its timing and devastating effect on the mediation efforts
of Ambassador Philip C. Habib combined to magnify the impact. ''I've rarely seen
so many top people in this Administration so angry over the same issue,'' said a
State Department official. ''Beirut was the end of the honeymoon between the
Reagan White House and the Begin Government.''

The irritation was reflected in harsh comments by Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger and Deputy Secretary of State William P. Clark, close friends of the
President. Mr. Weinberger said Mr. Begin's behavior ''cannot really be described
as moderation,'' and Mr. Clark added that the bombing had ''embarrassed and
disappointed'' the Administration. Mr. Begin, however, was in no mood for
moralizing from Washington. ''I don't want to hear anything from the Americans
about hitting civilian targets,'' he was reported to have said. ''I know exactly
what Americans did in Vietnam.''

Even during the Carter Administration's frequent spats with Israel, such cutting
comments were rare. By the end of the week, rhetoric had cooled as Israel agreed
to halt hostilities in Lebanon as part of a de facto cease-fire. The agreement's
long-term significance may be more diplomatic than military, however; it was the
closest Israel has come to striking even an indirect bargain with the Palestine
Liberation Organization.

Cease-fire or no, the Middle East will be prominent on Mr.  Reagan's calendar
into the fall. His introduction to the region's principal leaders begins next
week, when Egyptian President Anwar el Sadat arrives for two days of talks. The
Saudi Arabian Foreign Minister is expected in late August, Mr. Begin in early
September and King Hussein of Jordan in November.

Meanwhile, the Administration will have to define its goals and strategy.
Critics such as Harold H. Saunders, Assistant Secretary of State for the the
Middle East under Jimmy Carter, say little has been done in this regard.
''Reagan and his people don't have a Middle East policy,'' Mr. Saunders said.
''They don't have any appreciation of the history of the crisis, the problems
involved or even the commitments we made as a country under the Camp David
agreements. This absence of a policy has eroded U.S. power in the Middle East,''
he added. ''With its raids on Baghdad and Beirut, Israel has demonstrated that
it can do whatever it wants in the Middle East and America cannot restrain
her.''

The lesson of the Beirut bombing was that Israeli and American objectives in the
Middle East are frequently in conflict.  Washington's current paramount interest
is to stabilize the region to protect Persian Gulf oil supplies, keep the
Russians at bay and strengthen security relationships with Saudi Arabia, Egypt,
Jordan and Israel. To do this, the Administration wants to revive talks on
Palestinian autonomy, building on the Camp David framework.

Israel, however, sees threats to its security as overriding. The Begin
Government and its predecessors have demonstrated that they will act when they
perceive a security threat, without regard to consequences in Washington. For
all the political, military and financial assistance the United States has
provided, it has never developed commensurate influence in Jerusalem. Arab
states have assumed that the United States could force Israel to do its bidding
simply by turning off the aid. But tough talk has usually united Israel's
disparate elements and galvanized its American supporters.

Meanwhile, the Habib mission goes forward. What began as an effort to avoid a
battle over Syrian missiles in Lebanon has expanded into a search for
all-inclusive solutions to chronic Lebanese fratricide and Israeli-Palestinian
warfare. A gifted diplomat, Mr. Habib had made considerable progress before the
Beirut bombing in separating the forces in Lebanon and, more importantly,
involving Syria and the Saudis in the effort. Mr. Weinberger said the envoy had
been ''very close'' to realizing these American objectives when Israel
interrupted the process.

Mr. Habib's task now will be to build upon the fragile cease-fire.  If it lasts,
Mr. Reagan will probably feel free to lift the F-16 suspension sooner rather
than later. But the Beirut bombing is likely to remain fixed in his memory as
the beginning of an educational process about the harsh facts of life in the
Middle East.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Israeli troops on patrol along the Lebanese
border table of the public opinion front regarding the Middle East

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER OTTAWA, ALLIES STILL FAR APART ON THIRD WORLD

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1594 words


WASHINGTON THE most serious difficulties for leaders of the Atlantic Alliance
have usually been not in Europe, but in the gray areas of the third world -
Korea in 1950, Dienbienphu in 1954, Suez in 1956, the Cuban missile crisis of
1962, the Vietnam war and, more recently, Iran and Afghanistan. This is where
the fighting has been and where the danger of conflict with the Soviet Union has
been greatest. So it was not surprising that when Western and Japanese leaders
met in Ottawa last week, the main items on their agenda were pushed aside by the
flareup in the Middle East.

Official briefings and press releases focused on broad economic issues such as
high American interest rates and curbing trade with Moscow, and then on the
joint call for a cease-fire in the Middle East. But the largely hidden agenda
concerned change and the Russian challenge in the third world - how much of what
kind of political, military and economic help to provide, and in what
combination.

Administration officials said the carefully shielded agenda included El Salvador
and Namibia, how to manage the Arab-Israel negotiating process, allied attitudes
and responsibilities for Persian Gulf security and so-called ''global
negotiations'' on North-South economic relations.

The Reagan Administration and most of the allies differ sharply on most of these
issues. Tensions and feelings are running as high on many of them as on strictly
European issues such as negotiations with Moscow on medium-range missiles in
Europe, participants in the Ottawa meetings said. Foreign policy officials do
not expect that Europe, where East and West are armed to the teeth, will become
an actual battleground. Both Washington and Moscow realize that skirmishing in
Europe could lead to all-out war. But in the third world, after decades of
decolonization, the turf and stakes are still not established. Each side has
probed and tested the other and there have always been revolutions and contested
borders.

Third world issues have caused difficulties between Washington and its allies
since World War II. After the United States refused to help France at
Dienbienphu in 1954 and moved against France and Britain when they attacked
Egypt in 1956, the Europeans and, most notably, President Charles de Gaulle of
France, tried to do something about it. De Gaulle repeatedly proposed that the
United States, France and Britain form a political directorate to shape world
policies. ''If there is no agreement among the principal members of the Atlantic
Alliance on matters other than Europe,'' he asked, ''how can the Alliance be
indefinitely maintained in Europe?'' President Eisenhower and his successors
rejected the idea. But beginning with the Vietnam war, the shoe was on the other
foot: Washington was looking for support and this time the Europeans were not
buying.

The long-brewing disagreements were out in the open during the Iran and
Afghanistan crises. The Carter Administration tested the waters often to see if
the Europeans would join in economic sanctions against Iran to press for release
of the American hostages. The answer was no. Furthermore, the allies warned
against the threat of force against Iran. Western Europeans saw the convulsion
in Iran as change, albeit painful and ugly. Urging Washington to keep calm and
do nothing provocative, they predicted that eventually Iran would again turn to
the West, not to Moscow. The Carter Administration essentially followed this
line, but unhappily. If it had won European support for a tougher policy, it
might well have been less patient.

Fissures in the alliance after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan were even
deeper. Washington saw the move as a sheer power play, with dire implications
for the Persian Gulf. Most Western Europeans, at first, reacted calmly to what
they saw as Moscow holding onto a piece of territory in the Russian sphere of
influence. Besides, they were not about to risk a stable situation in Europe for
the sake of a matter of principle in Afghanistan.

The lines of tension were framed in philosophy and interest. While Washington
perceived leftist insurgencies as major threats to Western interests, the
Europeans saw revolution as a punch to roll with.  Where Washington saw
Marxist-Leninists beholden to Moscow, Europeans saw nationalists and potential
trading partners. While the new Reagan Administration insisted it would not
tolerate ''divisible detente'' - East-West peace in Europe, but conflict
elsewhere - Europeans were not about to jeopardize peace in Europe for a
showdown in the Persian Gulf or any place else.

The third world, the Europeans argued, is best dealt with through diplomacy and
economic relations, with military power far in the background. For Washington,
the military component loomed increasingly large and the Russian threat
increasingly menacing.

The Europeans do not deny the threat; they differ with the remedy.  In El
Salvador, for example, many Europeans urge direct negotiations between leftist
guerrillas and the ruling junta. The Reagan Administration advocates free and
supervised elections open to all who renounce violence, but opposes direct
talks. European critics say this means no political settlement at all, since the
guerrillas will not lay down their arms without direct talks. So be it, replies
Washington. And in the absence of a settlement, fighting may spread.

In Namibia, or South-West Africa, where South Africa continues to hold out
against the insurgents, most Europeans want to hold elections promptly, as
mandated by the United Nations. But at Ottawa last week, Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. reiterated that Pretoria would not agree to elections
without a variety of prior assurances. Elections will have to wait, but the
longer the delay, the greater the risk of black Africans holding the Americans
responsible for failure; the Europeans want none of that. Western officials will
discuss new proposals for Namibia in Paris this week.

In the Persian Gulf, the Reagan Administration keeps pressing for military
support by Western Europeans. Because they are far more dependent on oil from
the Gulf, Washington insists, Europeans ought to share in keeping the area
secure from Russian threats and internal instability. Most Europeans argue that
the Russians will not use force in the area, that a visible Western military
presence would only provoke internal and regional instability and that Europe's
best contribution is political and economic. But as Washington spends billions
of dollars and Europeans spend practically nothing on arms to protect mainly
European economic interests, it is difficult not to foresee further strains.

In the Arab-Israel dispute, Europeans count on Washington to hold Israeli
military power in check and to wring negotiating concessions from Jerusalem. In
their view, Western interests lie in a peace settlement made essentially of
Israeli territorial concessions.  Unless Washington delivers Israel, they
believe, moderate Arabs will become increasingly radicalized and anti-Western.
Any American administration, however, has to balance Israeli and Arab
considerations more carefully than that.

At Ottawa, other third world issues were subsumed under the agenda item ''global
negotiation.'' This is jargon for United Nations deliberations on North-South
economic relations aimed at a transfer of wealth from rich to poor nations -
preferential tariffs for industries of developing countries, more multilateral
aid, price supports for raw materials and the like.

The Reagan Administration does not like to provide aid through multilateral
agencies such as the World Bank, arguing that it does not directly serve
American strategic interests. It does not intend to increase economic aid and
believes that the best way for the third world to develop is to become more
hospitable for private capital investment. Most European leaders find this
stance unrealistic and needlessly provocative. They cannot imagine developing
countries turning themselves into vessels for free market enterprise.

There is some cynicism in the Europeans' position, Washington believes. The
allies are generally prepared to provide a higher percentage of their wealth in
foreign aid and to give developing countries certain trade preferences. But they
are not prepared to go much further and they are mostly concerned not to appear
unwilling to help. They put a great deal of pressure on Mr. Reagan in Ottawa to
join the global negotiations, but the President agreed only to participate ''in
preparations for a mutually acceptable process.''

Given the extent of the differences between Washington and its European,
Canadian and Japanese partners on third world issues, it is no wonder that the
summiteers did not want to call special attention to them on top of their other
problems. But unless something very surprising happened very secretly in the
corridors and private meeting rooms in Ottawa, the differences over the third
world are likely to persist and grow more acute.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of the leaders dining at the economic summit in
Ottawa

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Abroad at Home;
FOR THE SAKE OF ISRAEL

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 921 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, July 25


Over the two weeks of intense Israeli bombing in Lebanon, American officials
expressed increasing concern about the effects on the U. S. position in the
Middle East. But the American diplomatic move, when it came, was really more in
Israel's interest than in ours. It was an intervention to save Israel from the
consequences of its own policy.

The bombing campaign was as clear an example of self-destructive tactics as we
have seen in international politics lately. When Prime Minister Begin and the
cabinet finally agreed to the American proposal for a cease-fire, one can only
surmise that the political price they were paying had somehow, belatedly, been
brought home to them.

Some of Israel's warmest supporters in this country were sickened by the raid on
Beirut, which took the lives of 300 civilians. One of those supporters asked
angrily: ''How many innocent people does Menachem Begin have to kill before the
United States expresses its outrage?''

And it was not just the attack on Beirut. Day after day Israeli planes struck at
highways and bridges in raids that caused mainly civilian casualties. John
Kifner of The New York Times wrote from southern Lebanon on July 22 that most of
the victims were civilians ''burned alive in their cars, trapped in clogged
traffic.''

Israelis have been the victims of terrible attacks by Palestinian terrorists: at
the Munich Olympics, in the school at Maalot, in the bus on the coastal highway.
The incidents remain in our memory - and how much more, rightly, in the
Israelis'.

But the world will not be persuaded by that history, and should not be, that
Israel is justified in indiscriminate military attacks. The latest round of
fighting, so far as we know, began with Israeli air attacks on July 10. The
first Palestinian rockets followed, killing three Israelis, and then the raid on
Beirut. Altogether, over the two weeks, the death toll was approximately 450
Arabs, six Israelis.

Sovereign states in this world are not expected to act like terrorist groups.
Responsibility is one of their claims to existence, and one of their burdens.
The responsibility is the greater when a country is a dominant military power -
as Israel is in the Middle East, able to attack more or less where and when it
wishes.

Moreover, bombing has been a repeated failure as a device to break the will of
another people. The U. S. study of strategic bombing of Germany in World War II
showed that it had if anything intensified the German war effort and public
support for it. The same truth was graphically demonstrated in Vietnam.

The bombing in Lebanon had a particular ironic effect. Its designated targets
were Palestinian guerrillas, but the bombing ended by lending legitmacy to the
Palestinian cause. Mr. Begin could say, as he did, that he would not countenance
even indirect negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization for a
cease-fire. U. S.  officials could foreswear contact with the P.L.O., but there
had to be a dialogue and there was one, carried on through the Saudis.

The result has been to dramatize the political presence of the P.L.O. The world
sees it as a necessary party in the diplomacy of this episode - and, by
inference, in others.

The bombing, finally, was a failure in a sense more profound than its immediate
results. It was the logical end of a general Begin policy that refuses to accept
Palestinians as human beings with a sense of national identity. Instead of
dealing with that stubborn reality, Mr. Begin has handled the problem by force:
by continued occupation of the West Bank, by suppression and expulsion of the
area's political leaders, by the planting of settlements in the territory.

In the short run those tactics have worked. But they can bring no real peace, no
repose for Israel. They are a recipe for hatred. And bombing is the ultimate
expression of that bankrupt policy.

In the end only political solutions can give Israel the breathingspace it needs
and deserves. Only successful diplomacy can restore the country's internal peace
and moral authority. Bomb Lebanon, occupy it, send armed force farther and
farther: None of that can bring security for long.

If there is any hope amid the bloodshed of these last weeks - and I think there
is - it is in the response of the Reagan Administration.  It did not threaten,
it did not bluster. But it made its distress at Israeli policy plain, and it
brought the reasons home to Mr. Begin through the effective diplomacy of
Ambassador Philip Habib.

Most important, I believe that the President and his people have understood the
larger lesson of the affair. That is that only American leadership can rescue
Israel from the dead end where a policy of force without diplomacy, without
politics, has brought it.

Assuming optimistically that Ambassador Habib can make significant progress on
the Lebanese tangle, the challenge to the Administration will be to produce some
progress on the West Bank.  The available path is the suspended negotiation on
the Camp David promise of autonomy.  Leadership there will require the President
to tell Mr.  Begin, when he visits Washington this fall, that his travesty
version of autonomy--endless occupation, settlements, absorption--will not do,
in the interest of the United States or of Israel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON PAPERS, A DECADE LATER

SECTION: Section 6; Page 62, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 106 words


That the papers held no danger to the country because of military secrets is, I
believe, true. However, I feel that publication of the papers decidedly
destroyed the will of the American people to back their men who were fighting in
Vietnam. You go into a war to win, or you don't go. But once you are there, the
men who are fighting deserve the support of the home front. The end might have
been quite different had that been the case. My son was there.  BEULAH BRUCKHEIM

Binghamton, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TAXING PROBLEMS

BYLINE: By ROGER STARR;
Roger Starr is a member of the editorial board of the New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1715 words


REAGANOMICS Supply-Side Economics in Action.  By Bruce R. Bartlett.  Foreword by
United States Representative Jack Kemp.  229 pp. Westport, Conn.: Arlington
House. $14.95.

EAGANOMICS'' is to economic literature what a campaign biography is to history.
In effect, the book is a brief for the enactment of supply-side economics by
Congress, and like many campaign biographies it stresses the humble beginnings
of the hero who will rescue the country. But in ''Reaganomics'' by Bruce
Bartlett, the hero, born in a log cabin of princely forebears, is not a person.
It is an idea - the idea that current economic theory has smacked solidly into
an unyielding and uncongenial reality, and that the reality itself can be
changed by a more enlightened brand of economic thought, stressing the primacy
of production in order to stimulate consumption, employment and stable prices.

This ideological hero has its origin in the so-called Laffer curve, which, as
every one who cares must know, is named after Arthur Laffer, an economist
trained at the University of Chicago. The Laffer curve is not truly a curve but
an insight. Mr. Laffer notes that if people pay a zero tax rate, the Government,
any Government, will collect no taxes. He notes with equal clarity that if the
Government imposes a 100-percent tax rate on every income, no taxes will be
collected because no one will bother to work.

Between these two points, however, it is pretty hard to demonstrate that a curve
can be drawn that will predict how much taxes will be produced in any given
economic setting at any given rate of taxation. Mr. Laffer's theory is that
there are two points on his ''curve'' at which the same tax revenue will be
produced: one revenue reflecting a large volume of production taxed at a low
rate; the other, a low volume of production taxed at a high rate. The curve does
not tell us how to determine any of these paired points, but Mr. Laffer and Mr.
Bartlett do derive a moral with illustrious economic ancestry. They emphasize
that the purpose of taxation should not be the redistribution of income, but the
collection of revenue to pay the costs of Government that cannot be paid by
those who benefit directly from the services provided.

In short, drawing on economists from Ibn Khaldun (1332-1406) to our
contemporaries, Mr. Bartlett urges that it is better for all that Government
should follow policies that reduce taxes, which will encourage production rather
than consumption. Mr. Bartlett reminds his readers that the classical ancestry
of the Laffer curve lies in the economic theory of Jean Baptiste Say
(1767-1832), who argued that production must precede consumption as an economic
process. In vulgar terms, that insight was reduced to the proposition that
supply creates demand, and it was Say's theory that Keynes set himself to refute
in his ''General Theory.'' In Keynesian economics - devised during the Great
Depression, when no one seemed to have money for either production or
consumption - governments were encouraged to intervene in the world economy by
increasing demand.

The days of deflation now seem so remote that the Keynesian economic theory
intended to alleviate them is hardly relevant to the troubles of these times.
Our problem is easy enough to perceive: Inflation - or a reduction in the
purchasing power of the money that nowadays everyone seems to have - is taking
place at exactly the same time that the productive system is operating at far
less than capacity. The monetarist economists believe that the quantity of money
in circulation must be brought under control in order to curb the inflation of
prices and to encourage an economic revival on the production side. Mr. Bartlett
tells his readers that even Milton Friedman, a monetarist, has said that it is
more important to reduce the total size of the Federal budget than to eliminate
the deficit by a high level of taxation at a high level of Federal spending.

With interest rates running so high that the financing of housing becomes almost
impossible, and with the quantity of money in circulation continuing to increase
as these words are written, with the G.N.P. rising very little if at all, and
yet with millions of Americans underemployed or out of the work force entirely,
it seems that the Keynesian analysis of fighting economic stagnation with
governmental fiscal expansion of demand does not make sense. At the same time,
one wonders what will happen to the very large number of people dependent on
enlarged Government social programs if sharp cutbacks in Government spending
reduce the programs. And it is also clear that the dependence of the nation's
economy on international trade dictates a strong military posture that is bound
to be more expensive than in the past. How can all of these conflicting
urgencies be reconciled?

R. BARTLETT'S answer - and that of the supply-side economists - is most
attractive. It suggests that all of the objectives can be met at the same time
by, in effect, unleashing the productivity of the American economy. If the term
- unleashing -brings back memories of the futile hope that the
Kuomintang-controlled island of Taiwan would, released from its American
tethers, spring out against mainland China and dispose of the People's Republic,
the coincidence is intentional. Much as one would like to believe that the
immense problems involved here could be solved so painlessly, the inconsistency
in scale between the problems and the supply-side solution will probably leave
most readers in a state of confirmed agnosticism.

The supply-side solution to the current economic impasse is a change in the
progressive income-tax system that would significantly lower the tax paid on the
last dollars earned each year (the socalled ''marginal income'') by the nation's
upper-income taxpayers. The book cites the fact that most high-income families
manage to avoid paying the high rates of taxes by taking advantage of tax
shelters. Mr. Bartlett also stresses that in taking advantage of those shelters,
the taxpayer is investing large sums of money on projects whose economic motives
are, to put it mildly, clouded. They are by their nature intended to lose money
rather than to make profits, at least for a considerable term of years. This
suggests quite plausibly that current tax policy forces people with income high
enough to produce savings to invest those savings in producing things for which
there is no market.

EDUCE the marginal tax rates, says Mr. Bartlett on behalf of the supply-siders,
and you will give such a shot in the arm to the productive energies of the
nation that the increased flow of investment and employment will not only temper
the rate of inflation, but make possible a growth in the economy that will
support Government expenditure with much lower tax rates.

By definition, such a statement about the economic future cannot be proved
unless it is tried, and even then, the number of variables in an economic system
is so great that it is impossible to claim that any one of them - even so
crucial a matter as a major downward jiggling of the marginal tax rates - has
brought on the happy response. Nevertheless, Mr. Bartlett founds his church on
the pebbles of experience he has been able to pick up in the past 20 years or so
as, among other positions, an aide to Representative Jack Kemp of New York and
now as a staff member of the Joint Economic Committee of Congress. He talks of
the good results of the so-called Kennedy tax cut, and as Walter Heller, then
chief of the Council of Economic Advisers, put it, the cut did ''have a
tremendously stimulating effect, a multiplied effect on the economy. It was the
major factor that led to our running a $3 billion surplus by the middle of 1965
before escalation in Vietnam struck us.''

What, then, happened to the good results of the tax cut? According to Mr.
Bartlett, it disappeared because the inflation caused by the Vietnam War pushed
everyone into a higher income bracket, nullifying the effect of lower tax rates.
If the Vietnam War had been financed in a less inflationary way - by imposing
tax increases instead of selling Treasury bonds to the banking system, which
increased the money supply and helped intensify inflationary trends - the tax
cuts would have ended anyway. The net result seems to be that it's hard to run
an economy and fight a war at the same time.

As another example of the benefits of tax cuts and their usefulness in
increasing tax revenues, Mr. Bartlett cites California's experience with
Proposition 13, which sharply limited the power of localities to impose real
estate taxes. It is certainly true that the disasters that were predicted by
many to follow these tax cuts did not occur, but it is not equally convincing
that the surge in California's economy was the result of the local tax cuts and
not of a dozen other developments in American life that happened to take place
at the same time.

Even without proof, however, the immense problems of the present economy push
Mr. Bartlett's reader in his direction, not with conviction that margninal tax
rates would make the difference in the decision to invest in worthwhile, highly
satisfactory enterprises, but rather with the hope that this may be the case.
Irving Kristol has pointed out elsewhere that economic growth does not depend on
everyone's being stimulated by tax cuts, but only those entrepreneurs whose
willingness to take financial risks enlarges the economy. In turning to lower
tax rates at a time of serious rearmament and large budget deficits, we are, as
Herbert Stein has suggested (how his words, quoted in ''Reagonomics,'' anger Mr.
Bartlett!) in dangerous territory. Our reward may be increased inflation instead
of a healthier, more productive economy. No one knows. But even if the rah-rah
campaign tone in which Mr. Bartlett's book is styled tends to undermine one's
confidence, the reader finds himself rooting for the success of the
supply-siders' initiative. But the risks are still there, and agnosticism
remains an attractive position. The secrets of a growing economy -its strange
mixture of natural resources, cultural attitudes, competing interests - make it
hard to feel that last little surge of faith that tax rates alone will turn the
key.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 26, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WILFRED BURCHETT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 514 words


To the Editor:

Thomas Powers's review of Wilfred Burchett's ''At the Barricades'' omitted some
of the more revealing parts of Mr. Burchett's career, parts of which ought to be
known to anyone contemplating spending $15 on the book.

A K.G.B. defector, Yuri Krotkov, has testified that he knew Mr.  Burchett well
in Moscow and tried to help him in his attempt to get on the K.G.B. payroll.
Here is how Mr. Krotkov's testimony was summed up by the judge in an
unsuccessful libel suit that Mr. Burchett brought against a member of Parliament
in Australia in 1974.

''There then was talk about the amount of money that a correspondent would need,
and it was said to be about 10,000 rubles per month, and a free apartment and a
car; and according to him (Krotkov) Burchett said that was what he wanted, to
live and work as a foreign correspondent, that he wanted 10,000 rubles per
month, a free apartment and a car. And these sort of things were discussed
between him and Burchett in an indirect fashion; and he gave evidence of what
Burchett had told him about the way he functioned in Korea, and the way he
functioned in Hanoi, where he had worked for the Chinese and North Vietnamese
Governments. ...

''Burchett said to him, 'I am really a member of the Australian Communist Party,
but all these years I was involved in sort of illegal activities. In other
words, I didn't say openly whether I was a member of the Communist Party or not,
but I was and I am. And as a member of the Communist Party I was in China; I was
and I am in very close relation personally with Chou En-lai. ... And I served
our case, the Communist case, the Communist Party of China, giving them very
valuable information when I was in Korea among the foreign correspondents. ...
The same thing happened in Hanoi. I went to Hanoi and I am now in Hanoi. I am
established there on the payroll of the party. I am in close relation with Ho
Chi Minh ... I am deeply involved in this trouble against the Americans ... And
of course, I can be as useful in Moscow, again from an ideological point of
view, for our common cause.' ''

Mr. Krotkov went on to say that Mr. Burchett maintained a close relationship
with Colonel Borodin Barsegov, then head of the special K.G.B. department
responsible for subverting foreign correspondents in Moscow. Mr. Krotkov
identified Mr. Burchett's ''case officer'' as Victor Kartzev, a top-rank K.G.B.
officer.

No discussion of Wilfred Burchett would be complete without mention of the
prominent role he played in extracting and rewriting phony germ warfare
confessions from American POWs in North Korea during the Korean War. Derek Kinne
of Tucson, Ariz., was one of the POWs who says he suffered because of Mr.
Burchett. Mr. Kinne says he argued with Mr. Burchett in the POW camp, and Mr.
Burchett said, ''I could have you shot.'' Immediately after that Mr. Kinne was
subjected to cruel torture because of the way he had talked to ''Comrade
Burchett.'' He was kept in solitary confinement for 13 months. ...
REED IRVINE, Chairman, Accuracy in Media, Inc., Washington, D.C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 29, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA'S FRIENDS IN HANOI

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 367 words


To the Editor:

Your July 16 editorial ''Cambodia: Still a Sideshow'' oversimplifies the
situation and misses a main point: If the Vietnamese had not invaded Cambodia,
few Cambodians would be alive today.

Instead of asserting that ''Vietnam's crimes in Cambodia are real,'' you might
have acknowledged that Vietnam's intervention saved a nation from a government
that had exterminated some three million of its own people; that, furthermore,
Vietnam's intervention was forced by repeated Cambodian attacks on Vietnam,
particularly on the major rice-growing areas of the Mekong delta, to which
thousands of Cambodians had fled, increasing Vietnam's already considerable
economic difficulties.

And instead of talking about Vietnam's reputed crimes, you might have pointed
out that while the West watched Cambodians starve, Vietnam fed them with its own
meager resources and with relief shipments from the Soviet Union and from
independent groups like the British Oxfam.

Regarding the political contexts, you might have pointed out that Thailand - far
from being a worried little bastion of democracy facing an aggressive Vietnam -
for centuries has had interventionist interests in both Laos and Cambodia and
that after World War II Thailand was still trying to hold on to that part of
Cambodia where the Pol Pot troops are now based with U.S., Chinese and Thai
support. As it stands, if the Vietnamese were to leave Cambodia, Pol Pot's
troops would return with a vengeance.

As you say, Cambodia is the victim of the ''corruptions of geopolitics.'' The
United States, unlike the other parties involved, can't even claim to be acting
in its own interests. If we had normalized relations with Vietnam some years ago
, we might be able to exert some influence there. Instead, we drove Vietnam
further into the Soviet camp.

General Haig, who says he wants to punish and isolate Vietnam, is as wrongheaded
now about that country as he was 10 years ago, and the results for Cambodians,
and for us, are bad.
JOHN BALABAN, State College, Pa., July 17, 1981

The writer, as a field representative for the Committee of Responsibility,
worked for two years among refugees and civilian casualties in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon of an Ostrich

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 29, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
TRUCE OR PEACE?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 893 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 28


The present cease-fire in Lebanon is regarded here as little more than a
temporary truce. It has provided a pause for reflection, but few officials
pretend it will last unless it is followed by a major reappraisal and compromise
of the political problem between the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean.

This reappraisal is now beginning in Washington, very slowly, because the
attention of the Reagan Administration is still on the budget. But there are
some thoughtful minds at work here that are starting to think about the Middle
East in a different way.

In some respects this pause is comparable to two other critical periods in the
development of U.S. foreign policy after the last world war. In the late 1940's
and early 50's, it was recognized that defense of the U.S. depended upon new
political and economic commitments to defend Europe and the civilization of the
West.

Then as now, this idea began in the universities, in the press and among
forward-looking minds in the Cabinet, Congress and the Civil Service. It led in
due course, but only after the most searching and often venomous debate, to the
Marshall Plan for the reconstruction of Europe, and the North Atlantic treaty
alliance, in which the U.S.  committed its economic and military power to the
defense of its ideals.

The second critical period occurred in the Far East and Southeast Asia, where
the U.S. supported the reconstruction and defense of Japan and fought two wars -
in Korea and Vietnam - to make clear that this area could not be dominated by
the Soviet Union or Communist China without the risk of war with the United
States.

Now there is a third area of crisis in the Middle East, which involves the vital
interests not only of the fragile and divided nations and factions of that
region but also of the industrial and developing nations as well. This vast
geographic oil well, at the strategic military, economic and philosophic
crossroads of the continent, is now the presiding issue of world politics and is
likely to remain so for the rest of the century.

Washington has not been dealing with this third strategic zone as it finally
dealt with the crises in Europe and Asia. It has dealt with Israel politically.
It has dealt with Saudi Arabia economically. It has dealt with President Sadat
of Egypt personally, as it dealt with the Shah of Iran, and has scattered modern
military arms around the region in the hope of creating a regional balance of
power.

What is just beginning to come clear at the fringes of thought here, but not yet
at the center of policy, is that this strategy is not working; that the
Administration cannot make its way out of this tangle by exporting or
withholding military weapons and must begin to think not about the effects but
about the causes of the crisis.

Its root cause is fear - fear in Israel of another Holocaust, the military
destruction of that state or its internal destruction by inflation or subversion
by the Arab guerrillas or the Arab population in their midst, who are serving
but outbreeding them.

Fear also exists of the Russians, who are so close to the Middle East, who
thrive on anarchy; of the Europeans, who need Arab oil more than the support of
Israel; and of the ambiguity of the U.S., which supports Israel in election
years but resents its use of American arms in its excessive raids.

What is to be done about this dominion of fear that is keeping the Middle East
in turmoil? This is what Washington is now beginning, however vaguely, to
consider - and to consider the remedies applied in Europe and Asia in the other
major crises.

These others were eased if not resolved by removing the ambiguity or doubt about
Washington's intentions. It was made clear to the Russians by the NATO treaty,
and by the commitments to Japan and the presence of American troops in Korea,
that the security of those areas was vital to the security of the U.S., and that
any violation of their borders would be regarded as a challenge to war.

No such clear commitment has been given to Israel by the United States, and for
many years Israel didn't want it. But the situation is becoming more dangerous.
Washington talks of its ''alliance'' with Israel, but both do as they like,
regardless of the interests of the other. This uncertainty must be removed if
there is to be any compromise settlement in the Middle East.

Israel cannot be secure unless it redeems the Camp David promise of ''autonomy''
for the Palestinians, but it is not likely to redeem that promise if it is not
clear to the Palestinians and the rejectionist Arab states and the Russians that
the United States will defend the 1967 borders of Israel and the borders of the
adjoining Arab states against military attack.

There is probably no other way to contain the spread of nuclear weapons and the
expansion of Soviet power into this inflammable area other than by the sort of
commitment the U.S. gave to Europe. This is not a popular thought on Capitol
Hill, but for the first time it is beginning to be considered seriously here, as
a way to break the present decline into anarchy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               July 29, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 935 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
THE DISTORTION OF AMERICA. By Oscar Handlin. 154 pages. Atlantic-Lit- tle,
Brown. $10.95.

OSCAR HANDLIN, the Harvard historian, calls it a ''passionate and polemical
analysis'' of recent history, though it seems more like a furious indictment.
But however you characterize ''The Distortion of America,'' a book constructed
from a number of Professor Handlin's recent essays that have appeared in
Commentary, The Atlantic, New Leader, The American Scholar and several other
publications, there is enormous appeal to the exercise he undertakes in it. And
I'm not being entirely facetious, for, after all, who doesn't share Professor
Handlin's concern for what he describes as America's loss of purpose and
deteriorating position in the world today.

First, there's something perversely uplifting about being told that things were
once much better. It gives us a sense of standards to be reminded that the
United States used to be dedicated to the idea that the world was one, that we
were to serve as an example to that world, and that any intercourse we had with
foreign countries had nothing whatsoever to do with imperialism. (Professor
Handlin makes the point that, by the start of this century, the overwhelming
bulk of our foreign investment was tied up in Europe, Canada and Mexico, and
that even the small portion committed to undeveloped areas such as Africa and
Asia was mercantile rather than exploitative.)

Then, it's reassuring in a way to learn that America's opponents aren't doing
very well - that Communism has ''failed'' and the countries that have tried to
steer a neutral path have only succeeded in contributing to the world's present
instability.

Some Gratification

And finally, there's gratification of a sort in locating specific people and
events to blame for the major ills that have befallen us - the Israelis, for
example, for having unilaterally put Eichmann on trial and thus set in motion
the subsequent breakdown of international law. Or those who dissented with our
conduct of the war in Vietnam, for having undermined American credibility during
the Paris peace negotiations. Or the news media, for having failed to take
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's Harvard commencement speech seriously enough. Or
liberal intellectuals from Walter Lippmann on to the followers of Eugene
McCarthy, George McGovern and John Anderson, for failing to keep faith with
majority rule and the tastes of the common man, and thus contributing to our
present loss of trust in American ideals.

But the real beauty of stamping one's foot and condemning the recent past is
that there's not really much you have to do about it.  You get the benefit of
hindsight. Professor Handlin is a master of hindsight, particularly when he
observes, apropos of President Lyndon B. Johnson's conduct of the Vietnam War,
''Only a few years from his death, he sank into despondency,'' as if Johnson
knew in 1968 that he would die in 1973. Or where he writes, ''When Abbie Hoffman
and the Chicago Seven became cultural heroes in 1968, they not only assured the
election of Richard Nixon but shook popular confidence in the judicial and
political order incapable of restraining their rowdy antics,'' when many would
argue that it was the Nixon Administration's judicial order that virtually
created Abbie Hoffman and the Chicago Seven.

You get the benefit of hindsight, but there's not much you can do about what you
see. As Professor Handlin concludes: ''There is no turning back the clock of
history. The dreams of the 1950's are gone without prospect for recovery. There
are no means left to breathe life into the concepts of collective security and
international law.''

Of course, you now know what to do the next time there's a Vietnam War to win,
whatever the sacrifice; or a Shah of Iran to support, because you've learned to
distinguish between a ruler who is morethan-less good, like the Shah, and one
that is more-than-less evil, like the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. The only
trouble is, history doesn't tend to repeat itself in quite the precise
circumstances that permits the application of lessons learned in the past. This,
some would argue, is why we failed in Vietnam: because the lesson of Munich
didn't work in a complex colonial situation.

Pursuit of Possible

So all you have left to do after reading ''The Distortion of America'' is nod,
sigh ''How true!'', square your shoulders and follow Professor Handlin's simple
prescription for the ''proper employment of the interval'' until ''Soviet
clumsiness'' gives the free world ''a respite to discover equivalents'' of ''the
concepts of collective security and international law.''

This ''proper employment'' ''demands abandonment of illusions and recognition of
necessity, pursuit of the possible, not of the ultimately desirable. It requires
also recognition by the free world of its own identity, of the absolute moral
differences that separate it from the totalitarian regimes with which it shares
the globe. And the time left will be wasted upon those who fail to understand
that they inhabit one world with others and must summon up the will to defend
values from the past that are still valid for the future.''

In short, let us be vigilant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Oscar Handlin

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

1980 CENSUS FINDS CHINESE SURPASSING JAPANESE AS NATION'S LARGEST ASIAN GROUP

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words


The number of Chinese in the United States has grown so rapidly in recent years
that they now total more than 800,000 and have surpassed the Japanese as the
leading population of Asians in this country, according to 1980 census figures
announced yesterday.

The rapid increase in Chinese and in people from Japan, Korea, the Philippines,
India and Vietnam reflects a surge of immigration in the first decade after the
lifting of restrictive quotas on Asians in the late 1960's.

The people from those six countries make up the majority of the Asian population
in the United States. They have almost doubled since 1970 and now total more
than three million, as measured by the 1980 census.

The Immigration and Naturalization Service confirms the growth. It reported that
1.5 million Asians were legally admitted in the 10 years ended Sept. 30, 1980.

In the decade the number of Chinese increased 85 percent for a 1980 total of
806,000, according to the Bureau of the Census.  A decade earlier, Japanese were
the predominant Asians in America, with 591,000. They grew 19 percent in the
decade, to 701,000 in 1980, but were surpassed not only by Chinese but by
Filipinos. The Filipinos increased their numbers 126 percent, for a 1980
population of 775,000.

Koreans showed the most phenomenal growth, increasing from 69,000 in 1970 to
355,000 in 1980, a growth rate of 413 percent.  Asian Indians numbered 362,000
and Vietnamese 262,000 in 1980.  Neither had ever before been counted before by
the Census Bureau.  But immigration officials said the vast majorities of both
had come to the United States in recent years. Most of the Vietnamese were
refugees who came in under immigration quotas eased especially for those
displaced by the Vietnam War and other disruptions in Southeast Asia.

The increases were made more dramatic by the moderate increase shown by the
United States population as a whole in the 1970's: 11.4 percent. The Census
Bureau announced earlier that according to the count in April 1980, Asians and
Pacific islanders who designated their nation of origin numbered 3.5 million, or
1.5 percent of the population.

Some Groups Not on List

This, however, did not include Asians from certain countries, including
Thailand, Laos, Indonesia and Pakistan. Question 4 of the census form asked
residents to classify themselves as one of 14 designated groups or to check
''other'' and write in what classification they placed themselves in.  These
were the preliminary results: White 188,341,000. Black 26,488,000. American
Indian 1,362,000. Eskimo 42,000. Aleutian Islander 14,177. Chinese 806,000.
Filipino 775,000. Japanese 701,000. Asian Indian 362,000. Korean 355,000.
Vietnamese 262,000. Hawaiian 167,000. Samoan 42,000. Guamanian 32,000. Other
6,737,000.

Improved Methods a Factor

The bureau is to present a breakdown later on those in the ''other'' category.
But it is estimated that 40 percent of those who listed themselves in that
category were Hispanic Americans who consider themselves neither black nor white
but as belonging to a nationality not included on the census form. Many in the
''other'' column were Asians from various countries.

Some of the increase in the major groups was attributed to improved methods of
counting by the Census Bureau, but the census report said most of the increase
was due to ''a high-level immigration.''

For 40 years Asians and Africans were virtually excluded from entering this
country by numerical limitations first prescribed by the Quota Act of 1924,
which allocated entry on the basis of the national origin of the white
population.

Enactment of that law followed expression of fears by some white Americans of
being overrun by hordes of people of a different color, religion and customs. It
was repealed in 1965 and discriminatory quotas ended by 1968.

Current laws permit the entry of 270,000 persons a year, with each nation
limited to 20,000. Exceptions have been made, however, for refugee groups such
as those from Southeast Asia and Cuba, and the quotas do not include relatives
of immigrants who have come into the country legally. Also, there has been a
large increase in recent years in the number of illegal immigrants.

Changes Rule Out Precision

The result is that a much larger percentage of the population is now of Asian,
Latin American or African extraction, even though the Census Bureau's changes in
classifications between 1970 and 1980 prevent precise comparisons. Some persons
who listed themselves as Mexican or Puerto Rican, for example, were listed by
the bureau in 1970 as white.

Bureau officials said a large increase of American Indians, to 1,362,000 from
569,000 in 1970, was a result not only of high birth rates among Indians but
especially of improvements in census procedures in counting people on
reservations. The heaviest concentrations of American Indians were in
California, Oklahoma, Arizona, New Mexico and North Carolina.

Asians have tended to concentrate largely in the West, with California having
the largest number by far of Chinese, Japanese, Filipinos, Koreans and
Vietnamese. surpassing any other state.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table on populations of five Asian ethnic groups in U.S.
in 1970 and

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MULTI-DIMENSIONAL ALTERNATIVE TO AN AMERICAN PEACE ACADEMY

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 111 words


To the Editor:

After reading George Foster's article, I feel that those of us who were active
in protesting the American involvement in Vietnam have an opportunity finally,
through the Peace Academy Commission, to unite in a positive way to support a
program designed for peace.

It is ironic that George Washington called for a ''proper Peace Establishment''
in 1783 and that after so many military conflicts which grew continuously less
germane to our fruitful survival we still do not have Government ''peace
thinkers.''

During these days of official ''tough-talk'' it would be pleasant to hear some
soft sounds of wisdom.
NEIL GRIMALDI, Bronx, July 8, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                July 30, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TRIAL LAWYERS SEE GREATER ROLE IN PRODUCT SAFETY

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 683 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, July 29


Americans must depend on lawsuits, judges and juries, not government regulators,
to protect them from hazardous products and chemicals, according to the trial
lawyers who make their living bringing the lawsuits.

And some lawyers interviewed at the convention of the Association of Trial
Lawyers of America here predicted that there would be many more lawsuits for
harm done by toxic chemicals and similar substances as the Reagan Administration
cut back on Federal health, safety and environmental regulations.

With environmental and occupational safety regulations ''gone down the tubes,''
many more lawsuits can be expected, predicted Victor J.  Yannacone Jr., the lead
counsel in a lawsuit on behalf of 2.4 million veterans against chemical
companies that manufactured the defoliant Agent Orange, sprayed by American
forces in Vietnam.

''There's only one way that you can get societal safety and that's out of
liability - making it more expensive to do it the unsafe way,'' Harry M. Philo
of Detroit, outgoing president of the association, said in an interview.

Differences in Impact

Calling the 40,000-member association ''a coalition of lawyers who represent the
victims in society,'' Mr. Philo asserted, ''The Federal Government's efforts in
getting a safer society are infinitesimal compared to what we do.''

''It's the difference between a million-dollar verdict and a $500 fine,'' he
said.  Lawyers like Mr. Philo often get paid only when they win and can collect
''contingent fees'' ranging from 20 to 60 percent of the settlements for damages
paid to their clients for their injuries.

Not all lawyers agree that those who bring such lawsuits are entitled to a badge
of heroism, of course, although those who dispute it have not been much in
evidence among the 1,500 lawyers at this convention at the St. Francis Hotel.

Fee System Is Attacked

One critic, who describes such statements by trial lawyers as ''self-serving''
and contends that the contingent fees system has made many of these lawyers
rich, is Dan Burt, president of the Capital Legal Foundation, a
business-oriented public interest law firm in Washington.

''It fills the courts with a lot of baseless claims,'' fosters
''ambulance-chasing,'' and leads to ''an overly litigious society,'' Mr. Burt
said in a telephone interview. ''It does not deal with the many people who get
hurt who don't have a good lawyer,'' he said, adding that it overcompensates
others.

The trial lawyers, who decided unanimously today to continue barring defense
lawyers in civil suits from voting membership, bristle at such criticisms. They
contend propaganda by insurance companies that refuse to pay adequate
compensation to accident victims has unduly influenced public opinion against
them.

''The contingent fee system is the poor man's key to the courthouse,'' Mr. Philo
said.

A Theme of Gathering

This theme has been sounded over and over again in speeches and interviews at
the convention here this week.  It is almost the creed of the association, whose
members spend most of their time suing manufacturers of automobiles, airplanes,
collapsing buildings, toxic chemicals and other products described as dangerous
and defective in behalf of injured persons.

Richard F. Gerry of San Diego, the association's incoming president, said that
manufacturers and insurance companies could avoid wasteful litigation and ''put
the plaintiffs' attorneys out of business if they would just be fair'' in paying
claims.

Mr. Gerry expressed concern in an interview that powerful manufacturing groups
and insurance companies were lobbying for ''repressive legislation that would
take away the rights of victims'' and resurrect many of the legal barriers to
suing that have been battered down by state and Federal courts in recent
decades.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS' POSITION ON

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 616 words


CAMBODIATo the Editor:

Bernard Nossiter's July 18 news article, ''U.N. Resolution on Cambodia Keeps
Doors Open For Pol Pot,'' contains a number of inaccuracies concerning the
position of the Asean (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) countries at the
International Conference on Kampuchea.

he Asean countries believe that the world should continue to recognize the legal
Government of Democratic Kampuchea that existed at the time of the Vietnamese
invasion. This is a position supported by the principles of the United Nations
Charter and international law. To do otherwise would be to acquiesce in
Vietnam's invasion of its neighboring country and its imposition of a puppet
regime upon the people.

Concerning the future, the position of the Asean countries is that, once the
Vietnamese agree to a total withdrawal of their troops from Kampuchea, free
elections should be held, in which all Kampuchean parties and factions,
including the Khmer Rouge, would be allowed to participate. The party or faction
that wins the mandate of the Kampuchean people would form its new government. We
cannot accept the view that the Khmer Rouge should be automatically restored to
power following the withdrawal of the Vietnamese.

It is the view of the Asean countries that, for the elections to be genuinely
free, appropriate arrangements must be negotiated and agreed upon to ensure that
no armed Kampuchean factions, and this includes the Khmer Rouge, will be able to
prevent or disrupt the elections or to intimidate or coerce the population in
the electoral process and that the election result will be respected by all of
them.

We have agreed not to spell out, at this stage, what such arrangements could be,
but we certainly do not preclude the disarming of all armed Kampucheans or their
sequestration in camps.

The Asean countries also believe that the conference should negotiate and agree
upon appropriate arrangements to maintain law and order in Kampuchea and to
prepare for the elections, following the withdrawal of the Vietnamese and before
the establishment of a new government resulting from those elections. We cannot
accept the view that, after the Vietnamese have left, the maintenance of law and
order and the organization of free elections should be left to the Khmer Rouge.

According to Mr. Nossiter, these principles have not been reflected in the
declaration adopted by the international conference. He is wrong. Here are the
relevant paragraphs from the declaration:

''With a view to reaching a comprehensive political settlement in Kampuchea, the
Conference calls for negotiations on, inter alia, the following elements:

(a) Appropriate arrangements to ensure that armed Kampuchean factions will not
be able to prevent or disrupt the holding of free elections, or intimidate or
coerce the population in the electoral process; such arrangements should also
ensure that they will respect the result of the free elections.

(b) Appropriate measures for the maintenance of law and order in Kampuchea and
the holding of free elections, following the withdrawal of all foreign forces
from the country and before the establishment of a new government resulting from
those elections.'' (Ambassador) T. T. B. KOH Permanent Representative of
Singapore to the U.N.  New York, July 18, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1220 words


Strains emerge in Nigeria's 21-month-old civilian regime A2
Gambia radio reports President is ousted while visiting Britain A2
Israel, startled by U.S. anger at raid, call truce good-will act A3
Haig says Soviet arms shipments to Cuba have risen sharply A3
Iranians demonstrate at French Embassy A3
India defends decision to buy foreign wheat A4
Around the World A5

Government/Politics
Exhumation asked in case related to Hugel and C.I.A.  A10
Casey says he omitted 3 stock holdings in report A11
Carey signs bill to aid people caring for parents at home B3

General
Around the Nation A6
Five believed dead in blast at Utah explosives plant A6
Pennsylvania panel told of health insurance falsification A6
Fire Island property owners fight U.S. over condemnations B2
Summations heard in trial of seven on heroin-ring charges B3
''Rotten Apple Awards'' made in midtown ''litter disaster area'' B7

Industry/Labor
Medical group in Queens provid- ing services despite strike B16

Style
The Evening Hours B5
Gres, Mori and Spook in Paris finale B5
A party given in the spirit of stylish young women B5

Obituaries
James F. O'Neil, ex-publisher of American Legion Magazine B6
Sheldon Pollack, helped create Gateway Recreation Area B6

Weekend
Weekender Guide C1
Tours of biblical garden at St.  John the Divine C12
Culinary Institute, dining adventure at Hyde Park, N.Y.  C17
First music and dance festival at Bear Mountain C3
Modern dance on the beach and under the bridge C1

Kazuo Ohno, Japanese avantgardist, dances at La Mama C22
Guggenheim party celebrates Dubuffet's 80th birthday C1

Art People C20
Theater: Broadway C2

''Bodybags,'' about Vietnam veterans, at Intar C11
Screen: Caine and Stallone in John Huston's ''Victory'' C6

At the Movies C6

Carrie Fisher and Chevy Chase in ''Under the Rainbow'' C14
Music: Glass's Sanskrit ''Satyagraha'' in American premiere C20

Philharmonic plays in Central Park, with fireworks show C12

Sharon McNight sings country-western assortment C12

''Rake's Progress'' sung at Santa Fe festival C15

The Pop Life C22

Peggy Lee and Tony Bennett sing in Holmdel, N.J.  C22

The two sides of Carla Bley C22

Auctions C19
Books: Publishing C20

''False Witness,'' novel by Dorothy Uhnak, reviewed C21
Restaurants C16
TV Weekend C23
Robert E. Mullholland named president of NBC C24

Sports
National Basketball Association eliminates bonus free throws A14
Phil Hancock's 68 leads Canadian Open by a stroke A14
12 named for Whitney Handicap Saturday at Saratoga A14
Villanova coaching job poses new challenge for Charlie Jenkins A15
Baseball negotiations said to be on verge of breakthrough A15
Abdul-Jabbar reportedly seeks trade to Knicks or Nets A15
Todd reaches agreement with Jets on a new contract A15
Red Smith on a dwindling breed of baseball fan A17
Yankees tired of strike but support Miller A17
Simms of Giants sees the wisdom of Perkins's ways A18
Arias beats James, advancing to tennis quarterfinals A18

Features/Notes
Woman in the News: Alair Townsend, new city Budget Director B1
Notes on People B16

News Analysis
Judith Miller examines Senate inquiry on C.I.A director A11
John M. Crewdson on new Reagan immigration proposals A12

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A22

Helsinki rights, Soviet wrongs Advice on American rights Wanna buy a comet
picture?  Topics: barely visible Letters A22
Tom Wicker: Ronald Reagan, a man of reason A23
Flora Lewis: sharing the royal fun A23
Peter Shapiro: block grants are a trap A23
Sidney Zion: Mideast genesis, rewritten A23
Wright Morris: behind a tractor wheel A23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SWIMMER, 47, CIRCLES MANHATTAN A 5TH TIME

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 333 words


At 10:10 A.M. yesterday, George Kauffmann, a 47-year-old Keansburg, N.J., tavern
owner and father of 10 children, put on a yellow bathing cap and a pair of dark
goggles and plunged into the East River at 89th Street to swim around Manhattan
for the fifth consecutive year.

The reason for the swim was to raise funds for Vietnam veterans who had been
exposed to the defoliant Agent Orange, which some veterans' groups charge causes
cancer, skin rashes and liver disorders.

It was an unusual kind of publicity stunt because Mr. Kauffmann, who is also a
Councilman in Keansburg, a borough in Monmouth County, left 20 minutes earlier
than scheduled and missed several of the photographers and reporters who had
come to cover his endeavor. He said he did not have time to talk to those who
were there.

Teaches Retarded to Swim

The swim took a little more than nine hours, ending at 7:15 last night in the
East River off Gracie Mansion. His wife, Ruth, said that Mr. Kauffmann stayed in
the water alongside his escort boat for a while longer because ''he was hurting
pretty bad from arthritis.''

Mrs. Kauffmann said earlier that her husband ''only started swimming seven years
ago.'' He now teaches swimming to retarded children several times a week, but is
too busy to do any other swimming. She said that he had swum around Manhattan
twice at night and twice during the day. Recently he did a 32-hour swim in a
pool to raise funds for the police. Two of his past swims around Manhattan were
for cancer research, a subject he became particularly interested in, because
both his adoptive parents had died of the disease. She said that he only
recently became interested in helping victims of Agent Orange.

''You really need something to swim for,'' Mrs. Kauffmann said.  ''We never used
to go swimming because we had nine children in the first 10 years, and we were
too busy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Kauffmann

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'BODYBAGS AT THE INTAR'

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 536 words


TEE SARALEGUI'S ''Bodybags,'' which opened last night at the Intar Hispanic
American Theater, is a confused and chaotic attempt at writing a drama about the
emotionally debilitating peacetime effects of the Vietnam experience. The play
makes points, seems to backtrack, then covers everything with excess detail. The
dialogue is an admixture of the vernacular and verbiage.

In Melvin Van Peebles's production, John Snyder and Jaime Tirelli play two
comrades who fought together on the front lines and feel a responsibility for
each other's life. Home from battle, Mr. Tirelli quickly adjusts to the limited
failure of running a basement barroom, the setting for the play's action. In
contrast, years after discharge, Mr. Snyder is still tortured by demons - ghosts
that are familiar from other plays, novels and movies about modern warfare.

Actually, Mr. Snyder's character is so obviously disturbed as to be close to a
zombie. He wishes that his comrade had left him to die on the battlefield, that
he could have been sent home sewn inside a bodybag, the mordant central image of
the evening. War is hell, and all the rest of it. ''By bringing me back,'' he
says, ''you forced me to continue living the nightmare.''

The unrewarding relationship, with Cain-and-Abel as well as sexual overtones, is
complicated by the presence of Mr. Snyder's hapless wife (Donna Pescow) who has
sought guidance and sexual consolation from her husband's quondam best friend.
Miss Pescow wanders in and out of the basement, a serviceable design by Ken
Holamon, bringing news of her interfering mother, while the two men endlessly
act out their interlocked agon. The play seems longer than it actually is.

Gradually the ''true'' story of what happened to them in Vietnam is revealed,
and it is a tangle of unfamiliar names and unseen dogtags. Mr. Snyder's
self-destructiveness becomes increasingly irksome and the actor is unable to
make us care about the possibility of the character's recovery.

Playing a less doleful veteran, Mr. Tirelli manages to keep him a likable loser,
and to add an occasional liveliness to the evening.  Miss Pescow evokes a bit of
sympathy as the lady in the middle, the least developed of the three roles.

At the end of the play, when Mr. Tirelli is swept into the nightmare, and the
haunting fears become visible to him as well to his friend, the two actors -
under Mr. Van Peebles's adept direction - give us a glimpse of the torment of
survivors.

Battlefield Ghosts
BODYBAGS, by Tee Saralegui; directed by Mel- vin Van Peebles; sets costumes, Ken
Holamon; lights, Larry Crimmins; sound, David S. Rap- kin; production stage
manager, John N.  Concannon; casting, David Rubin. Presented by Intar, Max
Ferra, producer. At 420 West 42d Street.  Anita Burns
..............................Donna Pescow Johny Burns
...............................John Snyder Lou Santos
..............................Jaime Tirelli

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 31, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

RESTAURANTS;
East Side Italian and Vietnamese.

BYLINE: By Mimi Sheraton

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column Z; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1994 words


THE more attractive a restaurant is, the greater the promise of good food it
holds out, for it is logical for diners to assume that an owner who spends a
great deal of money and effort to create a beautiful dining room will be able to
effect equally felicitous results in the kitchen. That such optimism can be
somewhat misplaced is evident at the three-month-old Ristorante Felidia, on 58th
Street between Second and Third Avenues, where the food is disappointingly
inconsistent. Felidia, at No. 243, is not easy to find, despite its handsome
stained-wood front framing a lavishly etched window, because neither the name on
a small oval brass plate nor the building number is easily visible.

The dining rooms, arranged on two levels with a skylight balcony and an
attractive bar, take on a rustic airiness from white walls, leafy plants and
terra-cotta tile and brick. But the noise in certain areas can be deafening,
especially on the balcony. Moreover, the windows and skylights afford
uninterrupted views of an open construction pit and the back of a drab brick
building, and the airconditioning is excessive, although it will be adjusted on
request. Add to that badly organized service, and the diner begins to feel that
the food will have to be fairly sensational to compensate.

For the most serious eaters, a number of the kitchen's most serious efforts are
consistently good enough to do just that. Among such excellent offerings are the
assorted cold seafood appetizer, which includes a sprightly salad of squid and
shellfish, the mussels topped with minced pimento and onion and slivers of tripe
vinaigrette. The homemade pasta bow ties called fuzi alla fortuna del cacciatore
- according to the luck of the hunter - were wonderful topped with braised quail
and their savory sauce. Occhi di lupo, the short tubular pasta suggesting wolf's
eyes, is served with a subtle creamy ricotta-and-tomato sauce, accented by bacon
and grilled sausage, and a lunch special of the fine angel's hair pasta, capelli
d'angelo capricciosi, was heavenly under a sauce of tomato, onion and Italian
bacon.

Consistently excellent also were such main courses as sauteed sweetbreads in a
lemony sauce and good, tender white veal prepared in cutlets Milanese style, or
stuffed with ham and cheese Valdostana style, or as scaloppine under a delicate
pizzaiuola sauce of tomato and slivers of green pepper. Red snapper in a sheer
marechiare tomato broth and immaculately fried calamari were far more
successfully prepared than such other fish courses as shrimp reeking of iodine,
indicating staleness, or a heavy-handed interpretation of Italian fish soup. A
salad of escarole with white beans and one day's special vegetable - savoy
cabbage mashed with potatoes, garlic and olive oil - would be hard to match.

But very good though much of it is, Felidia's cooking is bedeviled by
inconsistency. The menu, which is often stained with wine and grease - lists
many original and enticing selections, but the house pushes daily specials, and
the captains tend to discourage ordering from the printed menu. This is
especially true of the pasta. Both homemade and packaged types are available,
but the staff steers diners to the homemade, probably for a variety of reasons.
Homemade pasta is, of course, more unusual and, with many sauces, superior.  But
there is a lot to be said for dried pasta with other sauces. In any case, the
dried pasta takes longer to cook, and at Felidia, it costs $2 to $6 less a
portion than the fresh.

Insisting on what you want at Felidia brings its own punishment, usually in the
form of a long wait. That is true not only of pasta, but also of the bland and
soggy hot appetizers.

Inconsistencies are apparent even with such pastas as tagliatelle, delicate
green noodles, sublime when cooked al dente and folded into a cream-and-tomato
sauce dotted with prosciutto and fresh peas (alla Felidia), but a travesty when
so overcooked that they melded into a single mass. Potato dumplings - gnocchi -
sometimes had the airy lightness expected, while at other times, were gray and
gummy, and the pesto sauce included very little basil. Linguine with clam sauce
was overcooked and undersalted, and its sauce needed a more authoritative belt
of garlic. Risotto with seafood would have been excellent if it had not been
tossed with salty cheese, and the cornmeal polenta was hard and stodgy.

''Piatti gastronomici'' is the menu's polite way of saying innards. Among them
are listed tripe, kidneys, calf's liver Veneziana and the excellent sweetbreads.
But the calf's liver and the kidneys were drowned in wine that did not cook off,
and mushrooms outweighed kidneys by at least eight to one.

A daily special of chicken breast stuffed with vegetables and cheese was also
overpowered by its wine sauce, and the pallid version of the garlic-sauteed
chicken scarpariello lacked flavor.

A single pass at zabaglione resulted in a very sweet and overfoamy version of
that whipped-egg-yolk and Marsala dessert. Similarly, all the cakes sampled were
toothachingly sweet and unsophisticated.  Prices are moderately high; a dinner
check for four diners who shared two appetizers, two pastas and two salads, four
full main courses, coffee, wine, tax and tip came to $157.

It is difficult to understand why the subtle and delicate food of Vietnam has so
far been meagerly and poorly represented in New York when far more creditable
examples can be found in other parts of the country. Unfortunately, the latest
effort in that direction is not likely to fill the gap. In fact, if Vietnamese
cuisine were less interesting, and if the Suzanne restaurant on East 46th
Street, between First and Second Avenues, were not the newest and virtually the
only source for it in Manhattan, there would be little reason for a review. The
restaurant, owned by Huy Ty Pham, a former South Vietnamese representative at
the United Nations, and his wife, Suzanne, opened about four years ago as the
Griffin, featuring fairly decent Continental food. The brick-and-wood
contemporary decor is intact, and in the evenings, there is still a piano player
adding to the cocktail-lounge atmosphere. Popular at lunch with United Nations
personnel but fairly empty at dinner, the Suzanne restaurant has an unattractive
bar scene on some evenings.

Oddly enough, the Continental food formerly served was better than the bland and
carelessly prepared Vietnamese dishes now featured. All of the Vietnamese food
is certainly edible, but considering the fascinating contrasts of texture and
flavor in the food of the Southeast Asian country, the examples at Suzanne are
lackluster.  Neither the staff nor the management takes much trouble to explain
the cuisine, and only occasionally does Suzanne Pham make suggestions.

The only consistently good appetizers among four sampled were cha gio, crisply
fried rice-paper rolls filled with crabmeat, chicken, noodles and mushrooms.
Although less delicate than versions tried in Paris and Washington, those at
Suzanne proved satisfying. Not so the barbecued spareribs, which were stale and
dry at both lunch and dinner, nor a watery pork salad. Shrimp grilled on skewers
of sugar cane was unavailable on three visits.

Spicy lemon shrimp soup, though made with ice-cold raw tomatoes, did have a good
belt of hot and sour seasonings as well as generous portions of shrimp and bean
sprouts.

Brochettes of pork and chicken had no flavor and were tough and dry, and so was
grilled lemon-grass chicken, but grilled beef brochettes, topped with a crunchy
sprinkling of sesame seeds and bedded down on a cushion of soft rice noodles,
were delicious. So was a soul-satisfying steamed earthenware casserole, com tay
cam, combining shrimp, chicken, bamboo shoots, mushrooms and scallions.  Crispy
noodles topped with vegetables and chicken, pork or shrimp brought back memories
of neighborhood Chinese restaurant-style chop suey. Shrimp, Saigon style, bore
almost no traces of the garlic and ginger seasonings the menu attributed to
them.

Two sauces were meant to accent some of the dishes. One was a clear blend of
fermented fish sauce and hot chili oil, the other a thicker sweet-and-pungent
dip for the brochettes. Sometimes the sauces arrived after the meat had been
eaten, other times not at all.

Stick to fresh fruit if you want dessert. Service is slow, especially at lunch.
Prices are moderate, and a three-course dinner ranges from about $12 to $18,
before tax and tip.

Felidia *
243 East 58th Street, 758-1479.  Atmosphere: Casual and charming rustic setting,
though noisy and drafty; service erratic, hectic and often slow.  Recommended
Dishes: Assorted cold seafood appetizers, occhi di lupo, tagliatelle alla
Felidia, fuzi alla fortuna del cacciatore, capelli d'angelo capricciosi, salad
of escarole with white beans, veal cutlet Valdostana, veal cutlet Milanese, veal
scaloppine pizzaiuola, sweetbreads, fried squid, red snapper marechiare.
Prices: Lunch, a la carte, with main courses $7 to $16, including vegetable;
dinner, a la carte, with main courses $8 to $16, including vegetable.  Credit
Cards: All major credit cards.  Hours: Lunch, Monday through Friday, noon to 3
P.M.; dinner, Monday through Saturday, 5 P.M. to midnight. Closed Sundays.
Reservations: Recommended.

Suzanne Fair
313 East 46th Street, 832-2888.  Atmosphere: Attractive dining room, generally
comfortable, although lighting is inadequate; service careless and indifferent.
Recommended Dishes: Cha gio rice-paper rolls, spicy lemon shrimp soup, beef
brochette with sesame seeds, com tay cam casserole.  Prices: Lunch, a la carte,
with main courses $6.95 to $13, including rice and vegetables; dinner, a la
carte, with main courses $6.95 to $13, including rice and vegetables.  Credit
Cards: All major cards.  Hours: Lunch, Monday through Friday, noon to 3 P.M.;
dinner, Monday through Saturday, 5:30 P.M. to 10 P.M. Closed Sundays.
Reservations: Necessary.
What the stars mean: (None) Poor to fair * Good ** Very good *** Excellent ****
Extraordinary These ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and
price in relation to comparable establishments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WEDDING ON THE SCEPT'RED ISLE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 536 words


EGYPT's dethroned King Farouk once remarked wryly on the prospect that only five
monarchs would be left in the world - the Kings of Spades, Hearts, Diamonds and
Clubs, and of England.

Farouk was a bit off on the numbers (and the gender) but right about the
enduring affection of the British people for their tencentury-old monarchy. It
came pouring forth last week for Queen Elizabeth II, her heir Prince Charles,
and especially the radiant young English noblewoman he wed, the Lady Diana
Spencer.

The event, eagerly awaited since the couple announced their engagement in
February, was so majestic that all the media hype and commercial exploitation
that went before could not make the occasion anticlimatic. As the Most Rev.
Robert Runcie, the Archbishop of Canterbury, said in his sermon, here was ''the
stuff of which fairy tales are made.''

Hundreds of thousands of Britons and visitors, many of whom had slept in the
street to save a place, cheered the wedding party as it proceeded, attended by
red-plumed horsemen, from Buckingham Palace to St. Paul's Cathedral. Lady Diana,
not yet royal, was escorted from Clarence House by mounted police but emerged
from a glass coach looking every inch a Cinderella, in a
pearl-and-sequin-encrusted gown of ivory taffeta silk with a 25-foot train.

The security surrounding the design of the dress was as successful as the heavy
precautions against possible terrorist attack on any of the scores of royal
personages and heads of state among the 2,500 wedding guests. Three thousand
troops and 4,000 uniformed police officers lined the route, many of them facing
in toward the crowd in a departure from past British practice. The only arrest,
however, was of a pickpocket.

The outpouring of patriotism was a bit surreal, considering that month-long
riots in British cities claimed their first fatality last week and another Irish
republican hunger-striker subsequently died in the Maze prison outside Belfast.
But perhaps all the bad news and hard times were precisely what made Britons
seize upon the wedding, just as Americans, after Vietnam and Watergate,
celebrated the Bicentennial with a fervor that surprised themselves.

The British monarchy that lost the colonies in 1776 goes back to 802 and King
Egbert of Wessex. When Prince Charles succeeds the Queen - something that may
not happen until he and the Princess have a child old enough to ascend the
throne - he presumably will become King Charles III (though technically he is
free to choose another name). Charles I and II both ruled in the 17th century;
the former lost his head and the latter, his son, was proclaimed King 11 years
later at the end of the Cromwellian protectorate, the only interruption of royal
rule in England.

''The real reason why the monarchy survives,'' wrote Lord Blake, Provost of The
Queen's College, Oxford, in the Financial Times last week, ''is because the
British people want it to survive. In that sense it is not only the oldest, but
also, paradoxically, the most democratic of our institutions.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Prince Charles and Diana, Princess of Wales

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Washington;
A DECEPTIVE PAUSSE

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, August 1


At the beginning of August, Washington has a happy face. It is glorious in the
sunshine. The news is good for a change. The Battle of the Budget is over. There
is a truce in the Middle East. The baseball strike has ended and there was a
fairy-tale wedding in London last week, a televised symbol of the more hopeful
and amiable aspects of human life.

So for the moment, there is at least the illusion of progress. For a long while,
it seemed that the conflicts and struggles within the nation and between nations
were beyond resolution or even compromise - even that marriage was going out of
style -but in the last few days, the paralysis of the past has been eased a bit
and there has been some decision, right or wrong.

Ronald Reagan, in his own way, has restored the power of the Presidency, eroded
by Lyndon Johnson in Vietnam, by Richard Nixon in Watergate, and by Jimmy Carter
in Iran. He has destroyed the myth that he was merely an attractive but indolent
old actor. He worked very hard on his budget, using his staff, the telephone,
and television to hold the Republican Party together, and to capture the
wavering Democrats with reckless concessions to their special interests. In the
process, he had his way with the Senate and even with the Democratic majority in
the House.

The Congress and the allies are impressed by this performance but not convinced.
They're all going on vacation and will be back after Labor Day with their
doubts, for the main question in their minds now is not whether Reagan's
policies will redeem his promises to reduce inflation, unemployment and interest
rates, to transfer $50 billion from the social services to the Pentagon, to
persuade the allies to increase their military budgets and to put U.S missiles
on their territory at the expense of their welfare programs, and in the process
to balance the U.S. budget and persuade the Soviets to behave.

The allied leaders were understanding and polite when they heard this theme from
the President at the recent summit meeting in Ottawa. But Chancellor Schmidt of
Germany went home and immediately announced a reduction in practical terms of
his military budget, and blamed Mr. Reagan's high interest rates for his
decision.

Prime Minister Thatcher has the same problems. After the savage demonstrations
against her austere economic policy in Liverpool, London and elsewhere, she has
had to accept the vast expense of a massive job-training program to avoid civil
disorder - a program that clearly will further unbalance her budget.

Prime Minister Trudeau of Canada and President Mitterrand of France tried to
impress on Mr. Reagan that the peace of the world in the coming years might very
well depend on the condition of the hungry majority of the human race, that
interest rates in the United States were wrecking the economies of Western
Europe, and that Washington's pro-Israeli policies were not solving problems but
were instead removing the possibility of a compromise settlement in the Middle
East.

So the calm here, while overdue and welcome, is a little deceptive. Everybody
needed a pause to believe in the possibility of progress and to reflect on the
future, but underneath the smiling faces of the Administration leaders there is
considerable anxiety.

The President has defeated the Democrats on Capitol Hill, and unintentionally
humiliated Speaker O'Neill and the other Democratic leaders in the House. He has
silenced the allied leaders by reminding them that they complained about the
undisciplined U.S. economy under President Carter and then protested against the
disciplined monetary policy that his Administration designed to correct it.

Yet the happy face of Washington at the beginning of August is not quite what it
seems. Most leaders in both parties and in the institutions representing
business and labor are being very cautious in private talks. They recognize that
it is one thing for Ronald Reagan to win the budget battle against Speaker
O'Neill, or avoid open conflict with Chancellor Schmidt at the summit, but quite
another to prove that his domestic and foreign policies will work.

The President has been very successful in Washington, and very precise in saying
what his top policies at home and abroad would accomplish. He now has to deal
with the consequences of his antiwelfare policies at home and his anti-Communist
rhetoric abroad, and prove that he has been right.

But that is for later. Washington now has a pause, and needs it after six
vigorous months of Reagan counterrevolution. The President and his principal
advisers have worked very hard and they need a rest.

This pause may be helpful. The French decided long ago that they would simply
vanish from Paris in August, in the belief that their absence would make no real
difference and might even be better than their presence. This year, Washington
might very well benefit from their example.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THOUGHT FOR FOOD: AID IS ALSO POLITICAL

BYLINE: By ANN CRITTENDEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1064 words


POLAND'S worsening food shortages have been as well-publicized as the nation's
turbulent reform movement -and when a livestock feed crisis threatened to make
the situation there even more desperate, the Reagan Administration responded
with some quick help. Last week, the Secretary of Agriculture, John R. Block,
announced that Poland would receive $55 million in new long-term credits to
purchase American corn.

The loan, made under the Food for Peace program, came on top of more than $600
million in Commodity Credit Corporation loan guarantees to Poland - more than
one third of all C.C.C. guarantees.  It also was the latest illustration of how
political considerations affect the distribution of American food largess.

Using subsidized food sales as a carrot to reward friends and a stick to punish
enemies has a long history. Lauren Soth, a scholar of American agricultural
policy, wrote in Foreign Affairs recently that ''if I were asked to rank the
motives behind P.L. 480 (Food for Peace) on a scale of one to ten, I'd place
charity at two and surplus disposal at eight.''

The Reagan Administration State Department has made no bones about its plans to
maintain the tradition. ''Food aid has always been one of the most political
things we've got,'' an aide to Myer Rashish, the Under Secretary of State for
Economic Affairs, said the other day. ''I think we are looking to continue the
politicization of the program.''

On the stick side, the Administration has already made cutoffs in food aid to
Nicaragua and to Mozambique, after the socialist Government there expelled
several American diplomats on charges of spying. The Commerce Department last
May denied a license to the Mennonite Central Committee to ship 250 metric tons
of wheat flour intended for hospitals in Vietnam. After appeals by the church
group, which agreed to monitor the distribution of the food, the license was
finally granted last month.

''I think it is fair to say that there is a policy to look at all of these
requests more carefully than in the past,'' said Raymond F.  Burghardt, deputy
director of the Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia desk in the State Department. ''It's
to make sure the aid is genuinely humanitarian and not developmental in
nature.''

Technically, American ''food aid'' comes in two forms, both lumped under the
Food for Peace program. Title I of the law, which accounts for roughly
two-thirds of the total, authorizes loans for purchases of American grain on
very easy terms - up to 40 years at interest rates as low as 2 or 3 percent.
Under Title II of the program, commodities are given outright to private
voluntary agencies and the United Nations World Food Program for humanitarian
distribution abroad.
Alienated Supporters

In all, Food for Peace represents about 30 percent of all United States economic
assistance, and most of the food aid available to developing countries. But aid
is a declining proportion of American food shipments abroad, and the program
these days generates more criticism than enthusiasm.

Last year, it accounted for only 4 percent of American farm exports, compared to
31 percent 20 years ago, and only 13 percent of all food shipments to the
developing countries, most of which are now paying for their imports in hard
cash. Moreover, politicization of the program has alienated many of its former
supporters. C.P. Timmer, a food system specialist at the Harvard Business
School, said recently that the United States has an excellent record of making
emergency supplies available for famine relief, but its subsidized food sales
have been unrelated to need or attempts to encourage effective development
policies.

Earlier this year David A. Stockman, head of the Office of Management and
Budget, proposed a complete phase-out, over three years, of Title I. His office
reasoned that the domestic rationale for concessional sales - that they provide
a market for surplus American grain and thus a support for farm income - has
become obsolete as commercial sales of grain abroad have soared. Farmers and
American diplomats objected, however, and under pressure from the State and
Agriculture Departments, the budget office backed away from the proposal.

But the budget cutters have succeeded in reducing the size and scope of food
aid. With a $100 million reduction from the proposed Carter budget, the United
States will ship 5.4 million metric tons in 1982, as opposed to 6.2 million tons
in 1980.

Distribution Disparities

One criticism leveled at Title I is favoritism. For the past few years, for
example, more than one-third of all Title I sales have gone to Egypt as part of
a massive commitment made in the mid-1970's to sell that country 1.5 million
metric tons a year. This disproportionate allocation has continued despite
widespread evidence that it discourages production and encourages corruption in
Egypt.  Largely in reaction to the disproportionate share going to Egypt, a
Congressional reconciliation conference put in a provision that no more than a
third of Title I allocations can go to any one country.  Many opponents of
subsidized sales contend that cheap food from abroad discourages local food
production in recipient countries, such as South Korea and Colombia. Moreover,
the food, which is sold to governments, frequently fails to reach the poor at
all.

Aside from some effort in the Agriculture Department to encourage disaster-prone
recipients to build up their food stockpiles, the new Administration has few
plans for revising the food sales program.  Whatever major changes occur will
probably come, as they have in the past, from Congress, which generally takes
its cue from the so-called hunger lobby on Capitol Hill. For example, some
legislators, notably Representative Jonathan Bingham, Democrat of Bronx, New
York, have proposed incentives to make food sales recipients invest more in
agricultural development.

The track record for such devices, however, is poor, and even many devout
foreign aid supporters are ''fed up with the whole Title I program,'' as a staff
member for Mr. Bingham recently put it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table of value of shipments of the Food for Peace
program in 1981

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Nonfiction in Brief

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 958 words


TO WIN A WAR 1918, The Year of Victory.  By John Terraine.  Illustrated. 268 pp.
New York: Doubleday & Co. $14.95.

A combination of historical revisionism and military buffery, this account of
the last year of World War I offers a staunch defense of Field Marshal Douglas
Haig, the commander of the British forces, who has been much barraged by other
historians, as it describes the final battles whose names still echo -
Passchendaele, Belleau Wood, the Marne, the Argonne, Chateau Thierry.

The book begins with the Kaiserschlacht of spring 1918, the ultimate effort of
the nearly exhausted Germans to take advantage of the space between the Russian
Revolution and the full entrance of the United States into the war. It concludes
with the destruction of the Hindenburg Line. The vivid accounts of battle show
an experienced hand: ''British battalion headquarters found the enemy infantry
upon them before they were even aware that the attack had begun; posts were
surrounded; gunners became aware of close-by shadows in the murk on which they
had to fire over open sights. The front crumbled like plaster; each probe
loosened a little more for its neighbors; soon the Germans achieved the
cherished aim of so many attacks during the war - they reached the gun-line.''

John Terraine, who has written several other books about World War I, is
impatient with finagling politicians, especially Woodrow Wilson, who, he
charges, suffered from ''the arrogance of the highminded man.'' He prefers
soldiers, ''these simple, patriotic, selfsacrificing men ... a departed race of
unassuming heroes.'' He is more at home with battles in the mud than in the
corridors of power, with the decisive thunder of artillery than with the
ambiguous whispers of diplomats, with clashes of personality rather than of
ideas. He is moved by courage wherever he finds it - and he finds it everywhere.

Served by simple maps and well-chosen photographs, Mr. Terraine makes clear the
strategies on both sides during the final phase of the war, reports on the
demise of the cavalry and the portentous arrival of tanks and planes, pauses
over the infighting that agitated both the Allied and German high commands, and
introduces us in passing to several figures who would become infamous in a
couple of decades - Pierre Laval, then a Socialist; Marshal Henri Petain, then a
cautious military man outmaneuvered by Marshal Ferdinand Foch; Hermann Goering,
then a dashing leader of the Richthofen Circus.

A German general is quoted as laying down this rule for his subordinates: ''The
first principle in position warfare must be to yield not a foot of ground; and
if it be lost to retake it by immediate counter-attack, even to the use of the
last man.'' This hard principle, to which General Haig subscribed, cost the
lives of hundreds of thousands of young men during the terrible trench warfare
in France. Perhaps Mr. Terraine is kinder to the generals than they deserve, but
as for his conviction that the soldiers on the Western front won the war, that
is only the bloody truth.
THE HISTORY OF AMERICAN WARS From 1745 to 1918.  By T. Harry Williams.  435 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.

This posthumously published history ends somewhat abruptly with the same year as
''To Win a War.'' T. Harry Williams, known for his many books on the Civil War
as well as his biography of Huey Long, intended to carry his review of American
wars through Vietnam. His prematurely concluded accomplishment is cause for
appreciation that he got as far as he did, and for regret that he did not live
to complete his plan and bring to his review of Vietnam the lessons learned
along the way.

All of America's conflicts, beginning with colonial skirmishes, are analyzed
briskly and sensibly, with attention to politics and diplomacy, strategy and
morale, weaponry and finance, as well as being straight accounts of battles.
Although most of the material will be familiar to readers of American history,
having it together in this form offers a useful perspective, and the book
abounds in asides that keep it fresh.

Mr. Williams reminds us, for example, that the Revolutionary officer who gave
the order ''Don't fire until you see the whites of their eyes'' was merely
cautioning his troops about the limitations of their muskets, which had an
effective range of only 50 to 100 yards. He also notes that the taste of
Revolutionary soldiers for shooting at British officers was attributed by
Loyalists to a lack of breeding, and observes that whenever American troops were
faced with guerrilla tactics, beginning with the Indian clashes, they did things
for which the nation would later feel ashamed.

Mr. Williams has sharp words for most of the generals who parade through these
pages. He quotes, with approval, a Hessian officer's characterization of British
General William Howe: ''He is as valiant as my sword, but no more of a general
than my arse.'' Even the sainted George Washington does not escape a touch of
his rapier.  General Haig, admired by John Terraine, is lumped by Mr. Williams
with the other World War I commanders who rarely visited the front lines and
knew no better way of fighting a war than to send their troops directly against
the enemy to be cut down by machine guns.

Mr. Williams is also critical of the vagueness of America's objectives in its
foreign engagements, especially in the Spanish-American War, which jolted us
into the age of imperialism and World War I, and from which we emerged as the
preeminent world power, with responsibilities for which we were scarcely
prepared and were far from eager to take on. The reader can venture a good guess
as to what the historian's coldly skeptical eye would have made of our
objectives in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EARTHLY DANGERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 987 words


THE MONTAUK FAULT By Herbert Mitgang.  285 pp. New York: Arbor House. $12.95.

By PETER ANDREWS

''THE MONTAUK FAULT'' is the first cataclysmic novel dealing with the possible
destruction of the earth I know that I could describe as ''charming.'' Herbert
Mitgang is such a graceful writer he cannot help but be amiable even when he is
busy ripping up the floor of the Atlantic Ocean and drying out the planet's
water supply.

Mr. Mitgang understands the rules of disaster novels, and he is scrupulous in
observing the literary requirements of suspense. In the very first paragraph of
this trim adventure novel, the Montauk lighthouse on the tip of Long Island, for
no apparent reason, splits in two and collapses into the sea. Next, a commercial
fishing vessel goes to the bottom with all hands. By the third page, the bodies
of surfers start piling up on the beach, and we get the feeling that something
is definitely going wrong in the ocean department. Although Mr. Mitgang moves
his story along with spirit, he is not the kind of author who grabs the reader
by the lapels and strong-arms him through the hurly-burly of a crowded
narrative. He assumes that once he has your attention, you will be courteous
enough to stay alert for the rest of the plot. I have rarely come across an
adventure story so quietly told. Reading ''The Montauk Fault'' is the literary
equivalent of sitting in a comfortable club chair while the oldest member tells
you about his experiences in the Great War over a glass of sherry.

His story concerns a professionally responsible newspaper editor, Sam Linkum,
who quits his job rather than become a gossip-monger when his paper has been
bought out by a television network that believes in nothing but personality
stories and the bottom line. After more than the usual number of improbabilities
in novels of this genre, Linkum finds himself drawn into the twilight world of
intelligence, where he acts as an international messenger for the United States
and Russia as these super powers strive to effect a new balance of terror using
the elemental forces of nature as weapons.

I am developing a certain resistance to novels with plots centering on global
extinction that, when stripped of their menacing hardware, involve not much more
than saving the heroine from a buzz saw.  Without meaning to sound stuffy, it
seems to me that desperate threats to the survival of humanity deserve to be
used for something more substantial than attention-getters in routine escapist
novels.  If you are determined to look for problems with ''The Montauk Fault,''
you are likely to find them. In the opening chapters, I scribbled a few
querulous notes in the margin; coincidences stretched farther than I like, and a
voracious lady television executive, who could have been fun, was overdrawn - I
hope she was overdrawn. But Mr. Mitgang writes so nicely, he effectively stays
the carping pencil.

A respected reporter for The New York Times, Mr.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Peter Andrews, a freelance writer, often reviews fiction.  Mitgang has a good
eye for the professional caste system in a big city news room. He draws just the
right distinction between the status of daily and weekend editors, and he has a
nice way with the low-keyed gag. At one point Linkum deplanes from an Alitalia
flight to Sicily vowing never again to fly with pilots who are applauded for
making a routine landing. By page 90 I surrendered my critical faculties
entirely and just went along for the ride, as one honest man saves us all from
our collective foolishness. I didn't believe any of it, but after a while, the
novel took on a logic of its own.  If one of the most powerful intelligence
officers in the United States wants to deal with what is potentially the most
dangerous East-West confrontation since the Cuban missile crisis by calling up
an old Army buddy who hasn't seen the inside of a covert operation for 35 years
and sending him to Moscow, it isn't up to me to correct him.

''The Montauk Fault'' is curiously and, in many ways, refreshingly unlike the
usual disaster stories. To scramble media for a moment, when I was a kid I
always found those tender movie scenes in which the hero and heroine hug and
kiss a signal to head for the candy counter until the gunplay resumed. I suspect
they may have been Mr.  Mitgang's favorite parts. Indeed, he does not seem to
have the heart for the pyrotechnics of cosmic disaster. His best scenes are the
quietest ones. Sam Linkum's wife, Elena Floria, a golden girl from Palermo, sits
in a seedy mental institution, her mind in disarray since the death of their son
in Vietnam. When Mr. Mitgang sketches in the collapse of this family, he is all
the more touching for his brevity. Sam has a reasonable and altogether
convincing affair with Jennie Ives, a spirited fellow editor at his old
newspaper. Together, they make love and make do as well as intelligent people
can under the circumstances.

Mr. Mitgang has been shrewd in his presentation. After I finished the novel, I
found that the plot complications of his story had receded quickly in my mind,
but I very much wanted to know if Sam Linkum ever got a proper job in the news
business again. (We need him badly.) I wanted to know, too, if Elena returned
from the mists of madness, and I wanted to be sure something very good happened
to Jennie Ives. Even at the edge of the abyss, people still count the most.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of a man pushing over a tower

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 3, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR LAND PROGRAM AIDS FEW

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2015 words

DATELINE: SAN CAYETANO, El Salvador


It has been nearly a year and a half since the Government of El Salvador
inaugurated one of the most sweeping land redistribution programs ever attempted
in Latin America. But here on this 1,500-acre farm, which has been converted to
a peasant-run cooperative, the milking stalls are empty.

The last of the 900 dairy and beef cattle were sold in the weeks before the
Government expropriated the farm and turned it over to the peasants who had been
working here. That was in March 1980. Since then, the cooperative has been
unable to obtain bank financing to start a new herd. The banks it dealt with
were taken over by the Government at the same time as the land-redistribution
program was decreed.

There was widespread hope that the program, which involves the creation of such
cooperative ventures, would not only reduce the power of the right-wing
oligarchs in El Salvador, but also help win the allegiance of the peasants from
the leftist guerrillas who are at war with the Government. But the program has
so far drawn only mixed reviews from Salvadorans and United States officials.

Program a Political Success

El Salvador, which has five million people and is about the size of
Massachusetts, is the most densely populated nation in Latin America. According
to the Salvadoran agency reponsible for administering the program, less than 15
percent of the country's farmland is now owned by cooperatives. Put another way,
only 386,010 people, less than 10 percent of the population, have benefited from
the conversion into cooperatives of 282 privately owned cotton, coffee, sugar
cane, cattle and other kinds of farms during the first phase of the program.

Asked whether the program had been a success so far, a conservative Salvadoran
businessman replied, ''Economically no, politically, yes.'' He was expressing
the general view here among private businessmen as well as Salvadoran and United
States Government officials.

Peter Askin, the director of the office here of the United States Agency for
International Development, which has been working closely with the Government in
planning and carrying out the program, said, ''It has not been a total economic
success.

''But,'' he added, ''up to this point it has been a political success. I'm firm
on that. There does seem to be a direct correlation between the agrarian reforms
and the peasants not having become more radicalized.''

The United States Congress has authorized $62,558,000 for the program, according
to the aid agency. ''One of these days, Congress is going to ask what we have
gotten for that investment,'' Mr. Askin said.

Languid men, machetes dangling from the waistbands of their worksoiled pants,
propped themselves against a broken tractor at the farm here. The farm was
formerly owned by the Regalado brothers, members of one of the country's
wealthiest families, but, according to the peasants, they had never lived there.
Asked how their lives now compared with their lives in those days, the peasants
answered, ''The same.'' Then, as now, they earn the equivalent of $36 every two
weeks.

''But we have faith,'' the cooperative's president said, standing in a small
office where a picture of one of the former owners still hangs crooked on the
blue-green wall above wooden shutters that swing open onto a vista of palm trees
and the lush green slopes of a volcano. ''There will be profits in the future,''
he said. ''The land is rich.''

Larger Farms Are Expropriated

Under the first phase of the land-redistibution program, all farms larger than
1,235 acres were ordered expropriated, with compensation, and turned over to the
peasants who had been working them. The second phase calls for the similar
conversion of rural estates larger than 247 acres. And the third stage, which is
usually referred to as the ''land-to-the-tiller law,'' provides that peasants
who were working as tenant farmers will become the owners of the smaller plots,
all tiny, many on seemingly vertical hillsides. The last stage has not yet
begun.

A few miles from here, at the 1,675-acre San Rafael el Provenir cooperative,
only three pieces of farm machinery are parked under the corrugated tin roof of
the machinery shed. The machinery is rented, not owned. Five small tractors, two
rice combines, four trucks and 1,200 cattle were sold by the former owners two
weeks before the farm became a peasant cooperative.

A tall green chalkboard is propped against the wall of the administration
building. In neat columns are listed the income, expenses and profits that the
cooperative expects from the cultivation of rice, corn, beans, coffee and sugar
cane. A profit of 111,892 colones, or $44,756, is projected for this year. But
there is a notation that the cooperative will have to pay the Government 320,000
colones, or $128,000, to be used to recompense the former owners. So there will
be a net loss.

Most Cooperatives in the Red

According to Mr. Askin, several cooperatives have shown a profit, some have
broken even, but most are in the red. An employee in El Salvador's Institute of
Agrarian Transformation said that only about 10 of 282 cooperatives had paid
their bank loans in full. Some of the defaults, which Mr. Askin described as
''sizable,'' may have to be written off as start-up costs, he said.

The question, Mr. Askin said, is, ''what price is the country going to pay for
the political benefits.'' According to Mr. Askin, coffee production has declined
10 to 30 percent since the private owners lost their farms, and there has been a
decrease of 30 to 40 percent in the cotton acreage. In recent years, these crops
have brought in about 70 percent of the country's export earnings.

But, Mr. Askin said, there will be an increase this year in the production of
basic grains such as corn, rice and sorghum.

'Business Acumen' Needed

If the cooperatives are to be economically successful, Mr. Askin said, they must
be viewed as business enterprises and less as social and political experiments.
In addition to technical agricultural assistance and easier access to financial
credits, he said, the cooperatives most need ''business acumen.'' They need
business, bookkeeping and accounting advisers, he said.

Title to the properties is held by the Institute for Agrarian Transformation,
not the cooperatives, and the institute decides how each cooperative's income
will be allocated - whether, for example, it is distributed as profits, used for
capital improvements or transferred to other, financially ailing, cooperatives.

Even the most ardent supporters of the agrarian changes agree that the institute
has been inefficient and corrupt.  El Salvador's armed forces helped carry out
the first phase of the land redistribution, occupying the largest estates so
that former owners would not interfere with the Government takeover. United
States and Salvadoran Government officials have pointed to this as evidence that
the army is no longer serving the landed oligarchy as it did for generations.

But the institute and church leaders have charged that the National Guard and
Treasury Police, which operate primarily in rural areas, have killed institute
workers and peasant leaders.

And according to an institute worker, more than 40 percent of the peasant
cooperatives are paying tribute to the army, an average of $120 a month for each
of the six to eight soldiers who ''guard'' the ranches, he said.

Many Peasants Don't Participate

Another major criticism of the first phase is that only a limited number of
peasants have been permitted to participate. According to the Agency for
International Development, 38,000 families are cooperative members. The number
could be twice that, Mr. Askin said.

Meanwhile, few of the former owners have received the compensation, in bonds and
cash, that the law provides. Because the Government lacks the money to pay the
previous owners, one business leader suggested recently that the farms should be
returned to them.

A United States Government official said here recently that the program's
chances of success would be enhanced considerably if the former owners were
paid. ''It would get them off the Government's back,'' he said.

'Country Must Industrialize'

The Minister of the Economy has proposed that they be allowed to use their
Government-issued bonds to buy industries and companies owned by a government
investment corporation. This way, the minister said, the former owners would
become industrialists. Mr. Askin agrees with the proposal because ''the country
must industrialize.''

''The quality and amount of land cannot support a population this size, let
alone double, which it might be by the year 2000,'' Mr.  Askin said.

More than 85 percent of the coffee, 75 percent of the cotton and 60 percent of
the sugar cane is still grown on farms controlled by a relatively few people.
According to an employee of the Institute of Agrarian Transformation, many of
these lands are owned by the same people who lost their larger estates in the
Phase I conversion.

The United States Ambassador, Deane R. Hinton, said recently that the second
phase of the program would not be carried out.  The third phase, the land to the
tiller law, has been evaluated by United States and Salvadoran leaders almost
exclusively in political terms. The prototype for the law was developed in
Vietnam by Roy L.  Prosterman, a professor at the University of Washington Law
School, who was instrumental in the adoption here of a similar program.

''The left fears land reform,'' Mr. Prosterman told a group of apprehensive
Salvadoran businessmen last year. ''It deprives them of their most valuable
weapon in implementing revolution because they can no longer appeal to the
landless.''

Law Is Harshly Criticized

Since its announcement in early 1980, the land-to-the-tiller law has been
harshly criticized primarily because for more than a year no titles were issued
to an estimated 125,000 peasant beneficiaries.  Now, according to the Agency for
International Development, about 500 titles have been issued, usually in
ceremonies presided over by a member of El Salvador's governing junta.

A large landowner, who supports the concept of land redistribution, criticizes
the land-to-the-tiller law on agricultural principles. The new peasant owners of
the tiny plots, she says, will necessarily continue to plant rice, beans and
corn for consumption by their families. Thus, she says, there will be no crop
rotation and the soil will quickly be depleted.

A Marxist professor here argues that the goal of land reform should not be the
creation of landowners but a more equitable distribution of wealth, which for El
Salvador's peasants means food.

Program 'Imposed by Junta'

This, he says, is not achieved by giving a peasant title to a piece of land,
which is often too small and of such poor soil that it cannot even grow enough
food for an average-size family. Instead, he says, the peasants should be
organized into some form of cooperatives, which are agriculturally and
economically more efficient.

A Jesuit priest recently criticized the entire land redistribution program
because it was hastily put into effect without any signficant contribution by
the peasants. ''It was imposed by the junta,'' he said, ''without ever asking
the peasants what they wanted.''

Asked if a less-than-perfect program was not better than no land redistribution,
he said, ''No, it would have been better not to have done anything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Salvadoran farmers in Los Lagartos

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 4, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1196 words


''THE United States continues to be the only country where you can graduate from
college without having had one year of a foreign language prior to and during
the university years,'' wrote Representative Paul Simon in his recent book,
''The Tongue-Tied American.''

Now, there are signs of a growing movement to make the Illinois Democrat's
statement obsolete. When the Stanford University faculty voted last month to
reinstate a language requirement beginning in the fall of 1982, it confirmed a
new trend, following by only a few weeks a similar action by New York
University. The era of educational parochialism appears to be drawing to an end.
Foreign languages and courses dealing with other cultures are making a modest
comeback at all educational levels.

When the President's Commission on Foreign Language and International Studies
tendered its report in November 1979, the situation looked hopeless.
''Americans' scandalous incompetence in foreign languages also explains our
dangerously inadequate understanding of world affairs,'' the report said. A
report released earlier this year by the Council on Learning, entitled
''Education and the World View,'' confirmed these concerns.

The vote at Stanford - its requirement had been abolished in 1969 at the height
of the student rebellion against all requirements - is a response to these
concerns. So is a new requirement by the New York City public school system that
all high school students must take at least one year of a foreign language.

Richard I. Brod, the Modern Language Association's director of foreign language
programs, confirms the new trend. A survey this year showed that 20 colleges
have established or re-established a foreign language entrance requirement since
1975, and 49 colleges introduced or reintroduced such a requirement for the
bachelor's degree.

These changes have come on top of existing requirements reported in the M.L.A.'s
last comprehensive survey in 1975, which showed that 18.6 percent of 1,285
colleges questioned at the time still had a foreign language requirement for
admission and 53.2 percent called for some such study as a graduation
requirement.

Mr. Brod points out that the list of institutions that recently joined the
pro-language stream includes such illustrious campuses as Berkeley, the
University of North Carolina, Kenyon, Smith and Williams. Equally encouraging,
the trend was joined by many smaller, less prominent institutions in all parts
of the country.

At the same time the concept of international high schools - public schools
that, in addition to all the regular academic requirements, place special stress
on a knowledge of world affairs and international relations - appears on the
rise. This year, such schools have been created in such scattered places as
Staten Island, Philadelphia, Atlanta and Monterey County, Calif. Last month, the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign issued a paperback about a national
seminar on how to set up such schools.

All these recent developments are little more than a drop into a vast void
created by decades of neglect. Considering that fewer than 4 percent of current
public school graduates have had more than two years of a foreign language, such
modest beginnings of a new awareness will mean little unless they are given
long-term support, not only by school boards and educators but also by those who
determine employment policies in private industry and in government.

Future support, moreover, will depend in large measure on an understanding of
why there has apparently been a turnaround after years of neglect. Why the
encouraging reversal now, at a time when the budget squeeze makes any
educational reforms or additions doubly difficult?

Part of the reason, in the view of many experts, is a growing public awareness
that the United States can no longer view the world as its oyster. The shock of
serious miscalculations, such as in Vietnam and Iran, and the continuing crisis
in the Middle East have alerted many Americans to the need to know more about
people in other nations.

The loss of what used to be considered a natural and permanent superiority in
such fields as the manufacture of automobiles, steel and television sets has
driven home the fact that American merchants as well as diplomats must compete
where, in the past, they could virtually dictate.

Starting with the President's Commission, the public has been given more of the
hard facts by experts who could not as readily be ignored as foreign language
teachers had been for years. Here are some typical, hard-to-ignore examples:

- Former Senator J. William Fulbright reports that only one Foreign Service
officer in the American Embassy in Kenya is required to speak Swahili.

- Rose Hayden, executive director of the National Council on Foreign Language
and International Studies, recalls that when a Russian sought asylum in the
American Embassy in Kabul, he could not find anyone who spoke Russian.

- Representative Simon writes that nobody in the American Embassy in India
speaks Hindi.

- Allen Kassof, a leading expert in international exchanges, says fewer than 10
Americans know any of the languages of Soviet Central Asia and that none of the
more than 70 staff members of the European Division of the Office of the
Secretary of Defense speaks German or French.

In foreign commercial dealings, Representative Simon lists these embarrassing
gaffes: A major American fountain pen manufacturer inadvertently suggested in
Latin American advertisements that its product would prevent unwanted
pregnancies; ''Body by Fisher'' in Flemish came out ''Corpse by Fisher''; the
first Chinese version of ''Come alive with Pepsi'' promised that ''Pepsi brings
your ancestors back from the grave''; Chevrolet's Nova told potential Latin
American customers that the car ''doesn't go'' - ''no va.''

Gradually it is beginning to sink in that such examples, funny as they may
sound, carry a serious message. Some graduate schools of business are showing an
interest in working jointly with language and international affairs programs.

Although the trend toward a less-insular curriculum is welcomed by many
educators, Rose Hayden warns against reliance on rigid new requirements. ''Not
everybody's a brain surgeon or a linguist,'' she says, emphasizing that the
important goal is for all young people to at least have access to effective
language instruction. ''Access and quality are the key,'' she adds, ''not just a
record showing that you've taken two years. What matters is proficiency to speak
a language and to understand the world.''

The warning should remind educators that one reason students rebelled against
the language requirement in the first place was that the teaching often was so
poor that the time spent on it seemed wasted.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 5, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Report Says 12,368 Fled Vietnam in June

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 167 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Aug. 4


Thousands of Vietnamese ''boat people'' continue to arrive at refugee camps
throughout Southeast Asia each month, according to an official for the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In June, 12,368 refugees, most of whom fled Vietnam by sea, were given temporary
shelter in approximately 40 camps in Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore and Hong
Kong. The month before, 14,792 refugees reached the camps, the largest number of
arrivals in a single month since July 1979. In January, the number of arrivals
was 5,606.

In June, 63,310 refugees were waiting in camps for resettlement. In that month,
Malaysia took in the largest number of refugees, reporting a total of 15,644,
the United Nations officer said.  Thailand said it accepted 13,281.

The refugee official said 393,394 Vietnamese boat people had been settled in
other countries since 1975. The United States has given permanent asylum to
231,091 since 1976.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 5, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DESPITE PERILS AFLOAT, VIETNAMESE CONTINUE TO FLEE

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1136 words

DATELINE: CAMP ONE MAKUNG, Pescadores, Aug. 1


Six years after the Communist victory in Vietnam, refugees are still coming to
this camp in the Formosa Strait. After arduous crossings, most are exhausted and
hungry; many are ill. All are grateful to be alive.

Pham Van Phu arrived here a little more than a month ago with his wife, Bui Thi
Phuong Mai, and 106 others from the city they still call Saigon, although its
name is now Ho Chi Minh City.

The small fishing boat on which the group hoped to reach Singapore ran into
heavy weather on the second day out from Vung Tau, Vietnam, and the engine
failed. They repaired it two days later, only to have it stall again.

The boat drifted toward an island, which the refugees hoped was south of the tip
of Vietnam, in the direction of Singapore. In terror, they recognized that they
had drifted northward, close to the coast of the country from which they were
fleeing. In the bad weather, their choices were to allow themselves to drift to
the coast, risk capsizing where they were, or, if they got the engine started
again, to change course for a long voyage to the Philippines.

A Fortuitous Rain

The repairs succeeded once more, and they headed into the South China Sea. Three
days later, as they drifted on the stormy ocean without nautical charts, their
supply of drinking water was so low that it was placed under guard and rationed
to the 35 children and the most seriously ill, and they cooked their rice in sea
water.  Their despair was relieved by a heavy rain that refilled their cups.

That evening, from out of nowhere, the white glare of a bank of searchlights
nearly blinded them. Worried whether there were Communist or other coast guards
behind the searchlights, they hesitated to head in that direction. Other islands
loomed behind.

The heavy waves of a sudden storm pitched the boat onto a coral reef. Exhausted,
the refugees swam, waded or were carried ashore, to soldiers who to their relief
did not carry the AK-47 rifles used by Communist armies. They were Chinese
Nationalists.

''The first thing they told us,'' said Mr. Phu, ''was that the island with the
searchlights, where we almost landed, was occupied by Vietnam. We would have
been back where we started. We men would have been shot, and who knows what
would have been done to the women and children.''

The Paracel Islands, to which they had unwittingly strayed and whose name they
still did not know, is disputed and in part garrisoned by China and Taiwan,
Vietnam, the Philippines and Indonesia. The refugees were later moved to this
camp in the Pescadores, a group of islands off the west coast of Taiwan.

The adults among the 108 refugees had no doubts about the mortal dangers of the
escape, which they had planned for six months. Mrs.  Mai said there never was a
time in their voyage when they regretted their decision.

''I knew how difficult my husband's position was,'' the slight 35-year-old woman
said. Mr. Phu, a former lower-court judge in Saigon, said he was released in
January after being held five and a half years without charges in a Government
camp.

White Hair Before His Time

''Look at my white hair,'' Mr. Phu said. ''I am only 40 years old.  Even after
my liberation, whenever there was a knock on the door, whenever I opened a
letter from the authorities, my first thought was that they would take me away
again.''

Duong Thi Lai, the wife of Bui Huu Do, an engineer who had spent one year at
forced labor, said she and her husband had not hesitated to expose their four
children, aged 6 to 13, to the perils of the sea, of pirates who rape and murder
and of the hostile reception that they knew might have awaited them.

''We escaped for the children,'' she said. ''I do not want them to live under a
regime where they could go to school only to learn how to use a shovel.''

Mr. Do, who said he had failed in four previous attempts to escape, did not wait
for a translation of his wife's words. ''I don't want my children to study in a
school of hatred and lies,'' he said, interrupting. ''They teach children such
stupidities as how they used to kill 10 Americans with one bullet during the
war. It is better to die than to live with a regime of stupidity.''

Mr. Do, a specialist in hydraulics under the former South Vietnamese Government,
refused offers of work under the new regime after his release from forced labor
and made his living as a parttime carpenter.

''I will not work for them,'' he said. ''I was ready to do so in 1975, to
reconstruct our country. I would have worked for a couple of bowls of rice, but
they taught me what they were like.''

The other passengers who shared the two couples' fishing boat were of the
educated class and unanimous in relegating any but political motives to a minor
place in explaining their decision to flee. For 16 young people who followed
them here, sailing a tiny craft for two weeks from central Vietnam to Taiwan,
economic motives were strong, but these motives were part of a bitterness
against the Hanoi Government.

They came from the coastal town of Qui Nhon, in the poor former province of Binh
Dinh, which American authorities in their day considered the most pro-Communist
in South Vietnam. They were fishermen and farmers or their teen-age sons and
daughters. They cited as their reason for wanting to go to America - an almost
unanimous wish - their bitterness against a system from which their parents had
expected relief from economic suffering.

Instead, the young people said, they or their fathers were given a choice
between joining fishing cooperatives or continuing to fish independently and
turning over 70 percent of their catch to the authorities for a fraction of what
it would bring on the free market.

''You cannot make a living,'' said Nguyen Van Hoi, who at the age of 18 was his
father's helper on his fishing boat. ''They are thieves, and when you are sick
you can't even buy medicine. Most of the people in Qui Nhon are not only unhappy
but also disappointed, except those who are working with the Government.''

A major reason for the disappointment, according to the young refugees, was that
despite the anti-Saigon sentiment prevalent in Qui Nhon, the Hanoi Government
had filled most local posts with people from the North.

Chu Dang Duoc, who is 19, said he feared being drafted to fight in Cambodia. He
said he would gladly serve in the American army but not in the ''enemy army''
against which his father had fought. His father is still undergoing
''re-education,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Vietnamese in a boat map of Far East

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 6, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HERS

BYLINE: By Laura Cunningham

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1377 words


DOOM, while always ''impending,'' has never appeared to have so much clout. As
the Continental Shelf drifts beneath our feet, acid rain drizzles upon our
heads. We have heard the nuclear burp of Three Mile Island, seen the inflamed
ooze of Mount St. Helens. If we're not yet at war, maybe we don't have to be, as
buried missiles fire rudely ''by mistake.''

Disaster is all around us and possibly within us, as even our own cells can
ricochet out of bounds. Everything causes cancer, and costs too much to boot. No
product is too trivial to be tragic: a hair dryer can blast the hot breath of
apocalypse, a room deodorant spray can pierce the heavens' protective mantle.
When the President's daughter, Patti Davis, sings, ''No Place Left to Hide,''
there are plenty of folks who seem, queasily, to agree.

While most Americans take another deep, polluted breath and go on about their
business, there are increasing numbers of survivalists, diehards who are
determined to outlive whatever mega mess may occur, who are coming to grips with
the idea of Armageddon. The world may end but these folks have no intention of
going with it. The bottom line is that survivalists will defend their food
stores to the death, a practice known as ''repelling borders.''

While survivalists will not stand up and be counted (discretion is part of the
plan), their growing numbers are reflected in the upswing in the byproducts of
preparedness. Oregon Freeze Dry Foods reports a boom, while disavowing any
connection with ''hard core survivalists.'' The company does allow that its
brand Mountain House is ''for those who store food for future emergencies.'' At
any rate, the beef stroganoff, with a 10-year shelf life, is moving. In
Laverkin, Utah, 240 underground condominiums are being built by Survive Tomorrow
Inc.

Grant Stapleton, a former Vietnam helicopter pilot, now operates Sentinel Arms,
a retail business in survival products, in Middletown, Pa. On the phone, Mr.
Stapleton said sales of his freeze-dried foods were ''way up,'' the $8,600
fallout shelters were moving and he couldn't keep pace with orders for
''assault'' rifles. He suggested buying guns and food now as a ''hedge against
inflation.'' He also offers a five-day ''Bug Out'' course for $1,400 (ammunition
included), during which 15 students are taken to a rural area and taught how to
use firearms, rappel and live on compressed foods.

Mr. Stapleton uses what he sells. He is already integrating survival foods into
his diet. ''I don't want to be down there eating Chinese spaghetti and getting
heartburn or worse,'' he said.

Mr. Stapleton is ready to kill to defend his shelter but says he probably won't
have to: ''My shelter is disguised. You look down there now, it's just marked
'sewer.' '' He claims to know the first survivalist minister who realized ''you
can't save everybody.'' Mr.  Stapleton recommends that at the first sign of
emergency you ''fill your bathtub.'' Won't that hasten a shortage? ''Yes,'' he
said, ''but that's the nice part of this. You only worry about yourself.''
Regarding the irony of his living within a mile of Three Mile Island, Mr.
Stapleton says: ''My retail business just happened to be there. I have an
airplane. Throughout the incident, I was gassed up and ready to go.''

I visited another survivalist, Tom Crucet, billed as ''more moderate,'' and
found the former Green Beret medic in his law office in Pearl River, N.Y.,
surrounded by pictures of eagles. (He has 119 emblems and paintings of eagles in
one room of his home - ''They are magnificent creatures,'' he says. ''I was in a
cage with one once in a zoo, and it was even better than I thought.'') He has a
mild, studious face and a weightlifter's physique. His desk was piled high with
survivalist literature, and his black dog, Tonka, sat by his side. Mr. Crucet's
main gripe, he said, is that the United States spends 50 cents per person per
year for civil defense while the Soviet Union invests $20 per person. He says he
wants to survive ''no matter what.''

''I was in Vietnam and I survived,'' he said. ''I was a medic and performed
amputations. I ate rats. I'll survive here, now.'' He thinks 90 percent of the
population would survive a nuclear holocaust, but would be ill-equipped as far
as food and water. He divides people into five categories: optimists, who think
nothing will happen; pessimists, who think they couldn't survive anyway;
desolationists, who would prefer not to survive in a post-nuclear world;
retreatists, who have already split from the society, and survivalists like
himself, who want to survive even in a violent, barren world. Why? ''Because I
enjoy life. Every minute of it.''

I asked him for more information about the desolationists. ''The majority are
women,'' he said. ''I don't know why, but most women don't want to deal with the
problem.'' And indeed most women didn't: almost all visible and audible
survivalists are men, with perhaps wives or girlfriends in tow.

One doesn't talk to survivalists without hearing the name Mel Tappan. He left an
investment business in Los Angeles in 1974 to found a survivalist mecca in Rogue
River, Ore., the place he deemed safest from nuclear attack. A former medieval
literature professor, he soon became the survivalist voice of reason; his book,
''Survival Guns,'' is a bible in the field. Perhaps because he was so important
to them, most survivalists still speak of Mel Tappan in the present tense,
preferring to ignore the fact that he is dead. He died last November at age 47
of kidney failure.

I reached the survivalist's widow, Nancy, 42 years old, at the ranch in Rogue
River where she now lives alone with her milk cow, Robin, 20 head of beef
cattle, five dogs and a four-year supply of food. (''We had two years' worth of
food for two people, now it's four years for me,'' she said.) When I spoke to
her, Mrs. Tappan - formerly Nancy Mack (of the Mack truck family) - was busy
canning No. 2 cans of cherries. (''Canning is the pits!'' she joked). A
sweetvoiced woman, she debunked the mystique of survivalists ''in underground
homes with gun turrets - I'm in an ordinary house right on the main road.'' She
doesn't have a shelter, although she thinks ''a combination root cellar and
fallout shelter would be nifty.''

Occasionally using the first person plural to include her late husband - ''We're
in a valley, we don't have a big view'' - she was the only female survivalist I
found and the only person in the field who sounded uncertain: ''Sometimes when
I'm milking the cow, I think, 'What am I doing here?' ''

Her pleasant voice doesn't change when she adds: ''I have a .45 auto for
self-defense - it's fun to shoot. I hope to heck I never have to use it on
people, but I will if I have to.'' As a survivalist, she complains: ''The field
is very macho, lots of male chauvinists. I got a call from a survivalist in
Arkansas and he said I was getting soft because I ran an article that said it
might not be necessary to kill people. After all, how many could we kill? Maybe
we could store tons of wheat and barter. He said, 'Nancy, you're looking at this
through rose-colored glasses.' ''

Rose-colored glasses? Could Mrs. Tappan cope in a world of total chaos? ''Yes, I
think I'd still be able to do the things I value,'' she said. ''I don't mind
being by myself. I enjoy growing my own food. I'm into garlic and alfalfa now.''
She doesn't much care for the freeze-dried foods - ''Yeccch. Most of it is
pretty unpalatable but the green beans are good.''

After talking to her, I tried some green beans: They ballooned from a two-inch
disk into a six-cup pasty green mass. They tasted terrible. If the future means
defending this stuff, I think I'll pass. Survivalism doesn't sound worth the
trouble: fatal combat for compressed spaghetti - Armageddon will be a fitting
finale for the ''me generation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 6, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MCGUIRE AIR BASE SENDS 14 CONTROLLERS TO 2 CITIES

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 881 words


McGUIRE AIR FORCE BASE, N.J., Aug. 5 - Maj. Jerome F. Simmer, commander of air
traffic control operations here, sent 14 of his best men and women off to
airports in New York and the Washington, D.C., area this week.

That left him with 97 men and women to man the 24-hour air traffic control
operations of this base. It is the home for a wing of the Military Airlift
Command and headquarters for the 21st Air Force and is rated as one of the
busiest military bases in the country, with more than 250,000 aircraft movements
a year.

Major Simmer feels his loss was the Federal Aviation Administration's gain since
his controllers, all with broad experience, are scheduled to take the places of
dismissed or striking civilian air traffic controllers.

As military personnel, he said, they are used to moving from place to place and
have had experience guiding aircraft into bases as small and leisurely as the
one in Panama City, Fla., to handling the hectic civilian and military air
traffic in and around West Berlin, where the United States military runs all air
traffic control operations.

He and his personnel come close to scoffing at the suggestion from civilian
controllers that the military lacks the experience to replace civilian air
traffic controllers, and they are openly critical of widespread complaints by
their civilian counterparts about the stresses of the job and the pay.

Cites Controllers' Experience

''We have sent controllers who have all kinds of experience, and they will pick
up easily on the operations at Kennedy and in Washington,'' Major Simmer said.
''We all use the same handbook and we are all trained according to Federal
Aviation Administration regulations.''

For his part, the commanding officer was generous about the civilian
controllers' complaint of stress, saying it was an ''individual matter'' that
experience had taught him had more to do with ''life style changes'' such as
divorce or personal problems than with anything inherent in the job of keeping
aircraft from colliding in midair. But many of his men, such as Sgt. William M.
Reardon, a 15-year veteran who has guided military and civilian aircraft over
Thailand, Burma and South Vietnam, are less charitable.

''I've done this job for 15 years and could do it for 15 more years,'' he said
with a smile. ''Sure, I know there are lives on those planes, but my job is to
save those lives by looking at the aircraft. Those who feel stress are those who
count the faces on the plane.''

The increased pay demands from the striking Professional Air Traffic Controllers
Organization, whose members make an average of $33,000 a year, draw a laugh from
the military personnel. Typical of the military pay is that of Sgt. Robert
Woznack, 30 years old, who is the Air Force's air traffic controller of the
year. His base pay is $8,000 a year, with housing and other benefits amounting
to the equivalent of $4,000 more.

250 Military Controllers Used

The men and women in air traffic control at McGuire are among the 5,000 Air
Force controllers, the largest group of military controllers. In all, 250
military controllers are busy familiarizing themselves with operations at major
airports throughout the nation, and 91 of those are members of the Air Force,
according to the Air Force Communications Command. Spokesmen for the command,
based at Scott Air Force Base near St. Louis, said that detailing their
personnel to civilian airports would not jeopardize the nation's military
preparedness.

Major Simmer, who said he could comfortably adjust to the loss of four more
controllers, stressed that should he lose more, he would have to cancel some
leaves, use his administrative personnel, who are all trained and rated
controllers, and cease a lot of the peculiarly military functions of personnel
in his unit such as mopping floors.

As the major talked, the ground controller peered out of the tower high above
McGuire Air Force Base, watching the change of crews on a massive C-141,
designated as GLK-03. As it taxied to the runway, the controller cleared it for
takeoff, gave wind direction and speed and then added routinely in a rapid-fire
patter:

''You're hot below 4,000 feet.'' It was a warning to the pilot not to fly too
low over an area at adjacent Fort Dix where artillery practice was then going
on.

Below the airport tower, at ground level, controllers work in a squat blue
building, molelike in darkness except for the glow of radar scopes and the
shimmer of radio frequency indicators.

In this room, controllers look at narrow paper strips of computergenerated
numbers that designate the movement of aircraft.  That movement is translated
into blips on a radar scope and a series of numbers indicating the altitude,
speed, destination and point of origin of aircraft. The goal here, as in the
tower, is the same: to maintain separation. Separation is the safe distance
between planes that is set down by F.A.A. regulations that apply to both
military and civilian air traffic.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: illustrated graph of the descent through New York
airspace photo of military air traffic controllers standing by

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 316 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 7, 1981 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'BEATLEMANIA,' THEIR LIVES, OUR TIMES

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 517 words


ACCORDING to a careful opening disclaimer, the four young men who star in
''Beatlemania'' are ''not the former members of the musical group known as the
Beatles.'' This laughable announcement is made for legal reasons, not esthetic
ones, because anyone fond of the real Beatles will immediately spot the
fraudulence of the enterprise. ''Beatlemania'' was a horror on the stage, and
it's even more of a horror at close range, where the seams really show. This
isn't a loving impersonation, or even an honest one. It's cheap, disingenuous
and loathsome.

''Beatlemania,'' which opens today at the Ziegfeld and other theaters, is even
more about its audience than it is about the Beatles, who of course, were not
willing participants in this venture. While the four Beatle stand-ins launch
perfunctory versions of Beatle hits, the extraneous footage recalls the viewer's
lost youth. In the purest yahoo spirit, the audience is encouraged to cheer for
the things they used to dig, and boo the things they didn't. Richard M. Nixon
gets boos, which isn't surprising. And there are cheers for Dustin Hoffman,
Janis Joplin, marijuana and LSD. But about Selma, Ala., about Vietnam, the
audience doesn't seem to care. This isn't a movie, it's a pep rally - and such a
mindless one that it draws bigger cheers for Timothy Leary than for the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.

''Beatlemania'' isn't just cavalier, it's pretentious, too. The film is divided
into segments with names like ''The Coming,'' ''Listening'' and ''Bottoming
Out.'' And the songs are illustrated by montages so gimmicky and senseless that
there's little point in trying to make head or tail of them. ''Eleanor Rigby''
accompanied by footage of a plane on a runway and some splashy paintings? Far
out, or at least somebody's idea of same. Dancers in college-kid outfits,
pantomiming lovers' farewells at a railroad station, to the tune of ''We Can
Work It Out''? One quickly stops pondering the logic of such things.

As for the look-alikes, the Paul rolls his eyes the way Paul did, and the Ringo
is wisely kept off camera most of the time. The George looks more like a young
Keith Richard, which may come in handy if a ''Stonesmania'' is ever in the
offing. Once they don wigs for the long-hair section of the piece, the John
Lennon look-alike is particularly unconvincing. Nothing is said here about the
murder of the real Lennon. If the movie has a single touch of good taste, there
it is.

''Beatlemania'' is rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''). It contains
footage of drug use and occasional nudity. Janet Maslin

1960's Wax Museum

BEATLEMANIA THE MOVIE, directed by Jo- seph Manduke; conceived and designed by
Bob Gill and Robert Rabinowitz; original Broadway concept by Steven Leber, David
Krebs and Jules Fisher; cinematography, King Baggot; produced by Edie and Ely
Landau with Mr. Leber and Mr. Krebs; released by American Cinema. At the
Ziegfeld Theater, the Avenue of the Americas and West 54th Street, and other
theaters. Running time: 86 minutes. This film is rated PG.

WITH: Mitch Weissman, Ralph Castelli, David Leon and Tom Teeley.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Photo of scene from movie 'Beatlemania'

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 7, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET IS SAID TO REJECT U.S. OFFER OF AFGHAN TALKS

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 6


The Soviet Union has recently rebuffed several efforts by the Reagan
Administation to start secret discussions on a possible political settlement of
the fighting in Afghanistan, according to State Department officials.

Messages passed to Soviet diplomats in Moscow and Washington in the last two
months, the officials said, were intended to convey an understanding of the
Russian concerns in Afghanistan, a willingness to discuss internal political
compromises there and a sense of the importance of the Afghan issue to future
Soviet-American relations.

The officials said that the United States policy since the largescale Soviet
military intervention in December 1979 had remained the same - to get Soviet
troops out of Afghanistan.

The officials described what amounted to a shift in strategy: to convince Moscow
that it could not win against insurgent guerrilla bands in Afghanistan and that
it should therefore take up the American offer to provide a face-saving
diplomatic exit that would take Soviet interests into account.

The Soviet diplomats gave the same response to each American overture, the
officials said, that they did to proposals by other nations.

The Russians said there was nothing to discuss until the West recognized the
Soviet-installed Government of Babrak Karmal and guaranteed Afghan bound-

American analysts now say Soviet forces in Afghanistan are in serious trouble.
Military analysis, page A4.
aries against cross-border guerrilla operations.  Information on the diplomatic
and military situations regarding Afghanistan was made available as part of an
acknowledged effort by the Administration to do three things. These are to
persuade Moscow that it can hope for nothing more than a debilitating military
standoff in Afghanistan; to bring about some movement on the issue in time for
an announcement at the meeting between Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A.  Gromyko, at the United Nations in
September, and to build support for the Administration's position in the United
States itself.

To build public support, Mr. Haig has approved a memorandum for general release
that says that ''many leading citizens and groups seem to have fallen victim to
an insidious double standard'' of criticizing actions by the United States but
saying little or nothing about Soviet actions.

''Now Soviet aggression gives rise to brief outbursts of criticism and token
action that soon die down and give way to calls for accommodation,'' it said.

''During the Vietnam War, tens of thousands of persons filled the streets and
squares of the world to defend the North Vietnamese and Vietcong,'' it
continued, but in response to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan and the
destroying of whole villages, ''no such growing moral outrage seems to be
present.''

To encourage Moscow to look for nonmilitary solutions, the State Department is
distributing an American intelligence estimate to reporters and American
embassies in the expectation that its essence would be passed on to the
Russians. The estimate says that the Soviet Union and the Karmal Government
''appear to be losing ground'' politically and militarily.

However, the Russians ''show no signs of abandoning their longterm objective of
legitimizing a pro-Soviet Government in Afghanistan'' and ''seem to believe time
is on their side,'' the estimate said. Intelligence officials said in an
interview that 90 percent of Afghanistan is beyond Soviet control.

In response to questions, Administration and intelligence officials said that no
American weapons were being transferred directly or indirectly to the Afghan
guerrillas. They acknowledged that weapons were being provided principally by
China and Egypt with financing by Saudi Arabia.

They also said weapons were coming from Iran, sometimes provided without charge
and at other times sold for well above market value. A Russian-made AK-47 rifle,
they said, sells for about $200 in Beirut and for about $1,500 on the Iranian
border. The most sophisticated weapon being provided to the guerrillas was said
to be the Russianmade RPG-7, an antitank rocket launcher.

On the diplomatic side, the State Department officials said that Mr. Haig
provided the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly F. Dobrynin, in Washington and the
Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Georgi M.  Korniyenko, in Moscow with diplomatic
formulas that invited questions, but that the Soviet officials were not
attracted by the bait.

Karmal Government Is Key

All of these efforts have missed the mark as far as Moscow is concerned. Soviet
diplomats have said they need to have solid assurance that the Karmal Government
would survive after the withdrawal of Soviet forces.

Soviet leaders have also stated their desire to transform talks over Afghanistan
into broader conversations about the Persian Gulf area. But they have not
presented any details, and Administration officials look on the suggestion as a
trap to forestall development of an American rapid deployment force.

The Soviet officials have indicated that they would go along with an Indian
proposal for talks between Pakistan and the Karmal Government, and perhaps other
Afghans. The West has resisted this on the ground that it would legitimize Mr.
Karmal's Government. The Indians point out that Washington has often dealt with
adversaries in the past.

The United States retains formal diplomatic relations with Afghanistan and is
represented by a charge d'affaires in Kabul.  There has been no American
ambassador there since the murder by Afghans of Ambassador Adolph Dubs in
February 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 8, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FOES OF THE C.I.A., NOT THE COUNTRY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 627 words


To the Editor:

Your July 21 editorial ''Secrecy Is Not the Only Security'' contains a number of
inaccuracies and demonstrates a misunderstanding of the Intelligence Identities
Protection Act. As one of the targets of that proposed legislation, we feel
compelled to reply.

For one thing, it is nothing short of scandalous for you to say that Philip Agee
''goaded the Supreme Court into a decision that menaces the travel rights of all
citizens.'' Agee did not revoke Alexander Haig's passport. You forget that Agee
has never been charged with a criminal offense and was, in fact, the victim of
calculated disinformation suggesting that he was going to go to Iran to
''judge'' the hostages, something he vehemently denied at the time. He has also
not ''named names'' in years - since before the U.S. routinely issued him a new
passport in 1978.

Had you limited your editorial to criticism of the proposed bill, we would have
no quarrel, but you felt compelled, as so many others do, to utter obligatory
denunciations of the Covert Action Information Bulletin, indicating a complete
misunderstanding of who we are, what we do and why we do it.

You suggest that we are trying to ''destroy vital intelligence functions.'' We
are against (and would be delighted to destroy but have no illusions about our
abilities) the secret manipulation of the affairs of other countries, the raison
d'etre of the C.I.A. This activity is not, to say the least, vital; it is
probably responsible for more hatred of the U.S. around the world than any other
single factor. The death and destruction attributed to the C.I.A. is staggering
-in Chile, in Indonesia, in Vietnam, in Laos, in Guatemala, in Jamaica, etc.

You also continue to insist that we are ''indifferent to the safety of the
agents,'' something which we have denied in your pages before. Suffice it to
reiterate that not a single person has been physically harmed on account of what
we do.

We are glad that you recognize that the bill's ''protections'' are no protection
at all, but it is saddening that you do not realize that there is no bill,
within the First Amendment, that will ''get'' us and not ''get'' you. Your call
for ''only the most tightly drawn identities bill'' is a cry in the wilderness;
there is no such thing.  ELLEN RAY WILLIAM SCHAAP, LOUIS WOLF Co-editors, Covert
Action Information Bulletin Washington, July 23, 1981

*

To the Editor: However painful the thought must be to Philip Agee, he continues
to do his country a significant favor by venting his self-righteous hatred for
the United States. Not content merely to expose American agents, placing their
lives in jeopardy, he now arrives on your Op-Ed page (July 27) as the darling of
an international society of misanthropes.

Some have argued that Mr. Agee would best serve his country by staying out of
it. I would welcome him back at once. Churchill once remarked that ''there are
some men who derive as stern an exaltation from the proximity of disaster and
ruin as others from success.'' Such a one is Philip Agee.

The Supreme Court erred in keeping him, in effect, out of the country, thereby
elevating him to a place of international attention. The correct move would have
been to let him remain an obvious stooge of the disinformation arm of the K.G.B.
His penchant for selfdebasement is its own best indictment. The Court merely
adds to his audience by making him a martyr.

Mr. Agee would only be a bad joke were it not for the fact that he has
endangered American lives by his actions. His intense attack on the U.S. is not
coincidentally related to the fact that we no longer hang traitors. The Times is
correct to offer him space. I'm waiting for Khomeini's column.
K. LEE BARRY, Berwyn, Ill., July 27, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GREEN BERETS STEP UP HONDURAS ROLE

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1180 words

DATELINE: LA VIRTUD, Honduras


This village's isolated mountain valley, as oppressively muggy by day as it is
bleak by night, is nonetheless attracting its share of visitors. They include
peasant refugees fleeing from neighboring El Salvador, Salvadoran Government
troops and American military advisers.

''This dump is the center of the world now,'' a United States Army officer said
when he was here for three days at the end of July. The officer, Capt. Michael
Sheehan, is a member of the Army's elite Special Forces, known popularly as the
Green Berets.

Captain Sheehan was accompanied by two senior enlisted men with extensive
experience in Vietnam. All three wore camouflage jungle uniforms and carried
M-16 automatic rifles.

They said they were from a Special Forces battalion based in Panama and that
they and five other American soldiers from the same unit had been assigned to
help the Honduran Army patrol the border. Their primary objective, they said,
was to control the Salvadoran refugees streaming in to escape the upheaval in
their country.

Aid May Be Reaching Guerrillas

But there is a special dimension to this duty: The American advisers in La
Virtud say that many of the refugees are from the families of leftist guerrillas
and guerrilla sympathizers and that at night some of them sneak out of the
Honduran refugee camps carrying food and other supplies through the rugged
mountain gorges to the rebels in El Salvador.

While the United States has long supplied Honduras with a limited number of
military advisers, their presence along the Salvadoran border is believed to
represent the first time they have been engaged in a mission connected with the
conflict in El Salvador.

Captain Sheehan said that the National Security Council had approved the use of
Special Forces units in Honduras in support of the military effort against
Salvadoran guerrillas. A Special Forces unit would soon be based in La Virtud,
he said.

The Reagan Administration has requested an increase in United States military
aid from $5.4 million this year to $10.7 million next year. In April, four
military advisers were on temporary assignment in the country.

Salvadorans Land in Area

Early in July, an American-trained battalion of the Salvadoran Army landed in
this area then crossed back into El Salvador in an operation to squeeze the
guerrillas out of the mountains on the Salvadoran side of the border.

The day after the landing, the Mayor of Vallodolid, a small village up the
deeply rutted mountain road from here, told local reporters that she had seen
American soldiers in the area a few days before the landing.

According to an official in the San Jose office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, 70,000 Salvadoran refugees have entered Honduras out
of about 305,000 who have fled El Salvador in the last year.

Refugees Live Under Tarps

On the bank of a river, in an area slightly larger than a football field, more
than 60 incandescent green and orange tarpaulin sheets, normally used to cover
truck cargos, provide shelter for several hundred Salvadoran families. The soil
here is cement-like, but astonishingly a few cornstalks, surrounded by crude
stick fences, stretch more than 10 feet high.

Several international relief groups, including Caritas Honduras, part of the
Roman Catholic relief organization, have set up tinroofed schools and a medical
clinic. All of the work is being coordinated by the Evangelical Committee for
Development and National Emergencies, which is known as Ceden, its initials in
Spanish. It is affiliated with the World Council of Churches.

The effort has not been without controversy. The United States Embassy in
Honduras has been embroiled in a dispute growing out of charges that
international aid intended for the refugees has been reaching Salvadoran leftist
guerrillas.

Reports Differ on Guerrilla Aid

In June, the country's major newspapers reported that Ambassador Jack Binns had
said that 50 percent of the international aid intended for the refugees was
going to the guerrillas.

In letters to the directors of Ceden and Caritas, Ambassador Binns said he had
not been the source of the reports. But he said that there was ''circumstantial
evidence'' that ''small quantities'' of the aid was reaching the guerrillas.

''There is no proof that any of the international aid for the refugees is going
to the guerrillas,'' Charles-Henry Bazoche, director of the Honduras office of
the United Nations High Commission on Refugees, said in a recent interview. ''We
have established tight controls.''

Militarily, it would be easy to control the refugees, the American advisers here
said, but there would be an international outcry about human rights if more
military control were exercised. Mr. Bazoche has protested to the Honduran
Government that the Honduran Army is treating the refugees brutally.

3 Refugees Reported Killed

Mr. Bazoche said that in March three refugees were killed after being taken from
a camp by the Honduran Army and turned over to Salvadoran soldiers. He said that
army incursions into the camps have ''somewhat lessened, but it remains a
serious concern of ours.''

A major problem now, he said, is that refugees are being turned back at the
border by the Honduran Army. Refugees reaching Honduras say that hundreds of
others are unable to leave El Salvador because the Salvadoran Air Force bombs
the fleeing columns of peasants.

In La Virtud, naked children, older boys playing soccer and grunting black pigs
share the weed-infested, garbage-littered central area surrounded on four equal
sides by crumbling adobe buildings.  Widespread hepatitis and malaria have
disabled even the foreign doctors working here.

A Dinner Shared With Americans

One evening, in a ramshackle adobe building where torrential rains easily
penetrate the gaps in the red tile roof, four American and Honduran soldiers
shared a kerosene lamp-lighted dinner with the French, West German and Honduran
doctors that are part of the relief effort in La Virtud.

When the discussion turned to the refugees, Captain Sheehan, a 1977 graduate of
the United States Military Academy at West Point, said, ''They have no human
rights.'' He said they have a ''right to food and a roof.'' And medicine, he
added, realizing he was among medical people.

Captain Sheehan told the international doctors that a Special Forces medical
team and other military personnel were being sent to La Virtud. International
volunteers were solemn and angry, and they verbally sniped at Captain Sheehan,
who again came to dinner, this night uninvited.

La Virtud has survived the poverty of underdevelopment for generations, they
said. A medical team from the Special Forces is coming more for military than
humanitarian reasons, they said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Honduras

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW BEGINNING--OR A STEP BACKWARD?;
WASHINGTON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2520 words


WITH Congressional passage of the biggest tax cut in history following $37
billion in budget cuts, most of the Reagan economic recovery program is in
place. The White House does not expect instant revitalizaton, however. Treasury
Secretary Donald T. Regan last week said little effect would be felt until the
fall of 1982, and, in a comment that appeared to signify a policy shift, said
that the Federal Reserve Board will have to ease up on monetary restraint
-though just a little - to avoid a severe recession.

Whether the Fed would, or should, is one matter on which economists differ
vigorously. Another is the future impact of the President's program. Some of the
differences were aired in separate interviews with economists from Wall Street
and from the academic community - Sam I. Nakagama, chief economist at the
brokers Kidder, Peabody & Co., Inc., for the last 10 years, and Allan H.
Meltzer, John M. Olin Professor of political economy and public policy at the
Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh and co-chairman of the Shadow Open
Market Committee, a private group that monitors actions of the Federal Reserve.

The first question Clyde H. Farnsworth, a reporter in the Washington bureau of
The New York Times, asked each was whether the economy is now headed into the
supply-side boom of the 80's that the President has promised. Excerpts of the
discussions follow.

Answer. Developments on Wall Street so far suggest that this is not the case.
There seems to be a very important and serious conflict between fiscal policy
and monetary policy.

Broadly speaking, fiscal policy, particularly looking forward to the latter part
of 1982 and beyond, seems to be very expansive; monetary policy seems to be
quite restrictive.

Question. But we do have the Administration's promise it's going to seek further
cuts.

A. The point is that right now you don't have in place tax and expenditure cuts
that would in fact narrow the (budget) deficit.

Q. But the Reagan economists point out that the deficit as percentage of the
gross national product is smaller today than since 1976.

Supply siders also argue that economic projections often don't take into account
the results of their tax reductions.

A. In the first place, I don't think that there's anybody around that can
really, in confidence, say that we're going to get the kind of budget cuts that
people in fact are talking about. As to what the stimulus effects on the economy
are going to be, that in large part depends on monetary policy.

And indeed, the basic thrust of what the Administration is saying is that GNP is
determined by monetary policy. They have a policy of reducing monetary growth
year by year. If you progressively cut GNP growth, barring some extraordinary
rise in (the) velocity (of the money supply), you'd have to expect a relative
(economic) decline.  There is a conflict that's very serious.

Q. You're saying we're headed for a period of minus real growth...

A. Unless there is a dramatic fall in inflation.

Q. There already has been.

A. It would have to be much more dramatic and more sustainable than we've had so
far.

Q. So where are we headed?

A. Where we're headed, I think, is in some sense being fought out in the
financial markets. Exactly this conflict between an economy that essentially
wants to go something like a 12 percent (growth rate, unadjusted for inflation),
particularly based on fiscal policies that we have and based on the cost-price
mechanism that we have, and a Fed (that is) trying to keep money growth down to
3 1/2 percent, gives you these extraordinary interest rates.
Interest Rates and Decline

Q. How long will they stay where they are?

A. That again depends on inflation, and on recession. If you have a decline in
business activity, then at least for a while, interest rates ought to decline.
There's a lot of untested doctrine around here, you know, and untested
assumptions here.

Q. How about the Kennedy-Johnson tax cut of the mid-60's? Hasn't that part of
the doctrine been tested? We had the Vietnam spending boom also, which gave us
our inflation.

But at least for a period, did we not get a relatively good economic performance
from rather substantial tax cuts?

A. In many ways the parallel was exactly the opposite. The inflation rate in the
three years before that tax cut was 1.2 percent; more recently it's been
double-digit.

And at the time you had that tax cut, we had an expenditure cut of 10 percent in
military spending, based on intelligence information showing that we were far
more superior to the Soviet Union in missiles and better balanced in
conventional arms than had been believed.

In the last three or four years there's been a growing perception that the
military balance is shifting in favor of the Soviet Union.  That was the most
basic reason why President Reagan was elected.

So instead of a cut in defense spending, we're in the midst of the largest
rearmament program in peacetime history. While we're cutting taxes in the next
five years by three-quarters-of-a-trillion dollars, we're talking about a $1.5
trillion rearmament program.

Q. Do you see any other areas where the budget expenditures can be cut
substantially?

A. The single most striking achievement of the Reagan Administration has been
the turnaround on the approach to the budget. However you may criticize the
methods that were used, that I think is a very dramatic and constructive change.

Q. But you don't see this continuing?

A. Well, as everybody points out, the easy parts have been done.  More and more
you're going to have more difficult things to do.
Recession and Unemployment

Q. Where is the economy headed, say, in the next six months and over the next
two years?

A. Unless you have a fairly taut decline in short-term (interest) rates, I think
we'll find ourselves in a recession. I think we're in an incipient recession
now.

There are several problems here: One, of course, is that unemployment will rise,
to 8 percent and higher; there's going to be a good deal more public
dissatisfaction.

And probably in that kind of scenario you will have quite a few financial
failures. To the extent that you have an improvement in the inflation rate, it
will be because of those factors.

Q. If we get gains on inflation, the supply siders say, we then move into the
better period. In fact, isn't the Administration admitting that the economy is
soggy and that we have to wait until next year before things will start to
improve?

A. As a matter of fact, I think we're going to be seeing a growing conflict
between the monetarists and the supply siders.  Q. Who's got the upper hand now?

A. Well, these things tend to change with the unemployment rate. In terms of
macropolicy at the moment, the dominant influence is the monetarists.

Q. Will we have an economy on the upswing by the time of the campaigning for the
1982 elections?

A. Yes. But if you're on an up-tick, you may still be having considerable
sogginess and considerable unemployment.

In other words, if after last year's recession you have another recession this
year, you do have to some degree a Thatcher-type situation, where you're paying
a very high cost in terms of unemployment and forgoing capital spending - and
also further weakness in major industries.

Q. We're talking about a shakeout. Isn't sometimes a shakeout necessary to move
ahead?

A. Well, sometimes possibly.  But after all, you've seen periodic shakeouts in
the U.K. and look where they are. In some sense to go this route is to go the
route of financial failure; it works, but it works with business failures.

Answer. The economy will do well, I think, in the 1980's to return to its
historic productivity trend. It may do better than that for brief periods during
the recovery from the current worldwide recession. But I don't think we'll see
the kind of growth that was forecast by some of the more enthusiastic supply
siders.

Question. Do you see the possibility, though, that we might not get an
investment boom?

A. The high real interest rates that we have now, of course, deter investment.
If they remained at this level we would have some difficulty. But I don't
believe that interest rates are going to remain at this level if the
Administration continues to carry through on its program and perhaps supplements
it by looking at ways to further reduce Government spending, or the growth of
Government spending, in fiscal years 1983 and on.

Q. The Treasury must borrow quite a lot later this year and presumably next year
as well to meet the Federal deficit. Added to the private demand for borrowing,
are we really going to see any kind of substantial interest rate decline? And if
we don't, aren't we in danger of running into financial collapse and a wave of
bankruptcies?

A. First, as we head into the current recession, this will cut inventories in
the usual way. And when those inventory cuts take place, we will see real
interest rates come down in response to continued monetary restriction that is
part of the Administration's program. As that happens, rates of inflation will
fall and as those rates of inflation fall interest rates will come down.

I think that that's a reasonably good prospect. Now, if that were not to happen
then I think we would want to reconsider what might be done, but I think we're
more than a year away from the point where we have to think about alternatives.

Q. How far into the recession do we have to get and how high will unemployment
get before before there will be pressure on the Federal Reserve to ease up on
the monetary stringency?

A. First, recessions follow something like a normal scenario. We can shorten
that length of time by making the program more credible - by making people
believe that the rate of inflation is down and is going to stay down.
Inflation and Expectations

Q. You're arguing that leaning on the Fed will correct the expectations and
therefore people will be convinced that inflation will drop and therefore
interest rates will fall of their own accord.

A. Not because they watch what the Fed is doing so much, but because they will
see the visible signs, as we already have begun to. The rates of inflation are
substantially below what most of the forecasters were telling us just a few
months ago.

Q. Yes, but a lot of the progress on the inflation front has been caused by what
the economists like to call exogenous factors such as food and energy.

A. No, no, I disagree with that fundamentally. When the rate of money growth
comes down various prices come down.  One of the reasons that the oil price is
coming down is that the economy is slower. One of the reasons that the economy
is slower is not only that we have a more sensible energy policy. It is also
because we are slowing the rate of money growth, we are inflating the economy
less. Those are the effects of monetary stringency. People don't spend as much -
one of the ways they don't spend as much is that food costs go down.

Q. What are some of the other elements that have to fall into place before we
get more stable growth?

A. We need to have more credible monetary policies. It's shocking that no one
can reasonably predict what the rate of money growth is going to be in 1982.
That's a very bad problem and one that is a major cause of uncertainty.

We now have a much clearer idea about the tax climate. That's to the good - a
much clearer idea about the spending climate. We have a not much clearer idea
about what the monetary climate is.

Q. Where would the economy be today had the elections not gone to the
Republicans?

A. President Carter would be pushing what was called reindustrialization - which
would have transferred far greater control to the Government and would have done
a great deal more to increase the growth of Government spending. The present
Administration's program is visibly trying to shift the burden to new and
growing industries.

Q. It's been described as a survival-of-the-fittest policy. Do you agree with
that characterization?

A. No, I would describe it as a rational policy to allow the market to choose
those industries and firms which are perhaps best suited for the climate of the
80's.

Q. Do you think that we can get by this period of austerity without unemployment
of over 8 percent?

A. My view is that we should be prepared for the idea that we would see
unemployment rates go as high as 8 1/2 percent.
Keeping the Fed Strong

Q. Is this a politically practical figure?

A. I've always believed that the basic problem of disinflating our economy has
been one of going through the transitional stage.

What generally has happened in the past is that a very few months of rising
unemployment and sluggish economy have caused the Federal Reserve and often the
Administration and the Congress to weaken, and we have shifted from what was
known as the priority of dealing with inflation to the priority of dealing with
unemployment and ended up making both worse.

That's really why we started to enunciate the programs we do. We believe you
have to deal with both programs to the extent that you can at the same time. You
have to have a program to stimulate jobs and output at the same time that you
try to reduce the growth of the rate of inflation.

Q. To what extent is the Administration program a 'riverboat gamble,' as Senate
Majority Leader Howard H. Baker Jr. characterized it? He added that he believed
the new economics will work.

A. (The risk) has been greatly overstated. No country has ever reduced the rate
of inflation without slowing the rate of money growth. No country has ever had
the effect of cutting taxes and the growth of government spending and not found
that the economy returns to full employment with greater spending by the private
sector.

Q. You think we've cut taxes enough?

A. The important things that we've done, are that we now don't scorn income
capital. We encourage people to earn income in a variety of ways, including by
saving and investing and getting dividends and interest.

I don't expect an immediate impact. I don't think that people are going to run
out and get into the labor force and make major investments. There will be a
transition. The market will want to see whether the Administration has the
ability and the Federal Reserve has the ability to go through the period of
austerity and come out with the policy intact. But I'm very confident.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of traders on the floor of the NY Stock Exchange
photo of Sam I. Nakagama photo of Allan H. Meltzer

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OPINIONS AND POEMS

BYLINE: By DARRYL PINCKNEY;
Darryl Pinckney is a freelance writer and critic

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1282 words


CIVIL WARS By June Jordan.  188 pp. Boston: Beacon Press. $12.95.
PASSION New poems, 1977-1980.  By June Jordan.  100 pp. Boston: Beacon Press.
Cloth, $20.95. Paper, $4.95.

ARECENT release from the National Coalition Against Censorship reported that two
poems, Allen Ginsburg's ''Howl'' and June Jordan's ''Getting Down to Get Over,''
have been effaced from an anthology used in the high school of Gretna, Va. The
release cited similar efforts in other communities, which is not surprising,
given the mood of the country. If the Parent-Teacher Association of Gretna
objected to the corrupting influence of those two poems, then the town should be
warned against June Jordan's ''Civil Wars,'' a book of thorough and unwavering
radicalism.

''Civil Wars'' is a collection of essays, lectures and letters, concerned with
the dramatic upheavals of the 60's and the still pressing problems of racism,
sexism, police violence. Arranged chronologically, taking in two decades, the
articles form a kind of autobiography of thought and feeling, the story of one
individual's activism and search for community. June Jordan is a poet, a woman,
a black, and these things define the issues that engage her. ''In 1960, I was a
very young twenty-four-year-old, interracially married, the mother of a
two-year-old son, and living in the housing projects in Queens,'' she writes.
''At the time, interracial marriage was a felony in 43 states, but in the
projects, our many neighbors wondered only if my husband and I had secured
parental consent for the relationship we were, evidently, carrying on.'' The
essays are personal as well as political, though June Jordan would argue that
there is no real distinction.

''Civil Wars'' is the record of a strenuous, complicated journey.  It includes
an indictment of ghetto schools, a remembrance of a writing workshop for
minority teen-agers, a conversation with a young man on the Harlem set of a film
(''Q. What's school like? A.  Boring.''), a ''position paper'' in favor of black
studies, a discussion of the implications of the DeFunis case (the ''reverse
discrimination'' predecessor to the Bakke case) and affirmative action, the
frustrations and satisfactions of teaching, reflections on her disillusionment
as a student at Barnard College. Very little is forgotten and much is forgiven
as June Jordan travels from one subject to another. Themes recur, inextricably
linked; in the way a locomotive speedily pulls the rest of the train into view,
the question of education brings forth other matters of trying to survive in a
hostile society. ''The white problem,'' she writes, ''will never be solved as
long as American Black life is an imagining, a TV spectacular.'' Whether her
target is William Shockley and his theories of racial superiority or the
misguided efforts of journalists or the sad malice of bigotry, Jordan is
volatile in her criticism but never shrill asshe contemplates the pernicious
distortions of what Jacobo Timerman calls ''semantic adventurers.''

Many of her opinions are provocative. Her poetry and her interpretations of
literary texts are informed by her experiences as a black woman. She notes the
political character of Shelley's ''Queen Mab,'' speculates on the reasons for
the obscurity of Zora Neale Hurston and the canonization of Richard Wright,
reviews the poetry of the Angolan revolutionaries, Antonio Jacinto and Agostinho
Neto. A blistering attack is launched on Conrad's ''Heart of Darkness.'' Jordan,
like Chinua Achebe, thinks ''Heart of Darkness'' is disfigured by racist
mythology. V.S. Naipaul, perhaps, would disagree. It may be that a writer cannot
live outside his historical moment. June Jordan defends Black English:
''Language is political.'' Sentences such as '' 'You are forgotten you existed!'
'' cannot be translated into standard speech without violating a quality that is
central to black culture.

June Jordan recalls vividly the nightmare of the Harlem riot of 1964: ''Bullets
were flying past the booth and all about me. ...  Women had begun to scream,
simply scream and not move.'' She offers impressions of Malcolm X and Fannie Lou
Hamer, is skeptical of conventional black leadership, and ponders the value of
nonviolence as she records a murder in Mississippi, the attack on a black youth
in a Hasidic neighborhood, the circumstances of police killings of blacks in
Brooklyn. Trouble and outrage are unending; if it is not Vietnam, it is famine
in Africa, until she appreciates the thorough disgust she found extolled in
William Hazlitt's ''The Pleasures of Hating.''

''A week after the riot, my husband wrote saying he was not coming back,'' she
writes. Miss Jordan considers at length the importance and trials of feminism
for black women. She prefers to think of feminism as an inseparable part of a
worldwide struggle against all forms of domination, and hence she criticizes the
narrow concentration of some feminists. Throughout, she writes of her
determination to resist the temptation to hate. ''Is there, in fact, somebody
else alive, besides each one of us? Is there some way to prove that there is
somebody else alive, without violence?'' she asks. She attempts to find
solutions to the problems that capture her imagination: collaborating with
Buckminster Fuller on a plan to redesign Harlem, developing a manual for land
reform in Mississippi.  Rage leads her to applaud the recent disturbances in
Miami, but always she seeks to temper her anger with a measure of determined
optimism and, as she calls it, love. That is a word she does not shrink from
using, at the risk of seeming sentimental or propagandistic, which is valiant in
an era as cynical as ours.

''Passion'' is an appropriate title for this gathering of 51 new poems. Miss
Jordan, in the preface, calls for a ''people's poetry,'' hailing Walt Whitman
and Pablo Neruda as notable examples. It is impossible to accept her charge that
there is a ''vendetta'' against Whitman in America. Even before recent scholarly
work that sympathetically discusses the homoerotic in Whitman's sensibility,
there was Randall Jarrell's important essay. It is also difficult to understand
why the quest for a ''New World'' poetry must entail the rejection of T.S.
Eliot, Robert Lowell, Wallace Stevens or Elizabeth Bishop, four of the finest
poets in the language. There is no contradiction in admiring ''The Waste Land''
as well as lyrics from the streets. One can learn from any tradition.

The poems in ''Passion,'' mostly in free verse, share many of the themes of the
essays. These poems are confidently within an oral tradition, and although the
oral can often mean the merely rhetorical, Miss Jordan serves the tradition
well, with a sensitive ear for the vernacular, for the ironic tone.
I remember finding you inside the laundromat in Ruleville lion spine
relaxed/hell what's the point to courage when you washin clothes?
Her poems are striking in their immediacy.
Our own shadows disappear as the feet of thousands by the tens of thousands
pound the fallow land into new dust that rising like a marvelous pollen will be
fertile
Sometimes there is stinging clarity.
My name is my own my own my own and I can't tell you who the hell set things up
like this but I can tell you that from now on my resistance my simple and daily
and nightly self-determination may very well cost you your life.There are, of
course, happier moments.Wanting to stomp down Eighth Avenue snow or no snow
where you might be so we can takeover the evening by taxi by kerosene lamp by
literal cups of tea

The energy and seriousness of these poems are impressive and, like the essays,
they are the work of a writer of integrity and will.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of June Jordan

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Practical Traveler;
HEALTH PROTECTION ON FOREIGN TRIPS

BYLINE: By Paul Grimes

SECTION: Section 10; Page 9, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1642 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


Thanks to medical science, travelers do not have to worry about illness in most
parts of the world, but many hazards remain, particularly for those who go on
''nature'' or ''adventure'' tours to remote areas where disease is rampant.
Reliable tour operators warn of health risks, take precautions in the
acquisition and handling of food and drink and suggest measures to prevent
illness. But sometimes travelers ignore warnings and take risks they never would
accept at home.

A lot of advice on disease risks and prevention throughout the world is
available free in the United States to those who care to seek it out before
leaving on a trip. In Atlanta, the Centers for Disease Control of the Federal
Public Health Service issues a wealth of frequently updated, authoritative
warnings and guidance. Although most of it is not available to the public
directly, it is available to travel agents, physicians, tour operators, ship
companies, airlines and local health authorities. Simply by asking, they can be
put on the centers' mailing lists without charge.

A good indicator of the quality of a travel agency, in fact, might be whether it
has readily available for your inspection the centers' annual booklet ''Health
Information for International Travel.'' This contains a country-by-country
rundown of vaccination requirements and malaria risks, detailed individual
descriptions of other diseases and medical ways to prevent them and a general
section on ''health hints for the traveler.''

As has been widely reported in the last year, malaria, once believed to be
almost eradicated, has made a strong comeback in tropical areas because of the
growing resistance of the carrier mosquito to insecticides and the resistance of
the malaria parasite to drugs. While the booklet reports extensively on malaria,
it also points up the following situations:

- Vaccination against polio is recommended for people who plan to visit rural or
remote sections of tropical or developing countries and are likely to be in
close touch with local residents. Do not rely on a past vaccination; get a
booster dose (usually oral for children, by inoculation for adults) before you
leave.

- Tetanus remains an important health problem throughout the world, and there is
no known immunity. A booster injection is recommended every 10 years, regardless
of your age. This may not be necessary at home where you can get medical
treatment quickly if you are scratched or punctured by a rusty nail, but it
could be important if you are in unfamiliar territory, even in the United
States.

- Typhoid is prevalent in many countries of Africa, Asia and Central and South
America, so vaccination against it - though it is not required for international
travel - is recommended if you plan to stray from the usual tourist itinerary in
those areas.

- While vaccination against plague, which is spread by rodents and fleas, is not
recommended for the average tourist who stays in modern hotels, there is
substantial risk in rural, mountainous or upland regions of Africa, Asia and
South America - popular areas for safaris or nature or adventure tours.

Dr. Vincenzo Marcolongo, a Toronto physician who founded the nonprofit
International Association for Medical Assistance to Travelers, a
preventive-medicine and physician-referral service, has recently been expressing
alarm about schistosomiasis, an infection spread by parasitic snails that infest
fresh water in Africa, eastern South America, the Caribbean islands, the Middle
East and eastern Asia. Larvae from the snails can penetrate the skin, enlarge
the liver and spleen, impair the blood flow and, if untreated, prove fatal.

Physicians at the Centers for Disease Control do not share Marcolongo's concern.
''Schistosomiasis is on the rise,'' said Dr.  Irving Kagan, director of the
parasitology division at the centers, ''but it should not affect travelers
because travelers should not be swimming in rivers in affected areas. You have
to play an active role, such as by going swimming. No matter how inviting the
Nile is, tourists just don't swim in the Nile.''

Marcolongo, however, does not think the idea of a Nile swim to be outlandish,
although he concedes that a vacationer on a luxury river cruise would probably
not leap overboard for a dip. He feels the river might entice other kinds of
American travelers and cites the experience of a 28-member international tour
group that crossed the Sahara in southern Tunisia by camel. Upon reaching an
oasis, he said, ''the idea of jumping into cool water to relieve the intense
heat'' provoked the tourists to overlook warnings given at home. Nine members of
the group, the doctor said, contracted schistosomiasis.  For details on
Marcolongo's organization and how to become a member, contact IAMAT, 350 Fifth
Avenue, Suite 5620, New York 10001(212-279-6465).

A preface to the booklet ''Health Information for International Travel''
stresses the importance of considering the type and duration of travel and the
nature of the areas to be visited when seeking the best ways to stay healthy. It
simply is not sufficient, the booklet says, to consider only whether
immunizations are required under international health regulations. Rather, it
says, you should consider whether they are recommended.

The centers suggest that in planning a trip to areas that may be medically
risky, you list your itinerary in the sequence in which the countries will be
visited. Then note the incubation period of quarantinable diseases - the minimum
period for vaccination before you enter a country that requires it. For example,
it takes five days before a vaccination against cholera is considered effective;
six days before a shot for yellow fever is considered effective. A visitor could
be placed in quarantine if his vaccination was not given early enough.

Do not be misled by the fact that, as an American, you may have lived all your
life in the healthiest possible surroundings. Whether or not a country requires
a certificate of vaccination against a particular disease depends not on where
you grew up but on where you have visited in recent months. You will not need a
certificate of vaccination against yellow fever, for example, if you fly to
India directly from the United States. You will need one, however, if you plan
to visit central Africa on the way.

You should be sure to consult your personal physician about any preventatives
you propose to take. (They will probably require a prescription, anyway, but
some that may be available overseas are not considered safe by American health
authorities.) Your doctor will know of any allergies or chronic ailments you may
have and what preventatives may be taken safely with those conditions.

The 1981 edition of ''Health Information for International Travel'' should be
off the press by the time you read this. Among the changes from last year:
Taiwan no longer requires any vaccinations (last year, immunization against
cholera was recommended for visitors from infected areas); many countries have
dropped all requirements for vaccination against yellow fever; Panama has
dropped all requirements for vaccination against smallpox.

The booklet is published as an annual supplement to the centers' Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, an often dramatic narrative and statistical statement
on disease throughout the world, including the United States. A recent issue of
the report warned of the danger of eating raw fish because of parasites that can
be transmitted to humans. The warning focused on salmon eaten in California, but
parasitologists said there were high incidences of illnesses in Japan,
Scandinavia and the Netherlands. This does not mean that Americans visiting
Japan should avoid all sushi, but care should be taken in selecting where they
eat it.

Another issue of the Morbidity Report said that dengue fever, a virus carried by
the Aedes aegypti mosquito, had recently been reported in Cuba and the eastern
Caribbean. The Cuban strain, it said, had resulted in 31 deaths. Three days
after publishing this, the centers issued one of their occasional ''advisory
memos,'' which are intended to report and describe newly identified health
problems associated with international travel.

The memo advised that dengue produces sudden high fever, severe headache, joint
and muscle pain and rash. It said the disease is usually mild but that sometimes
recovery is prolonged. Although the risk for the traveler ''appears to be
small,'' the memo added, visitors to endemic regions should stay in
well-screened areas when possible, wear clothing that covers the arms and legs
and apply mosquito repellent.

Because of frequent changes regarding cholera, yellow fever and smallpox, the
centers' bureau of epidemiology distributes a weekly ''blue sheet'' to keep the
annual ''Health Information'' booklet up to date. The blue sheet for the week
ended July 17, for example, said cholera still infected areas of Burundi,
Cameroon, Ghana, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Liberia, Malaysia, Mozambique, Nepal,
Nigeria, the Philippines, Rwanda, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Thailand,
Uganda, Vietnam, Zaire and Zambia, and that Jordan had been added to the list
within the previous seven days.

The sheet also noted, as did previous issues, that the world's last case of
endemic smallpox was reported on Oct. 26, 1977, and that no vaccinations of any
sort are required to return to the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOXIC SUBSTANCES TO BE AUCTIONED

BYLINE: By LEO H. CARNEY

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 1, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1538 words


DESPITE what some critics have called a plethora of state and Federal
regulations governing the transport, use and disposal of hazardous chemicals,
the Department of Defense regularly sells to the general public thousands of
gallons of toxic substances at auctions, the way it does surplus jeeps.

The auctions, some accepting spot bids and others soliciting sealed bids in
advance, are part of the department's traditional business function at its
logistics agency, which has ''property disposal'' offices on almost every
military base in New Jersey and elsewhere.

In the next two weeks, for example, 1,045 gallons of a highly toxic component of
Agent Orange and numerous used transformers containing polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCB's) will be auctioned in New Jersey.

Although both substances are known to cause serious illness and birth defects,
buyers need present only some form of identification and a casual statement of
use.

According to catalogues mailed only to prospective bidders throughout the
nation, the used transformers will be offered at military bases in at least nine
states, including the Military Ocean Terminal in Bayonne.

According to the catalogues, prospective bidders for the transformers and PCB's
are warned to ''prevent contamination of the environment'' and not to come in
physical contact with the compound.

However, the purchase terms require no binding precautions by the Defense
Department to determine how the transformer and PCB's will be used and how, if
at all, the encased compounds will be disposed of legally and safely.
Furthermore, bidders are warned that they, not the department, are responsible
for complying with all regulations of the Federal Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act governing hazardous waste.

The terms of the purchase also state that the buyer alone is liable for any
accidents that may occur as a result of purchasing the chemicals.

PCB's, used in transformers and other products, were banned because of their
enduring presence in the environment. They can be destroyed only by incineration
at 2,250 degrees Fahrenheit. Other methods have been devised over the last few
years but none is in wide use today.

New Jersey regulations state that PCB's in concentrations below 50 parts per
million may be dumped at regular sanitary landfills and garbage dumps. Levels up
to 500 parts per million must be shipped to a secured chemical landfill in New
York and levels above that must be sent to incinerators in Texas or Arkansas.

The chemical used in Agent Orange, known as 2, 4, 5 - T, will be available at
auctions Wednesday at the Naval Air Engineering Center in Lakehurst, Ocean
County, at 9 A.M.

Agent Orange, a potent defoliant, was used in Vietnam. Many veterans exposed to
it there have sued the Government, claiming it has caused long-term illnesses in
them and birth defects in their offspring.

Dr. Robert Tucker, the assistant director of the Office of Toxic Substances and
Cancer Research in the state's Department of Environmental Protection, said last
week that 2, 4, 5 -T, while not as toxic as dioxin - the most controversial
component of Agent Orange - was still a very dangerous compound.

He recalled, and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency later confirmed,
that the chemical had been largely banned because of potential chromosomal
damage to those exposed to it.

Richard Rosencrants, a spokesman for the Defense Department's logistic agency in
Michigan, said in a telephone interview from his office that bidders this
Wednesday would be required to submit a general statement about how they would
use the herbicide. (The Federal ban does not include uses for industrial weed
control or application in open range lands.)

However, Mr. Rosencrants added: ''How to prevent anyone from using it for
nonapproved uses is a question for which I have no answer.'' Referring to the
sale of hazardous substances in general, Mr.  Rosencrants said: ''We understand
that there are dangers, but the material is clearly labeled. God forbid if they
would try to use it for something else.''

Among the other hazardous substances sold at auction as often as twice a month
at military installations in this and other states are industrial solvents and
cleaners, corrosives, adhesives, highly volatile resins and chemicals that the
Government says can burst into flame at room temperature.

One solvent commonly auctioned at Lakehurst is trichlorethane. The National
Occupational Safety and Health Administration says that when inhaled, ingested
or absorbed through the skin at levels above those considered to be safe, it can
cause eye and nose ailments, liver and kidney damage and depression of the
central nervous system.

Gerard Healy, a former civilian employee of the Lakehurst Naval Air Engineering
Center, has assisted state and Federal environmental agencies in their
investigation of hazardous waste dumping at the center. Last November, Mr. Healy
testified before a subcommittee of Congress that investigated reckless dumping
practices at Lakehurst and other Federal facilities in New Jersey.

In an interview last week Mr. Healy said the military's purpose in auctioning
hazardous chemicals ''was to dispose of the stuff by selling it,'' thus legally
skirting Federal regulations.

''Any joker off the street can buy the stuff,'' he said.

Could the vigorous fishing of the mossbunker, a common forage fish which also
has numerous commercial uses, be depleting some of New Jersey's most popular
recreational fish species, such as blue fish, striped bass and weakfish?

Many sports fisherman think so and this summer they have been complaining to the
state's Department of Environmental Protection and circulating a petition to
outlaw commercial purse seining for the mossbunker. The mossbunker, officially
known as menhaden, is the state's most abundantly harvested fish, although it is
essentially inedible.

It is used as bait for crabbing and, ground into meal, is a protein source for
poultry and other livestock. In addition, its oil is used as a base for some of
the most expensive rust-proof paints.

The problem, according to Bruce Freeman, chief of Marine Fisheries for the
D.E.P., is that the best bunker fishing is within a mile from shore, precisely
the area where sports fisherman want mossbunker netting outlawed.

The dispute between the sports and commercial fisherman is of long standing.
However, as Mr. Freeman noted last week, the sports fisherman have become more
adamant in their position this year. By the end of the summer, petitions in
hand, the sports fisherman probably will be asking the Legislature to take some
definitive action in their behalf.

An official of the Army Corps of Engineers said that there was no question that
lobsters were being harvested within a contaminated dredge-spoil dump site six
miles off Long Branch.

''There are lobster pots out there, no doubt about it,'' said Dr.  Dennis J.
Suszkowski, chief of the corps' Regulatory Branch in New York.

Dr. Suszkowski's statement flew in the face of assertions by Norman Sickels,
president of the New Jersey Lobstermen's Association, who earlier this summer
denied that any lobster pots were within the dump area.

However, Dr. Suszkowski emphasized that, even though the dredge spoils contained
PCB's, cadmium and mercury, ''I really don't believe there's any public-health
problem.''

Two years ago, Dr. Suszkowski said, the Army made tests within the
eight-square-mile dump site. Lobsters taken from the area at the time, he said,
contained levels of those hazardous substances as low as in lobsters taken from
relatively clean ocean waters.

Detectable levels of those compounds, Dr. Suszkowski explained, are found
throughout the New York Bight, the area of the Atlantic between the tip of Long
Island and Cape May. This, he said, comes from the migration of substances from
the dump site, the Hudson River or from atmospheric fallout.

''They're found in the ocean now naturally,'' he declared.  Although the levels
of pollutants found in lobsters taken off the Jersey coast are within the safety
limits set by the Food and Drug Administration, Dr. Suszkowski said, he does not
know what the biomagnification effects would be for very low levels of PCB's or
heavy metals ingested by humans over a long period of time.

New Jersey's lobster industry is centered in the Belford-Highlands area near
Sandy Hook, and lobsters are taken from waters just a few miles offshore or from
far out at sea. Last year, some 500,000 pounds of lobsters were landed and sold,
mainly for consumption in New Jersey.

The materials deposited at the dump site are sediments dredged primarily to
accommodate shipping operations in New York Harbor, the Hudson River, the Kill
Van Kull and nearby areas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GUN INDUSTRY'S ROLE IS SHRINKING

BYLINE: By JOHN S. ROSENBERG

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 25, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1403 words


NEW HAVEN THE gun manufacturing business, the bedrock on which Connecticut's
prowess as a supplier of everything from machine tools to jet engines was built,
is showing signs of old age.

Stagnant sales, obsolete factories, soaring product-liability costs, and lagging
innovation have prompted some companies to divest their gun divisions, most
recently on July 20, when Olin Corporation sold its Winchester Sporting Arms
Division in New Haven to a group of private investors for $24 million.

While some smaller, family-controlled enterprises, such as Sturm, Ruger &
Company Inc. of Southport, have remained competitive and are growing, the
industry's overall role in the state economy is shrinking.

Guns were ''really the very origin of precision manufacturing in America,'' said
William B. Ruger, the founder and chairman of the company that bears his name.
''It was particularly true that the Connecticut River Valley was the birthplace
of this whole system of interchangeable-parts manufacturing,'' he added, in
cities such as Middletown, New Haven and Hartford.

The great names of the industry are still readily visible. The huge brick
factory of the Colt Firearms Division of Colt Industries Inc., topped by a blue,
onion-shaped cupola, looms over I-91 in Hartford.  To the south, the same
highway passes the modern plant of Marlin Firearms Company in North Haven. And
commuters on the Connecticut Turnpike regularly see the ammunition plant of
Remington Arms Company Inc., now a subsidiary of Du Pont, in Bridgeport.

But their economic importance has dwindled. From June, 1970, when Vietnam War
spending swelled payrolls in Connecticut gun factories to 9,900, the work force
has declined steadily to 6,890 in June 1980, a reduction of 31 percent. Compared
with peak production in World War II, when the plants swarmed with tens of
thousands of workers, the decline is even more severe.

''The market is basically static,'' said C. Hugh Fletcher, president of U.S.
Repeating Arms Company, the new name given to the firearms assets sold by Olin.
(Olin is retaining its profitable ammunition business.) Sales of expensive
sporting arms, the rifles, shotguns and revolvers that make up the bulk of
business for U.S.  Repeating Arms, Sturm Ruger, Marlin, and Colt, are ''not
growing except for the home-defense portion,'' he said.

Mr. Ruger, whose company, established in 1949, has grown to become one of the
largest suppliers, with 1980 sales of $80.3 million, said that real growth after
price increases amounted to ''a few percentage points'' a year. Even with that
experience, he said, ''I'm sure that we have simply increased market share.''

The industry's difficulties have not been lost on the analysts at the top of
industrial conglomerates. In January, Emhart Corporation, headquartered in
Farmington, sold its Savage Arms Division, which is located just over the
Massachusetts border in Westfield, to a Los Angeles company. After a bitter
six-month strike that lasted until January 1980, Olin, realizing that the New
Haven plant ''lost money consistently for more than the last decade,'' as one
company official put it, decided to sell the Winchester gun operations.

Much of the industry is saddled with old plants and a reputation for poor
quality.  From 1972 until this year, Mr. Fletcher said, Winchester introduced no
new products, and the company's ''image in the industry had slipped. The quality
wasn't considered as good as it was in the past.'' Improvements in quality
involved Olin in substantial investments in renovating and purchasing new
capital equipment, he said, but operations were hampered by a costly old
multi-story factory.

As part of its recovery plan for the business, which expects sales of $65
million this year, Mr. Fletcher said, ''we expect within three to five years to
build a new plant on land adjacent to the existing site.'' The
400,000-square-foot factory would be financed in part from loans and grants from
New Haven and the State Department of Economic Development and would assure the
continuation of 1,000 jobs, which makes U.S. Repeating Arms one of the city's
largest employers.

In the meantime, to trim costs, the number of general, administrative, and sales
personnel has been cut from 244 to 95, and the company is pursuing a vigorous
program of introducing new products and selling guns, such as the new $600 John
Wayne Commemorative Model 94 rifle, to collectors. Finally, the company hopes to
take advantage of ''certain reductions in wages and fringe benefits'' agreed to
by unionized workers as part of the acquisition plan, Mr. Fletcher said.

Colt may have similar problems. Its military weapons factory in Hartford is old
and costly, although the commercial gun facility in West Hartford is more
modern. The company's M-16, the standard military rifle for the armed forces of
the United States since the early 1960's, currently is not being produced in any
significant quantities, and collectors have complained about the performance of
some of its expensive commemorative models. Company spokesmen in Hartford and
New York City declined requests for interviews.

Not all of the industry is in disarray. Du Pont clearly felt sufficiently good
about Remington, in which it had held a majority of the stock, to buy complete
ownership in February, 1980. Bangor Punta Corporation, headquartered in
Greenwich, retains ownership of Smith & Wesson, the highly profitable handgun
maker in Springfield, Mass. And companies such as Sturm, Ruger have grown
handsomely.

While innovation has slowed at some of the other manufacturers, which tend to
specialize in either handguns or rifles, like U.S.  Repeating Arms, Sturm, Ruger
has continued to turn out new models across the broad range of weapons. In the
early 1970's, it introduced a line of revolvers intended for police use, in
competition with Colt and Smith & Wesson. In 1979, the company brought out an
over-andunder shotgun, with the barrels mounted vertically. The $760 gun has
been ''a huge success technically, and it's a growing success in the market,''
Mr. Ruger said. Sales have increased 237 percent, from $33.8 million in 1975,
and employment in Southport and at a larger New Hampshire factory has increased
more than 50 percent, to about 1,500.

Even so, Mr. Ruger is wary about the weapons business. Sporting arms sales,
which he conceded were a '' 'faintly controversial' business'' are likely to
remain stagnant, so ''we are interested in military and police business in the
last few years to a much greater degree than in the previous 25 years.'' The
company's New Hampshire casting facility has just been enlarged, and sales of
castings to outside users ''could very well account for a volume of business in
the next decade that equals the arms business,'' he said. Remington has
diversified, too, and makes specialty saw blades at its Bridgeport factory.

Finally, the business had to cope with heavy product liability costs. Sturm,
Ruger is defending itself in 60 product liability cases, including one in Alaska
where it is appealing a $500,000 award. ''Our insurance premiums, when we
stopped being insured, reached 5 percent of sales,'' Mr. Ruger said. Similarly,
in 1978, Remington settled a single liability case involving a person injured by
one of the company's rifles for $6.8 million.

Overcoming these burdens, while buying the capital equipment needed to engrave
fancy rifles and shape wood rifle stocks, tasks for which skilled labor is
increasingly scarce, will be difficult in a market with stagnant sales. As part
of its plan to turn around U.S.  Repeatnmg Arms, Mr. Fletcher said, the new
management is projecting sales next year ''in the range of $90 million,'' about
a 40 percent increase over 1981. Gains like that will be hard to achieve in an
industry in which, as Mr. Ruger noted, ''it simply hasn't been a practical
growth area for a lot of these conglomerate companies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of C. Hugh Fletcher Photo of Winchester logo Photo
of Winchester rifles

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Television Week

BYLINE: By Gene Lambinus

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 3, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 193 words


Eyes on the Point
''Coming out of the 60's, we were rather suspicious of the military.  But we
came away from this production feeling impressed with the way young people
respond to the training.'' Sonya Gilligan was speaking about how she and her
husband, Mike, reacted upon completion of their latest documentary, ''No Excuse,
Sir,'' which the filmmakers describe as ''an update on West Point since the
Vietnam War.'' The hour-long film will be shown on Channel 13 on Friday at 9
P.M., as part of the ''Exchange'' series.

The Gilligans, who live in Garrison, N.Y., just across the Hudson from the
military academy, began shooting the film in the spring of 1979. It is a
companion piece to other Gilligan documentaries dealing with the river and its
banks. In 1979, they finished the 90-minute ''Henry Hudson's River: A
Biography.'' And they are now working on ''Metro,'' a three-hour portrait of New
York City that will reflect its modern-day visage as well as sketching its
ethnic heritage.

Their first production, ''Christina's World,'' won four Emmy awards in 1977.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

G.I.  BILL URGED FOR MEN JOINING COMBAT GROUPS

BYLINE: BY RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 9


The Reagan Administration plans to propose a new G.I. bill of educational
benefits that would favor young men who join the ground combat arms for the
military services, according to the Defense Department's senior manpower
official.

Lawrence J. Korb, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for manpower, said in an
interview that the measure, which is to go to Congress early next year, would be
designed to attract young people into the Army and the Marine Corps rather than
the Navy and Air Force.

"Everybody who joins the military service is going to get some educational
benefits," he said, "but we want to give the best package to those who go where
we need them most."

"If a youngster joins the Navy or the Air Force," Mr. Korb said, "he's going to
get a lot of technical training, which is a marketable skill. But if somebody
joins a combat arm in the Army or the Marine Corps, unless you can send him back
to school, he doesn't have a marketable skill."

An Education in Exchange

"What we want is a kid who wouldn't even have thought about the military to give
us a couple of years in the combat arms," he said.  The incentive would be a
college education.

Mr. Korb outlined the new G.I. bill in a discussion ranging over critical issues
raised by the Administration's plan to expand the armed forces by 200,000 to
250,000 in the next five years, while retaining the volunteer force and avoiding
a draft.

Mr. Korb said the Administration intends to make the military services more
professional by persuading more people to make the military a career and to stay
beyond the 20 years need to require for retired pay. He was not enthusiastic
about lengthening initial enlistments to six years, as suggested by other
officials, because that might discourage potential recruits.

Manpower costs should not rise drastically after next year, Mr.  Korb said. If
Congress approved the 14.3 percent pay increase that the Administration wants to
take effect on Oct 1, military pay will have been made comparable to civilian
wages, he said, then no further big pay increases would be sought, as long as
routine increases kept up with inflation. He also said that retaining a greater
number of experienced people should make them more productive and cut the costs
of advertising, recruiting, training and schooling.

He said the shrinking pool of young men of military age should not be the
obstacle to meeting manpower quotas that many critics of the volunteer force
have contended. Mr Korb asserted that in 1975, before the present peak in the
youth population, the Army needed 4.3 percent of the eligible young men to meet
its quotas. By 1987, at the bottom of the current cohort of young men, the Army
will still need only 4.2 percent of that group to make its quotas.

On the role of women, Mr. Korb said: "We are increasing the number of women in
the service every year." Women are about 9 percent of the armed forces. That is
expected to go to 10 or 11 percent, he said, and the services are evaluating the
performance of women to assess their future roles.

"Every job in the military ought to have a set of mental and physical
standards," Mr. Korb said. "People who don't meet them should not." But he
suggested that women would still not be allowed in combat.

Mr Korb also said that the Manpower Task Force President Reagan appointed last
month to examine personnel needs would complete its work by the end of the year.

The main question being studied, Mr. Korb said, was: "What do we have to do
right here, this year, to make sure that we get the kind of force we want to
support the strategy that we're setting up." Mr. Korb said that the new G.I.
bill being considered would be a centerpiece of the recruiting effort. There
seems to be support for such a measure in Congress, although many different
versions have drawn attention.

But critics of the volunteer army and proponents of a return to the draft could
be expected to oppose the G.I. bill as too costly and unworkable, Congressional
officials said.

Contrary to widespread belief, the sort of bill being prepared is different from
previous programs. Officials said that the previous G.I. Bills, after World War
II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War, were intended as rewards for service.
But the new bill would be an incentive to enlist.

Secondly, the benefits of the earlier G.I. bills went to men who had been
drafted or who enlisted under the indirect pressure of the draft. The new bill
would support a volunteer force.

Finally, the other G.I. Bills provided nearly equal benefits to each recipient,
except for an extra allowance for married men. In the proposed bill, more
benefits would go to those in the infantry, artillery and armored corps, and the
Marines.

Among the complexities of the situation is how to attract people to combat
branches with a G.I. Bill, on the one hand, while also retaining the best
soldiers as career noncommissioned officers and specialists.

Manpower experts said that the services, especially the Army and Marine Corps,
need large numbers of low ranking members for a few years.

They also said that some of the better soldiers and Marines, even after
enlisting to obtain educational benefits, would find that they liked military
life and would stay.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT CETA CAN DO: ONE NEW YORK WORKER'S STORY

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 381 words


To the Editor:

Five years ago, I wrote a letter to The Times in which I expressed my feelings
of apprehension and sadness about the then-proposed termination of the
Comprehensive Employment and Training Act program. The letter was published.
year earlier, as an unemployed Vietnam-era veteran with no real skills, I had
been hired by the City of New York and assigned to the Housing Department as a
neighborhood aide. I had kept my eyes and ears open, and I had learned from
those who were willing to teach me. When I wrote the letter, I was not
apprehensive about being out of work, I was sad because I would no longer be
allowed to continue to learn the skills I had so desperately sought and needed
in order to provide for myself and those who depend on me.

Collectively, we were lucky to be granted a stay until a new Administration
stepped into the picture and extended the program. But even after this occurred,
the controversy surrounding the CETA program continued. There were those who
called CETA a no-show, nogood program; others said it just kept people off the
official dole, and still others called it a neo-welfare program. In my letter, I
said that CETA provided an opportunity to obtain realistic on-the-job training
that would come in handy in the future.

Today, I am still employed by the Department of Housing Preservation and
Development, where I hold a position of considerable responsibility. I have
acquired a significant amount of knowledge in my area of professional interest
and, just as important, I earn a decent living. I am now waiting to be appointed
from a Civil Service list as a result of having taken a professional experience
and training exam.

My greatest feeling is one of pride, of having been able to serve my people more
than once: as a Vista volunteer, in the military and again with CETA, where I
was paid for my work in behalf of my fellow citizens while I gained experience
that has paid off for me.

I feel that the dollars that were spent on CETA were not wasted, and I sincerely
hope that all those CETA workers who are scheduled to be dismissed at the end of
August (just days before Labor Day) have a better answer to my question of five
years ago: Where to now?
PETER ANTONIO AVILES, Oakland Gardens, N.Y., Aug. 4, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A TURNAROUND, NOT JUST IN SPORT

BYLINE: By Lee Ballinger

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: WARREN, Ohio


The baseball strike is over and the second season has begun. Yet the underlying
causes of baseball's transformation from an island of tranquillity into a sea of
litigation remain as obscure as ever.

Only after careful reflection on my own life as a steelworker and a sports fan
did I begin to understand baseball's true financial picture.

As an American, I grew up believing that the only question of significance I
would ever have to answer was, ''How much more?'' Didn't my parents live much
better than my grandparents? Hadn't I, in turn, quickly surpassed them when I
returned from Vietnam? With every contract, my union came up with more money and
almost unimaginable benefits. This was achieved despite the fact that the union
agreed in advance not to strike and never disagreed with the steel companies on
fundamental policies.

Baseball as we know it was born when I was, immediately after World War II.
Baseball's best players returned from that conflict and settled back into a
sport in which the biggest change in nearly a century had been the shift to the
live ball that introduced the homerun era. Sixteen teams remained crowded into
America's industrial heartland from Chicago to Boston. Most were owned by
moderately wealthy families with limited outside business interests.

Baseball has changed a great deal since then but it is not the designated hitter
or the return to constant base stealing that has captured the public's
imagination. It's players' salaries. The conventional wisdom attributes baseball
players' position atop the professional sports totem pole and steelworkers'
similar perch atop the bluecollar slag heap to the awesome power of their
unions. This notion is as false as it is fashionable. While I won't deny the
skill of Marvin Miller, the players' negotiator, nor the importance of the
United Steelworkers of America, they are not responsible for the new wealth of
the people they represent. Rather, the post war economic expansion was so
profitable that the wisest course for business was to let key sections of United
States labor, including baseball players, eat a larger piece of the pie. The
seemingly endless expansion of wealth in America obscured the fact that the
relative shares for ballplayers and hardhats began to decline.

Meanwhile, the billions of dollars invested in Southern industry slowly created
a market that could support major league baseball. The 16 teams that existed at
my birth had grown to 26 by the time my son entered first grade. The Sun Belt,
which had never been known as a hotbed of Major League baseball or modern
industry, had become home to both.

Rising disposable income allowed me and my blue-collar brethren to become such a
desirable market that advertisers began throwing money at the networks fighting
for access to sports air time. The networks were only too happy to pass along a
bushelful of dollars to the owners who never genuinely complained if the players
picked off an odd peck or two.

The Federal Government also helped out by bestowing special tax advantages on
both the steel and baseball industries. Ironically, this allowed steel companies
to diversify out of steel while it made professional franchise ownership so
attractive that it was a rare corporation that did not consider diversifying
into baseball.

By the mid-1970's the overheated world economy had expanded to the most remote
corners of the earth. But even a tidal wave must eventually expend its energy
and recede. Inevitably the economy must contract. The undertow thus created is
carrying real wages, our ability to buy a house or a box seat, out to sea.

Yet, as we all became increasingly restless watching so many things we took for
granted slip from our hands, sports fans were comforted by the thought that
almost every day we could escape for two or three hours in a baseball game. When
the strike began on June 12, there were no more comforting thoughts at all.

The corporate leopards, including those who own baseball teams, are changing
their spots. The depression we are slipping into demands that they reduce their
labor costs if the former ratio of pie morsels is to remain intact. The contract
the baseball players have agreed to will push them rapidly back in time toward
the prefreeagency days of 1974. Here they join a long parade, already in
progress, of blue- and white-collar workers.

But at least the settlement will bring back baseball, and no matter how much the
owners bastardize the rest of the season to wring out every possible playoff
game, that is a delight. But it does nothing to slow the upward surge of ticket
prices or the awkward two-step toward universal pay television. Despite the
seven-week strike, the fan remains as unrepresented and ignored as he was in the
dead-ball era.

With the opening of the ''second season,'' our choices as fans have already been
made for us. We might as well enjoy what's left of this semiseason. We may not
be able to afford even this much baseball again for a long, long time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Lee Ballinger, who works on a steel-pouring crew at the Warren, Ohio, mill of
the Republic Steel Corporation is author of ''In Your Face! Sports for Love and
Money.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 10, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HANK MCGRAW VENTURES BACK TO THE GAME

BYLINE: By IRA BERKOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 2143 words

DATELINE: BEND, Ore.  THIS spring the Phillies


after months of discussion and hesitation - hired Hank McGraw as a coach with
their Bend rookie league team, but first they asked him to cut the ponytail that
extended to his waist. He did. They asked him to trim his walrus mustache, and
the droopy loops were soon snipped.

Then he was asked to remove the gold earring in his left ear. He consented but
reserved the right to set it back in his lobe during off-hours. Agreed.

Even though this was for the lowest field-management job on the lowest level of
organized baseball, the compromises were not particularly easy for the Phillies
or for McGraw, and the relationship remains tentative.

''It's safe to say that we're the only club in baseball who would take Hank,''
said Jim Baumer, the Phillies' minor league director.  ''Once you get a tag in
this game it's hard to shake. But everybody deserves a second chance.''

Hank McGraw, brother of the Philadelphia pitcher Tug McGraw, is 38 and has been
out of baseball for nine years. ''I know I'm being watched pretty closely,'' he
said recently. ''But I'd like to see things work out. I miss baseball.'' He was
willing to make some concessions in order to return, but, he said, ''I'm still
basically going to have to be my own man.''

He was always his own man, which is what got him into trouble in baseball in the
first place. His particular crime? Growing hair.  Because of it, McGraw, a
onetime career minor leaguer, became a cause celebre.

It happened in July 1970. McGraw was a good-hitting catcher (he also filled in
at infield and outfield positions) for the Phillies' top farm team, the Eugene
(Ore.) Emeralds of the Class AAA Pacific Coast League. Although the team had
outstanding personnel - including future major leaguers such as Willie Montanez,
Oscar Gamble and Joe Lis - it was foundering. A new manager, Lou Kahn, was
brought in. One of his first official acts was to have McGraw cut his hair.

McGraw's dark hair was not shaped in the traditional round-as-abaseball design
but fell nearly to his collar. And his sideburns were also relatively long,
extending to his ear lobe instead of to the accepted mid-ear length. To some,
apparently, his hairiness symbolized the poor showing of the club. Pictures of
McGraw then show him to be positively clean-cut by most standards of the day,
though his eyebrows do seem a little bushy.

''Baseball is such a sheltered world,'' McGraw says, ''that anything that looks
a little unusual seems a lot unusual when maybe it's not unusual at all.
Baseball is always a few years behind the rest of society.''

But this was also in an age when youth was scaring the Establishment. Young men
and women with shoulder-length hair were protesting the Vietnam War, some were
shouting ''Flower Power,'' and guys wore beads and girls wore boots. People
played the guitar and they weren't even cowboys. Everything seemed to be
changing.

''Trim your mop, Hank,'' Manager Kahn told McGraw.''I like it this way,'' McGraw
said. He also said it was an intrusion on his privacy.  McGraw was suspended
indefinitely and without pay. He says he couldn't believe it, nor could many
other people.  He had been hitting .305, with 14 home runs and 49 runs batted
in, and it was only halfway through the season. The Phillies' two catchers, Tim
McCarver and Mike Ryan, were suffering with injuries, and Hank says he thought
at the time he might get his first shot at the big leagues. He was 27, had been
in the minors for eight years, since he signed as one of the Mets' first bonus
babies in 1962. And he was having his best season ever.

Yet suddenly he was a nonplayer.  ''Let's face it,'' Baumer says today, ''Hank
was a hippie.''

McGraw, who indeed wore sandals and strummed the guitar, says that he wasn't
trying to defy the Establishment or make any kind of protest.

''I've always worn long hair because my head is so large - I wear a size 7 5/8
hat - and my neck is long, and so I just look silly with short hair,'' he said.
''Besides, I didn't understand the issues of the war well enough in those days
to really take a stand. But I immediately became a symbol, and it took me by
complete surprise.''

The story of the suspension was picked up by the news agencies, and suddenly
McGraw was the eye of a storm that swept across the country, and into Mexico and
Canada and even Europe.

''I got letters from all over,'' McGraw said. ''One guy wrote that I was a
menace because I was tampering with something as sacred and American as
baseball. A woman in Wisconsin blamed me for her daughter's eloping because the
girl had left a note with a newspaper story of me and wrote on it, 'Freedom
Lives.' And an awful lot of people said I needed Jesus Christ to help me through
this.

''But there was a reaction from other people. And it was: 'Right on!' ''

To get away from all the publicity, McGraw hid for 10 days in a friend's house
in the Oregon woods. Then he headed for New York to stay with his brother Tug,
and he went to see Marvin Miller, executive director of the Major League Players
Association. The issue was raised that it was unlawful for a team to exercise
this kind of imperious control over an individual. But because Hank wasn't a
major leaguer, Miller couldn't handle the case. There was a possibility of a
civil suit, but it was discarded when, after six weeks, the Phillies sold Hank
to Hawaii, an independently owned Class AAA team.And he soon received the back
salary that had been withheld.

Chuck Tanner, the manager in Honolulu, said he was delighted to get a player of
McGraw's caliber, regardless of his appearance. ''I don't even know if there's a
barber in this town,'' Tanner said. The team went on to win the pennant, with
McGraw making a major contribution.

After the season, McGraw was purchased by the Brewers organization and in the
following year by the Braves, but nothing was quite the same. ''Everywhere I
went, the first thing anyone asked was about my hair,'' he said. ''The label
that I was some kind of revolutionary followed me into every town.'' The
experience defused his spark for the game.

''And from the standpoint of management,'' McGraw said, ''I had become more of a
suspect than a prospect.'' After the 1972 season - as player-coach with
Savannah, Ga., a Class AA team - he retired. His marriage of a year had broken
up, and he went to live in a cabin on the Russian River in northern California.
Away from the world. Away from the rat race. Away from baseball.

He earned a living by making leather products and by old-fashioned bartering,
traveling in his van to the nearby towns of Monte Rio and Guerneville.

But Hank kept in touch with Tug, who is a year and a half younger, and followed
his brother's career closely. Whenever Tug played in San Francisco against the
Giants, Hank came down to visit. They talked baseball, as they had done ever
since they were boys in Vallejo, Calif., when they worked on pitching in the St.
Vincent's schoolyard behind their home and, when it grew dark, moved to the
street and played under the lamp-lights.

In retirement, Hank still watched baseball on television, and then a few years
ago helped organize a softball league in the area near his home. A field was
cleared and Hank coached the team called the Panama Reds. The league was
unconventional, to say the least.

''There were a lot of guys who were rebels in the 60's and never played team
sports - too bourgeois,'' McGraw said. ''But now they got interested. And
they're running around in their third-world dress. It was funny, and fun. I
really enjoyed coaching and teaching them the game. Then some guys started
getting really competitive. And some began to criticize their teammates.

''So one day I called a team meeting in my cabin. And on the wall I put up two
signs. One read, 'Good Guys' and the other read 'Jerks.' And I put names of
players under each. Of course the guys who were listed under 'Jerks' wanted to
know what they were doing on it. And I told them. We hashed it out and things
got better after that.''

The softball league rekindled McGraw's enthusiasm for baseball.  ''Do you think
you'd like to come back?'' Tug asked him one day.''I might like to take a
shot,'' Hank said.  Tug said he'd see if there was any interest on the part of
the Phillies.  ''If they consider it, they'd ask you to make concessions, you
know that,'' said Tug.  ''Sometimes you have to,'' said Hank. ''I don't think
I'd be trimming my values if I trimmed my hair.'' Tug discussed it with Paul
Owens, vice president of the Phillies.  Owens then talked to Hank, and he liked
what he heard. He was somewhat surprised at how knowledgeable and how serious
Hank was about the game. Then he talked it over with Baumer, the minor league
farm director.

''And knowing Tug as we do,'' Baumer says, ''we respected what he had to say
about how well he thought his brother would work out. And from our standpoint,
we thought, 'Hey, maybe Hank can relate to young players in a way some of the
rest of us can't.' It was worth a try.''

On the field, Hank looks like any other coach who is hitting fungoes in the
twilight to outfielders in a small minor league park.  He is well-built, at 6
feet 3 inches and 210 pounds - just about his playing weight. The sun reflects
against his sunglasses and off his Hawaii championship ring. On the back of his
Phillies' uniform he wears No. 45, Tug's number. His hair tips his collar, but
it is not as long as some of the other players on the club, who wear what the
players call a hair hat - some even needing bobby pins to keep their caps on.

After a game, Hank will change into a linen patchwork sport jacket, a T-shirt
with a Russian River insignia, and clogs and, away from the ball park, screw in
an earring.

''But on the field they want me to show an example of being fairly straight -
and concentrating just on the points of the game,'' McGraw said. ''I can
appreciate that.''

''What I missed about baseball,'' he said, ''was not the active part - the
cheers in your ears - but something else: the spiritual or religious aspect -
the combining of the mental and the physical and the emotional. The attempt to
master something that takes a long time. In some ways it reminds me of one of
those Eastern disciplines, like Zen. I thought I might be able to convey that to
young players.

''I've always been intrigued by excellence and I thought that the really great
players seem to transcend their bodies. I look at a Steve Carlton or a Rod Carew
who consistently reach certain peaks of performance, and I wondered why. I
believe it is a matter of their concentration - it is so great nothing
interferes.

''For example, every stride when a great player is running is an event. Look at
Pete Rose, and that head-first slide. Notice when he gets up, he is dirty only
from chest to knees. And he never jams a finger. He has complete mental control
of what he is doing.

''The top players can overcome the fear that is in all of us in times of
pressure. Remember Tug in the World Series last year in critical moments? How he
patted his heart with his glove? He wasn't showboating, he was simply using the
energy of the situation and the people in the stands - and turning it from a
negative force to a positive one.

''I don't know if anyone can teach that. But at least you can make young players
aware that such things do exist. Now, down here, I haven't tried any of this
yet. These kids are green peas. They've gone from stars in high school or
college to this rookie league - and it's like a culture shock. They've got so
much to learn about the fundamentals of the game, such as turning the double
play. That's enough for them to try to digest at this time.

''But one day, maybe at some other level of the game, I can offer something
different in the way of coaching. And I'll let more of me come forth. If not,
I'd just go back to the cabin.

''Meanwhile, I'll just do my job as I'm asked to do it. And I'm sure things'll
work out fine - they have so far - as long as I don't rattle anyone's cage, and
they don't rattle mine.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 2 photos of Hank McGraw

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 12, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM HAIG'S SPEECH ON RELATIONS BETWEEN U.S. AND SOVIET UNION

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2407 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


Following are excerpts from a speech by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.
to the American Bar Association in New Orleans. The text was made available here
by the State Department.

Over a century ago Alexis de Tocqueville predicted that the United States and
Russia were destined to become the world's most powerful states. This prophecy
has come to pass in the nuclear age. Our unreconciled differences on human
rights must therefore not be permitted to bring a global catastrophe. We must
compete with the Soviet Union to protect freedom, but we must also search for
cooperation to protect mankind.

This search has been both difficult and disappointing. Most recently we invested
extraordinary efforts in the decadelong search for detente. But even as the
search for a reduction in tensions intensified, the instrument of tension -
Soviet military power -was strengthened. This buildup gained momentum from a
remarkably stable and prosperous period in Soviet history.

As the Soviet arsenal grew and the West failed to keep pace, Moscow's
interventionism increased. The achievement of global military power, justified
as parity with the West but exceeding it in several categories, assumed a more
ominous role: the promotion of violent change, especially in areas of vital
interest to the West.  Today's Soviet military machine far exceeds the
requirements of defense; it undermines the balance of power on which we and our
allies depend and it threatens the peace of the world. An international system
where might - Soviet might - makes right, endangers the prospects for peaceful
change and the independence of every country.

Reactions to Shift in Power

Perhaps predictably, the Soviet attempt to alter the balance of power has
produced a backlash. The American people have shown that they will not support
unequal treaties; they will not accept military inferiority. The once-staunch
Chinese ally has become an implacable opponent of the Soviet quest for hegemony.
And Moscow has earned the enmity and fear of many nonaligned states through such
actions as the occupation of Afghanistan and support for Vietnam's subjugation
of Cambodia.

This backlash comes at a time when Soviet prospects are changing for the worse.
The economies of Moscow's Eastern European allies are in various stages of
decline. The Soviet economy itself may have lost its capacity for the high
growth of the past. Ambitious foreign and defense policies are therefore
becoming more of a burden. Perhaps most seriously, as events in Poland have
demonstrated, the Soviet ideology and economic model are widely regarded as
outmoded.

The decade of the 80's therefore promises to be less attractive for Moscow. But
the troubles and power of the Soviet Union should give pause to the world.
Moscow's unusual combination of weakness and strength is especially challenging
to the United States.

What U.S. Wants From Moscow

What do we want of the Soviet Union? We want greater Soviet restraint on the use
of force. We want greater Soviet respect for the independence of others. And we
want the Soviets to abide by their reciprocal obligations, such as those
undertaken in the Helsinki accords. These are no more than we demand of any
state, and these are no less than required by the United Nations Charter and
international law. The rules of the Charter governing the international use of
force will lose all of their influence on the behavior of nations if the Soviet
Union continues its aggressive course.

Our pursuit of greater Soviet restraint and reciprocity should draw upon several
lessons painfully learned over the past decade in dealing with the Soviet Union.

Soviet antagonism toward Western ideals is deeply rooted. We cannot count upon a
convergence of Soviet and Western political principles or strategic doctrines.
Convergence should not be, and cannot be, a goal in negotiations. As a
corollary, we should avoid dangerous optimism about the prospects for more
benign Soviet objectives.

Defending Our Interests

The Soviet Union does not create every international conflict, but it would be
dangerous to ignore Soviet intervention that aggravates such conflict. Even as
we work to deal with international problems on their own terms, we must deal
with Soviet interventionism. A regional approach that fails to appreciate the
strategic aspect of Soviet activity will fail ultimately to resolve regional
conflicts as well.

A working relationship with the Soviet Union depends on a balance of
alternatives and our ability to communicate to Moscow that such alternatives
exist. We must indicate our willingness to reach fair agreements that speak to
the legitimate interests of both the Soviet Union and the United States. But we
must also be prepared to defend our interests in the absence of such agreements.
Our ability to do so will be a major inducement for Soviet cooperation.

Finally, the search for real reductions in tension with Moscow must cover the
full spectrum of our relationship. We have learned that Soviet-American
agreements, even in strategic arms control, will not survive Soviet threats to
the overall military balance or Soviet encroachment upon our strategic interests
in critical regions of the world. Linkage is not a theory; it is a fact of life
that we overlook at our peril.

Restraint Is Prerequisite

Based on these guidelines, the United States has taken steps toward the
achievement of a more stable and beneficial relationship with the Soviet Union.
Our actions have been shaped both by the lessons of the past and by Winston
Churchill's observation that the key to the Soviet riddle was Soviet national
interest.

President Reagan has written President Brezhnev that we want a constructive and
mutually beneficial relationship with the Soviet Union.  What, in turn, do we
offer the Soviets? We offer a reduction in the tensions that are so costly to
both our societies. We offer diplomatic alternatives to the pursuit of violent
change. We offer fair and balanced agreements on arms control. And we offer the
possibility of Western trade and technology.

But such a relationship can only be the consequence of a pattern of greater
Soviet restraint. In the absence of such restraint, our military capability, our
alliances and our friendships will enable us to protect our interests.

Over the last six months, this message has been reinforced by over 50 direct
contacts at senior diplomatic levels. And we have prepared a concrete agenda of
the outstanding problems between us in these areas: geopolitcal issues, arms
control and economic relations.

Geopolitical Issues

The most persistent troubles in U.S.-Soviet relations arise from Soviet
intervention in regional conflicts, aggravating tensions and hampering the
search for peaceful solutions. Unless we can come to grips with this dimension
of Soviet behavior, everything else in our bilateral relationship will be
undermined - as we have seen repeatedly in the past.

The Soviet Union must understand that it cannot succeed in dominating the world
through aggression. A serious and sustained international reaction will be the
inevitable result, with greater dangers for everyone - including Moscow. The
Soviet Government must recognize that such a reaction has finally occurred,
provoked by the crises of Afghanistan and Cambodia. And the international
community has proposed ways and means for resolving those crises to the
satisfaction of all legitimate interests.

The people of Afghanistan overwhelmingly oppose the Soviet occupation and the
Babrak Karmal regime. The vast majority of the world's nations are challenging
the Soviets to come to the negotiating table, to agree to a political solution,
to withdraw their forces and to restore Afghanistan's nonaligned status. The
proposal of the European Community for a two-stage conference is a sound step
toward the achievement of these objectives. But the Soviet Union still prefers
to promote a bizarre theme: that the United States is unwilling to negotiate
about questions of critical international concern; that the U.S. wants a return
to the cold war; that the U.S. is the source of the trouble in Afghanistan.

Offering an Alternative

The Soviet Union must begin to understand that Afghan resistance and
international pressure will be sustained. By supporting initiatives such as that
of the European Community, we offer the Soviet Union the alternative of an
honorable solution.

The same is true for Cambodia. The U.N. conference and the attempts of the Asean
nations to find a political solution to the Sovietsupported Vietnamese
occupation have won broad support. Here, too, the international community has
been rebuffed by Vietnamese and Soviet refusal even to attend the conference.
Here as well, we believe that patience and perseverance - and the design of
sound diplomatic solutions - offer the Soviets and their surrogate the choice:
international isolation and failure or international cooperation and a way out.

I have often mentioned the activities of the Soviet Union and its Cuban proxy in
aggravating tensions from Central America to southern Africa. Can there be a
greater contrast between their efforts and those of the West in trying to
resolve the political, economic and security problems of these regions?

It is time for those who preach peace to contribute to peace. The way to do it
is through new restraint, both in Moscow and Havana.

Arms Control

Our past hopes for a relaxation of tensions with the Soviet Union were
eventually concentrated on the search for arms control. But we overestimated the
extent to which arms control negotiations would ease tensions elsewhere. And we
underestimated the impact of conflict elsewhere on the arms control process
itself. The attempt to regulate and reduce nuclear weapons must remain an
essential part of the East-West agenda, but we must focus on its central
purpose: to reduce the risk of war.

Only balanced and verifiable agreements that establish true parity at reduced
levels can increase our security. I have already addressed the broader
principles that govern our approach. As we begin this part of the dialogue, it
is essential to recognize that fair agreements can be reached with patience and
perseverance. Above all, we must demonstrate that we can sustain the balance by
our own efforts if agreements fail to do so. Indeed, if we do not cause the
Soviets to believe that in the absence of arms control they face a more
difficult future, they will have little or no incentive to negotiate seriously.

On this basis, we have commenced discussions with the Soviets on theater nuclear
forces, and we have proposed that formal negotiations open before the end of
this year. We want equal, verifiable limits at the lowest possible level of U.S.
and Soviet long-range theater nuclear weapons.

We have also launched a frank discussion of compliance with existing arms
control agreements.  We have initiated the intense preparations and conceptual
studies that must precede a resumption of progress in the Strategic Arms
Limitation Talks.

We and our European allies have proposed an innovative new set of
confidence-building measures in Europe which could provide a valuable means to
reduce uncertainty about the character and purpose of the other side's military
activities.

It is now up to the Soviet Government to put its rhetoric of cooperation into
action.

Economic Relations

East-West economic ties are also on our agenda with the Soviet Union. Over the
past decade, these ties have grown rapidly but they have not restrained the
Soviet use of force.

The time has come to refashion East-West economic relations. We shall seek to
expand those ties that strengthen peace and serve the true interests of both
sides.

The Soviets have looked toward Western agriculture, technology, trade and
finance in order to relieve the pressing economic problems of Eastern Europe and
of the Soviet Union itself. But the Soviet leaders must understand that we
cannot have full and normal economic relations if they are not prepared to
respect international norms of behavior. We must therefore work to constrain
Soviet economic leverage over the West. Above all, we should not allow the
transfer of Western technology that increases Soviet war-making capabilities.

In sum, American strategy toward the Soviet Union is proceeding on two fronts
simultaneously.

Barriers and Incentives

First, we are creating barriers to aggrression. We are renewing American
strength. We are joining with our allies and friends to protect our joint
interests. And we are making strenuous efforts to resolve crises which could
facilitate Soviet intervention.

Second, we are creating incentives for Soviet restraint. We are offering a
broader relationship of mutual benefit. This includes political agreements to
resolve oustanding regional conflicts. It encompasses balanced and verifiable
arms control agreements. And it holds the potential benefits of greater
East-West trade.

We are not under any illusion that agreement with the Soviet will be easy to
achieve. The strong element of competition in our relations is destined to
remain. Nonetheless, we believe that the renewal of America's confidence and
strength will have a constructive and moderating effect upon the Soviet leaders.
By rebuilding our strength, reinvigorating our alliances and promoting peaceful
progress, we are creating the conditions that make restraint and reciprocity the
most realistic Soviet options. The Soviets will eventually respond to a policy
that clearly demonstrates both our determination to restrain their continued
self-aggrandizement and our willingness to reciprocate their self-restraint.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Secretary of State Alexander Haig Jr

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 13, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A VIETNAMESE ORPHAN TELLS OF KILLINGS AND CANNIBALISM IN 52-DAY SEA ESCARE

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 911 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Aug. 11


Dao Van Cu is a 15-year-old Vietnamese orphan whose ribs, collarbone and
shoulder blades protrude from his emaciated body so sharply that one fears they
will cut through his skin. His head is swathed in a large bandage, and his body
is marked with angry scars.

The doctor at the refugee detention center told him that he had gained two
pounds since he arrived eight days ago, which brought his weight up to 68
pounds.

When he fled Vietnam with a group of fishermen in June, he weighed nearly 100
pounds. They were at sea in a small boat for 52 days, according to the adults.
Of 11 people aboard, 5 reached safety.

The youth explained that he had decided to join the refugees after the fishing
boat on which he had been working encountered their boat at sea off the central
Vietnamese city of Nha Trang. The refugees stopped to ask for fuel and water.

Decision to Flee

He said he resolved to join them because he ''could not live'' under the
Vietnamese authorities. ''I work on a fishing boat,'' he said, ''but often they
make me go to work in the forest.''

He described this work as cutting trees and clearing the forest, under armed
guard and without pay. Twice this year, he said, he was rounded up with other
youths and older men and sent far from home to work for a month in what are
called ''new economic zones,'' preparing them for habitation by what he said are
''big families who have no work and are hungry.'' They received two meals of
rice and dried fish a day and were hungry all the time.

''And I was also afraid they would send me to fight and would not let me write
home to my sisters,'' he said. Many boys of 18 are being drafted, he said,
although he could not explain against whom they would be sent to fight. ''One
ran away with a wounded leg and hid at home, and they arrested him,'' the youth
said. ''That is when I thought of escaping.''

Interviewed separately, the three surviving adults from the refugees' boat,
including the captain - the fifth survivor is also a teen-ager - described a
crossing that, even when measured against other refugee accounts, was
particularly harrowing.

Supplies Run Out

Larger ships passed them by, the seas were heavy and their food, water and fuel
ran out. They drifted; sometimes they used their clothing to fashion a sail, and
at other times they turned the makeshift sail into a fishing net.

But this is typhoon season in the South China Sea, and fishing was useless in
storms. When the winds died down and the sun shone, there was no rain to provide
drinking water; they had to light fires with planks torn from the deck to boil
sea water and catch some of the steam in a tube to yield a few drops.

Dao Van Cu said the captain and his group told another teen-age youth who had
joined the group at sea to commit suicide so that the others could eat him. He
pleaded for mercy, and the matter was put aside while the captain and his
companions went to sleep.

The terrified youth fell upon the captain as he slept, Dao Van Cu said, and in
the ensuing fight the boy jumped overboard and drowned.

Four Men Overboard

Two days later, the voyagers caught some fish and were eating. The captain, a
former South Vietnamese Army sergeant, ordered them to save some, to dry in the
sun for the next days. A fight broke out, and Dao Van Cu hid below deck. When
quiet was restored and he returned, four men were overboard. He said he did not
know how they died.

The death of five refugees left him frightened. He and another youth, who was
ill, were the outsiders in a group that also included the captain, his brother,
his 17-year-old nephew and a friend. There were few fish to eat, and the supply
of drinking water was extremely low.

Dao Van Cu said that at this point the others held a discussion among themselves
and gathered around him. They pulled his shirt over his head and tied his legs
with a rope. While two men pinned him to the deck, the captain's nephew beat him
over the head with an iron bar until he bled profusely. The gashes have not yet
healed.

As he lay bleeding, he heard one of the others tell a third to cut his throat.
He cried and pleaded for mercy. ''They wanted to eat me,'' he said, ''and put a
large pot of water up to boil. I waited for them to cut my throat.''

Boat Reaches Hong Kong

No one stepped forward to kill him, and he was left lying in the bow. Later that
day, his ailing young companion died and was eaten by the others, and he said
this gave him a respite. But two days later the threats were renewed. His life
was spared, he said, only because on July 26 their boat reached the shore of a
hilly island that is part of this colony.

In the separate interview, the three adult survivors denied attacking Dao Van Cu
and the charges of cannibalism. But they substantiated his account of fighting
in which four men ''fell overboard and drowned.'' They said Dao Van Cu's head
wounds resulted from a fight with the youth who died.

The authorities here have separated Dao Van Cu from the three adults out of fear
for his safety. The captain's nephew is in a hospital. But Dao Van Cu is
frightened.

Does he regret his decision to flee? He shook his head in his most vigorous
gesture in a long conversation and replied: ''When they hit me over the head and
I was lying on the deck and it bled and hurt, I thought: 'Why did I leave my
sisters? Life with them was better. They will eat me.' But when I saw the hills
here, I no longer regret it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 13, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Hello, Moscow

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 625 words


Slowly, Secretary of State Haig is finding his voice and using it, firmly but
respectfully, to address the Soviet Union. After the belligerence of the early
Reagan days, that is progress.

It should not be news in the nuclear era that the United States, while competing
with Moscow to protect freedom, ''must also search for cooperation to protect
mankind.'' But that was not this Administration's tendency until Mr. Haig began
sketching his vision of detente. He is at pains now to prove that contacts with
Moscow have not been neglected. That Washington no longer regards communication
a mark of weakness is also progress.

Some of Mr. Haig's propositions remain dismayingly vague; what he says is mostly
sound but what he doesn't say may hide a bushel of contradictions. Perhaps even
now he is not so much negotiating with the Kremlin as bargaining for negotiating
room inside the Administration. But he is on the right track and should be
encouraged to produce details that support his principles.

Mr. Haig's major message to Moscow this week began with an unemotional list of
complaints to which most Americans subscribe. The Soviet arms buildup,
particularly in Europe, has been excessive; it needs to be either matched or
reversed by agreement. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, support for Vietnam's
invasion of Cambodia and use of Cuban troops in Africa are all dangerous resorts
to force. No stable relationship is possible if that is to be the Soviet way.

Such ''linkage,'' as Mr. Haig put it, is a fact of life. But it does not follow
that nuclear arms control must therefore be mortgaged to progress on all fronts.
The Secretary still implies that if the Rus-sians do not behave better the world
over, the United

States will punish them by pursuing military superiority. But that is a mirage;
there is an immutable parity in strategic weapons and it argues for arms
control. It can be a negotiated parity at reduced levels or uncontrolled parity
at much costlier levels.

Whatever happens in Afghanistan, it will not alter the logic of SALT.
Fortunately, arms control is not the only ''reward'' Mr. Haig would offer for
detente. He also holds out trade and technology and ''diplomatic alternatives to
the pursuit of violent change.''

But as he also recognizes, Soviet exploitation of change is not the same as
Soviet instigation of every crisis. And as he should have added, counterforce
and bribery will not contain Soviet influence everywhere. The aspirations of
other societies and the skill of American diplomacy also count. If the United
States mishandles regional problems - the Palestinians in the Middle East or the
Sandinists in Central

America - it invariably strengthens Soviet opportunity.  So Mr. Haig has only
begun to define a policy.  When he asks Moscow to ''respect international norms
of behavior'' as the price of detente, he invites a sweeping negotiation about
ground rules that the

United States, too, would have to observe. No Afghanistans, to be sure. But
overseas bases? Arms sales? Military advisory teams? Do the Administration's
''conceptual studies'' for arms control extend to these difficult realms?

Henry Kissinger's ''code of conduct'' for the superpowers turned to rubber the
moment it was announced in Moscow a decade ago. But such a code is what both
sides need if they really mean to reduce confrontation and improve relations.
And for that, they will have to talk, soon and often.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 13, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

IN EUROPE, CARRIERS STRUGGLE TO GET ATLANTIC JETS ALOFT

BYLINE: By STEVEN RATTNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Aug. 12


Trans-Atlantic air carriers struggled today to restore ample plane service to
North America and to move several thousand passengers who have clogged airports
across Europe for two days.

The return this morning of the Canadian air controllers at Gander, the key
Atlantic station, came too late to prevent another wave of widespread
cancellations, but by evening, airline spokesmen said, delays were reduced and
near-normal service was expected for tomorrow.

''Any plane that wants to take off can be given a slot,'' said a spokesman for
the British Civil Aviation Authority, which has coordinated European departures.
However, some delays will probably persist because of the strike by United
States controllers, she said.

At London's Heathrow Airport, the busiest in Europe, hundreds of travelers again
spent the night in Terminal Three, either huddled on benches or sprawled on the
floor. After reports of ebbing funds and spirits among would-be travelers, women
who live nearby prepared and distributed sacks of sandwiches.

Crowds Being Dissipated

By late afternoon today, the crowds had largely dissipated and airline
representatives contended that those remaining were mostly stand-by passengers,
for whom few seats were available. In addition, airlines reported that many
passengers had left, deciding to wait until the situation improved.

''Other things equal, it looks like tomorrow will be pretty much normal,'' said
a spokesman for Pan American World Airways, which dispatched today ''a dozen big
planes'' to North America. However, the labor dispute held services to about 60
percent of normal - an improvement over yesterday when there were only 20
percent of the customary total of 200 daily trans-Atlantic flights.

''It's been a great improvement today and should be even better tomorrow,'' said
a spokesman for British Airways, which canceled four trans-Atlantic services and
operated seven today, with delays from ''a couple of minutes'' to two hours. It
was estimated that the widespread disruption yesterday cost British Airways $1.3
million.  The line lost $250 million last year.

There were threats of further disruption of trans-Atlantic service from a
variety of European air controller organizations, particularly in Portugal. But
to aviation officials here, those threats were of only modest concern with
Canadian airspace again open.

A Lack of Aircraft

Some airlines were hampered in part today by a lack of planes, which have become
scattered across the globe as a result of the disruptions. Pan American, for
example, said that only one flight from the United States, its round-the-world
service, arrived in London today, limiting equipment available for westbound
journeys.

The scene in London was repeated across Europe. In Frankfurt, for example,
thousands of travelers dozed on counters and floors at continental Europe's
largest air terminal.

''If I see another wurst I think I'm going to cry,'' said Linda Kessler of Bay
Ridge, Brooklyn, as she began her fourth meal of sausage in two days. ''It's
like when the Americans tried to get out of Saigon at the end of the Vietnam
War,'' said David Deal of Wheaton, Ill., who had waited since Monday for his
flight home.

In London, one waiting passenger, the Rev. Peter Williams, a 26-year old
Anglican priest, was trying to get to Rhode Island where he was due to be
married on Saturday. ''It will be heart-breaking if we have to call it off,'' he
said.

And Simon Evans, a young man who has been told he will die of cancer within six
months, was trying to get home after a last visit with his grandparents, who
live in Cardiff, Wales.

Full Planes Reported

Flights, of course, were leaving full, except for one British Airways trip to
New York at 1 A.M., departing six hours late. A bigger plane was substituted and
''we just couldn't find enough people around to fill it,'' a spokesman said.

As for the other air traffic controllers, the Portuguese controllers reiterated
that they would stop handling United States traffic, but not until Sunday
evening.

In the Netherlands, the Dutch Air Traffic Controllers Guild told its members it
considered United States airspace unsafe, but the statement did not appear to
carry any practical impact. A meeting of an international controllers
association was still planned for Thursday in Amsterdam, but concrete action
also appeared to be a week away.

Controllers in New Zealand lifted their ban on handling United States-bound
flights.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of passengers waiting in Heathrow Airport

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PANEL SAYS INDOCHINA REFUGEES MAY INCREASE

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 13


The United States must be prepared for continuing and possibly increased flows
of refugees from Indochina, particularly Vietnam, according to a State
Department report released today.

In the report to Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., a fourmember panel
that has just completed a 25-day tour of Southeast Asia endorsed the general
direction of United States refugee policy, saying that most of the Vietnamese
''boat people'' were legitimate political refugees.

But the report said many of the people from Cambodia and Laos, especially the
lowland Lao, appeared to be fleeing for economic reasons, to improve their basic
living conditions, rather than from a fear of persecution.

The panel, headed by Marshall Green, former Assistant Secretary of State for
East Asian Affairs, foresaw ''a long-term continuation of the exodus of boat
people from Vietnam'' and ''the potential for increased land refugee flows from
Laos and Cambodia, in view of worsening conditions of life and the threat of
widening hostilities.''

The State Department commissioned the study in part because of a widespread
belief that those trying to leave Indochina today were much different from those
who fled five years ago.

In addition, there is a growing debate over the wisdom of maintaining refugee
programs at current levels while the United States cuts back on domestic social
programs. In Congress, Senator Walter D. Huddleston, Democrat of Kentucky, has
charged that ''the great majority of those claiming to be political refugees
are, in reality, economic refugees'' and that the State Department was
recruiting refugees to fill unused quotas set by Congress.

The panel rejected such allegations, but it warned the Administration not to
''stretch the concept of refugee beyond its proper boundaries, lest the term
itself be debased.''

Lists 'Worrisome Aspects'

There were several ''worrisome aspects of our Indochinese resettlement program''
listed in the report:

- Charges that an increasingly large proportion of the refugees are motivated
primarily by such factors as economic betterment rather than by persecution.

- The fact that more and more of the refugees have neither immediate family
connections in the United States nor ties dating from the period of American
involvement in Indochina.

- Charges that there is a growing tendency among refugees to exploit the welfare
system and complaints about the high costs of resettling refugees.

- The fact that as other countries resettle fewer refugees, the United States is
absorbing an increasingly large proportion of them.  Since the end of the
Vietnam War in 1975, the panel said, 1.4 million refugees have come by boat and
by land from Vietnam and across Thailand's borders from Cambodia and Laos. About
1,060,000 Indochinese refugees have been resettled outside Southeast Asia since
1975. Of that number, 504,000 have come to the United States, according to the
report.

''The Vietnamese constitute the hard core of the long-range refugee problem,''
the panel said. The flow of Vietnamese boat people continues at the rate of
8,400 a month, an increase of one-third over last year, while the flow of Lao
and Hmong refugees has decreased significantly, the panel said.

There could be an upsurge of refugees at any time because of the continuing
turmoil in Indochina, the panel said.

Definition of Term Cited

''All of those who fled their homeland are generically referred to as
'refugees,' '' the panel said. ''In the strict sense of the term, however, it
appears that some number of them, difficult to ascertain with accuracy, may not
qualify as a 'refugee' within the meaning of that term.''

Under the United Nations definition accepted by the United States, a refugee is
a person who is unable to return to his or her homeland because of a
''well-founded fear of persecution'' because of race, religion, nationality or
political beliefs.

The panel found it ''disturbing that some refugees in Southeast Asian camps are
fully aware of the United States welfare program.'' The other members of the
panel, besides Mr. Green, were Rita E.  Hauser, a New York lawyer; James F.
Greene, former Deputy Commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization
Service, and Richard W. Wheeler, senior vice president of Citicorp.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of refugees aboard sampan waiting to leave Vietnam

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI STILL HOLDS THOUSANDS IN CAMPS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: MAKUNG, Pescadores


More than six years after the Communist victory, countless thousands of
Vietnamese who served the former Saigon Government remain imprisoned in jungle
camps, uncharged, untried and unsure whether they will ever be released.

Although the Government in Hanoi announced in response to international
criticism that in no case would the imprisonment for ''re-education'' exceed
three years, the outflow of refugees continues to bring to other shores men who
have only recently been released from such concentration camps.

Pham Van Phu, who was arrested in June 1975 for having been a judge in Saigon
Criminal Court, arrived at this island group in the Formosa Strait on a small
fishing boat in mid-June. He said he was released last January from a
''re-education'' camp at Xuyen Moc in Dong Nai province, about 200 miles north
of the former South Vietnamese capital.

About 4,000 prisoners remained, Mr. Phu said, of which all but 200 had been
junior oficers, lieutenants and captains in the South Vietnamese Army. The
others were low-level and medium-level civil servants like himself. The Xuyen
Moc camp was particularly big, the 41-year-old former judge said, but every
province in South Vietnam is known to have one or more camps.

Senior Officers Sent to the North

Like other former camp inmates, Mr. Phu emphasized that only lower-ranking
officers and civil servants remained in southern camps, while those of senior
level in the military and the old Government, as well as those accused of
''crimes against the people,'' were sent to the north. A feeling has long taken
root among their families that those in northern camps will never be released.

Throughout his imprisonment, during which his weight dropped from 138 to 99
pounds, Mr. Phu said he had never been confronted with any accusation or
interrogated. His release, like his arrest, was accompanied by no comment or
justification.

The only aspect of camp life that might justify the term ''reeducation,'' Mr.
Phu said, was the occasional reading by one of the prisoners to his work gang of
an editorial from one of the party newspapers, which the group was then to
discuss. But the former judge said that such discussion lasted only as long as a
guard was watching.

Similarly, he added, the daily review of the group's work, to be followed by
mutual and self-criticism, never went on beyond the presence of the guards, all
of whom were North Vietnamese. Only in the first month of his imprisonment was
Mr. Phu subjected to nine political lectures and ordered to write and rewrite at
least 15 times a detailed account of his life.

Hard Labor With Minimal Food

For the rest of Mr. Phu's five and a half years of imprisonment, his and his
fellow inmates' lot was hard labor with minimal food, bare shelter, ragged
clothes and a total absence of any medical attention. The work consisted of
clearing the jungle and planting the corn and root crops that were almost their
only fare.

''We couldn't live without the food that our families bring us,'' said the
former judge, glancing at his wife, who, sitting at his side through his long
narration, mirrored on her intense face the recollection of years of anguish.
''We had to submit a list of the food we brought, and if, for instance, we
listed only 'beans' instead of 'red beans,' they would confiscate it,'' said his
wife, Mrs. Pham Van Phu, whose eyes look older than her 35 years.

The family visits occurred every two months and were limited to 30 minutes.
''Almost every time I went I saw men carrying bodies and I was afraid,'' Mrs.
Phu said, looking at her husband. ''Many died in the beginning,'' he said.

Mr. Phu recalled the death of a well-known writer, Nguyen Manh Con, who demanded
to be freed after the three stated years of ''reeducation'' were up. He was told
that he could be released into prison. He went on a hunger strike and died after
about a month.

Problems Continue After Release

Hunger was a constant of camp life, Mr. Phu recalled, on a diet that was rarely
supplemented by vegetables and only three times a year by fish or meat - the
judge held up two fingers to indicate the size of the ration - on the Lunar New
Year, Ho Chi Minh's birthday and independence day.

Consistent with accounts of others released from ''re-education,'' Mr. Phu said
that his problems did not end with his release. To be allowed to return to live
with his wife in their old home required a residence permit given only to those
holding permanent jobs, and no permanent jobs were available for persons without
a residence permit.

The objective of this Kafkaesque procedure, according to former detainees, was
to put pressure on them to return with their families to such regions as those
in which they were imprisoned, to try to eke out a livelihood from jungle areas
prisoners were clearing. Instead, like many other former prisoners, Mr. Phu used
his temporary legal stay in Ho Chi Minh City, Saigon's new name, to arrange for
his escape.

Mr. Phu, who prefers to speak only of matters that he has seen, said he could
not estimate the total of political prisoners still detained. But a friend who
escaped with him, Bui Huu Do, a hydraulic engineer, said, ''Where there are
prisons there are prisoners, and there are five or six camps in every
province.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Group Said to Get Missing Fliers' Remains

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 154 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 13


A representative of the National League of Families of American Prisoners and
Missing in Southeast Asia today turned over to American officials skull
fragments that were said to be the remains of three American airmen missing in
action over Laos since the Vietnam War. The remains are to be sent to forensic
experts in Hawaii for identification.

Lao rebel forces reportedly found the remains in a village near a documented
crash site in south central Laos.  The rebels gave the remains to George Brooks,
a member of the board of directors of the league, an organization of wives and
parents of the more than 2,500 Americans still missing in action in Indochina.

Mr. Brooks, an engineer from Newburgh, N.Y., whose son Nick disappeared over
Laos in 1970, in turn gave the remains to American officials in Bangkok, who
will send them to Hawaii.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM'S FIRM STAND ON CAMBODIA TALKS

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 373 words


To the Editor:

I must take issue with your July 16 report ''Hanoi Hints it Might Talk to a U.N.
Panel,'' published at a time when certain quarters were trying very hard to
create the impression that Vietnam, while not participating in the
''international conference of Kampuchea'' this time, would participate in a
further session.

Let me reiterate the position which was, I believe, unequivocally stated in my
press conference at the U.N. on July 15.  The Socialist Republic of Vietnam
maintains that, by overthrowing the genocidal Pol Pot regime, the Kampuchean
people not only put an end to mass murders and destruction within their country
but also contributed to the cause of peace and stability in Southeast Asia.
There is no disputing that under the young People's Republic of Kampuchea
(P.R.K.) the Kampuchean nation has been coming back to life.

The ''international conference on Kampuchea,'' convened by the U.N. without the
agreement and participation of the People's Republic of Kampuchea, constitutes
therefore interference in the internal affairs of Kampuchea. It violates the
sovereignty of the Kampuchean people, defies their wishes, hampers the rebirth
of their nation and, more serious still, lends a helping hand to the Chinese
authorities in their open attempts to bring back to power the Pol Pot regime -
murderers of three million Kampucheans. Far from contributing to a solution of
the problems, it merely exacerbates tension between the countries in Southeast
Asia.

That is why my Government has firmly rejected the declaration and resolution
adopted by the conference. Naturally, we will not recognize and contact in any
form the ''panel'' created by it, nor participate in any further session of such
a conference.

We hold that all issues pertaining to Southeast Asia should be discussed and
settled by the countries in the region on the basis of equality and mutual
respect, without one party imposing its views on the other and without outside
interference. This is the only way to gradually establish peace and stability in
Southeast Asia, in the interest of the peoples in the region and of world peace.

HA VAN LAU, Permanent Representative of Vietnam to the United Nations, New York,
Aug. 9, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
Controllers' Strike

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words


Trans-Atlantic travel is returning to normal at airports A12
Views of the air controllers' strike from 33,000 feet A12
Trans-Atlantic air travel returns to near-normal A12

International
Lowly Hindus in India see Islam as their salvation A2
Ex-prisoner tells of harsh life in Vietnam 're-education' camp A3
East Berlin marks anniversary of the wall A4
Around the World A5
Lebanon accepts 'in principle' Libyan offer of defense system A6

Government/Politics
White House seeks ways to shift welfare programs to states A8
New York State increases penalty for late tax payments B2
U.S. cuts to cause layoffs of 600 in New York's job service division B4

General
Ukrainian boy's parents call asy- lum official kidnapping A3
Around the Nation A8
Reporter's Notebook: Linda Greenhouse on bar convention A13

Health/Science
Voyager 2 transmitting sharp photos of Saturn A13

Weekend
Lincoln Center goes out of doors C1
Weekender Guide C1
Metropolitan Baedeker: Fire Is- land C1
A hands-on West Side children's museum C12
Art: Jackson Pollock and Lee Krasner show in Hamptons C1

Whitney shows off its Georgia O'Keeffes C18

Auctions C19

Toledo (Ohio) Museum sched- ules 1982 El Greco tour C18
Theater: Broadway C2

New Face: Ben Masters in ''Key Exchange'' C3

Peking Opera at Tully Hall C3
Screen: ''An Eye for an Eye'' with Chuck Norris C6

At the Movies C6

''The Uprising,'' reconstituted Nicaragua war story C10
Dance: Margaret Fisher learns from the insects C14
Music: Brubecks lead an alfresco weekend C17

Philharmonic offers brassy ''Corsair'' in park C17

Hildegarde, still incomparable, singing at Marty's C22

Ruth Brown is belting them out at the Cookery C22

Vince Giordano leads new jazz group C24
Books: Publishing C21

''Cujo,'' Stephen King novel, re- viewed C21
Restaurants C16
TV Weekend C23

Style
The Evening Hours A14
For the elite, summer means - work A14
Career relocation: companies test a seminar A14
Fetal treatment vs. abortion A14

Obituaries
Chester Brown, former chairman of Allied Chemical Corporation A13

Sports
Guidry and Yankees turn back Tigers, 3-0 A15
Cubs stop Mets' streak at three games, 6-1 A15
Indians hope demotion to minors will help Charboneau A15
Vijay Amritraj upsets McEnroe at Canadian open A15
Red Smith on how Redcoats lost again at Saratoga A17
Shirk, tight end, fighting for job with Giants A17
Ten-year-old girl wins gold medal at Empire Games A18

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A22

Ma Bell drops the other shoe Mayor Koch's rugby game Nicaragua, lost and found A
superb regulation!  Letters A22
Flora Lewis: the neutron weap- ons muddle A23
Tom Wicker: Puerto Rico - an American colony?  A23
Cyrus R. Vance: the Japanese- American partnership A23
Millicent Fenwick: yesterday's endless summers A23
Robert F. Drinan: Reagan's dan- gerous foreign policy A23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 14, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. BARS LOAN FOR GUYANA

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 455 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 13


The Reagan Administration, in an action described as representative of a more
rigorous approach to lending to the third world, today vetoed a $20 million loan
to Guyana that came before the board of the Inter-American Development Bank.

R.T. McNamar, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury, said the decision had been taken
on ''technical economic grounds and should not be interpreted as a vote against
the Government of Guyana.'' A spokesman for the Washington-based regional
lending institution declined to comment on the American action.

The funds had been earmarked for the Guyanese Agricultural Industrial
Cooperative Development Bank mainly for investment in rice production.

Loan Conditions Criticized

''There were not adequate conditions tied to the loan,'' Mr.  McNamar said,
''and the indications were that it would amount to little more than a subsidy.''
Also playing a part in the decision, he said, was the American assessment that
Guyana was not moving rapidly enough toward free-market pricing in agriculture.

The Administration has taken the position that multilateral development
institutions such as the World Bank and the smaller regional development banks
should use their leverage to encourage pricing policies that reflect real
economic value, even if it means the phasing out of subsidies to consumers.

The Administration also wants the institutions to serve as providers of ''seed
capital'' that would lead to greater co-financing by the private sector in the
host country.

Today's action marked the first time that the United States had voted against a
loan under conditions in which the American vote would actually block it. A
majority of the members supported the loan, one development bank source
reported, but with American opposition, the loan failed to win the necessary
two-thirds vote for approval.

During the Carter Administration, the board of the World Bank approved a loan to
Vietnam, despite a negative American vote.  Earlier this year the United States
abstained in a vote on an energy loan to Colombia on the ground that the money
would be financing activities where market prices were not involved. That loan
went through.

A source from the development bank said that the loan to Guyana was part of a
lending package developed with the cooperation of the World Bank and had been
considered ''technically acceptable to help Guyana's agricultural sector, which
has severe weaknesses.''

A representative from the Guyanese Embassy said no one could comment on the
matter until tomorrow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 15, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Around the Nation;
May Day Plaintiffs Given $2.5 Million in Damages

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 210 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 14


Checks ranging from $925 to $3,245 have been mailed to about 1,000 demonstrators
who were arrested on the Capitol steps in the 1971 May Day antiwar protests,
representing damages won in their lawsuit against the Government.

The National Capital chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, which
handled the case, distributed about $2.5 million to the plaintiffs, who had
contended that the arrests violated their constitutional rights.

About 1,200 demonstrators were arrested at the Capitol and thus were eligible to
share in the award, but 200 have died or disappeared in the ensuing 10 years.
More than 10,000 people were arrested in various parts of the city in the Mayday
protests, but only those at the Capitol were involved in the lawsuit.

The chief plaintiff in the case, Representative Ronald V. Dellums, a California
Democrat, wrote a letter enclosed with each check saying that he was donating
the money he received to the A.C.L.U. in recognition of its legal assistance in
the historic case.

Leslie Harris, executive director of the local A.C.L.U. chapter, said the long
legal battle had been ''an incredible drain'' on the chapter's finances.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY PLANS TWO DIVISIONS TO CARRY OUT NEW STRATEGY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 15


The Army's Chief of Staff, General Edward C.  Meyer, says that the Army expects
to add two divisions to its active force and two divisions to the National Guard
by the end of the fiveyear plan being drawn up in the Pentagon.

General Meyer said in an interview that he wanted to add an air assault
division, like the 101st Airborne, which moves by helicopter, and a new type of
division light in weight but armed with sophisticated weapons and equipment.

The divisions would join the 16 divisions now in the active Army force. They
would represent an effort to reduce the bulkiness of the service, to enhance
maneuverability and enable it to respond more readily to the new strategy
devised by Defense Secretary Caspar W.  Weinberger and his advisers.

That strategy is expected to call on the services to prepare to deploy anywhere
in the world for a lengthy, global war fought with conventional weapons. To do
that, General Meyer said, the Army must be both more capable and more mobile.

New Equipment Added Weight

After the war in Vietnam, Army divisions became heavier and harder to transport
as they added tanks, armored personel carriers and other heavy weapons to fight
land battles against the Soviet Union in Central Europe.

The Ninth Division, at Fort Lewis, Wash., is experimenting with lighter, more
powerful weapons, lightly armored but fast vehicles, advanced electronics and
communications, and new tactics to use the new hardware. Whatever is learned at
Fort Lewis would go into the new ''hi-tech'' division, General Meyer said, and
also adapted into existing divisions.

The general said that adding two divisions would require nearly 100,000 men and
women. A combat division requires about 15,000 soldiers with additional
artillery, engineer and aviation support, plus combat support extending to
maintenance depots that would require 33,000 more men and women.

He said he thought the Army would set up the divisions near the end of the
five-year plan under consideration, because the concept has clear support at the
highest levels of the Pentagon. Final decisions are to be made public in the
military budget that Congress is to get in January.

Guard Divisions in Two States

The general said that the nature of the two National Guard divisions, from
well-populated states, would be determined later.  But, he said, one might be
another light division with high technology; the other, a heavy, armored
division. He did not name the states.

He asserted that the changes could be made within the 7 percent annual growth
rate in military budgets set by the Administration.  ''We've figured out how to
do it with what I consider to be a reasonable share of the defense pot,'' he
said. ''I think it is possible.''

But that would depend, General Meyer said, on having a ''reasonably defined''
budget for the five-year period with assurance of steady increases, instead of
sharp rises and falls.

Before adding the divisions, General Meyer said, money must be directed to fill
in what he once called a ''hollow army.'' He said, ''As I look to the future,
what we are trying to do with the resources that we see flowing to us now is
first to fix the things that are broken.''

Other Needs of an Improved Army

He said that that included recruiting people in the quantity and of the quality
the modern Army needs, retaining experienced sergeants, building up parts
stockpiles, and buying weapons and equipment on schedules likely to achieve
unit-cost savings.

That done, General Meyer said, the large amounts of weapons, vehicles and
equipment developed in recent years would be sent to the forces in the field.
''We're at the front end of bringing in equipment that the Army hasn't had since
World War II,'' he said.  ''That is going to be one of the greatest management
problems that we've had, bringing in this new equipment and making sure that
people are trained up to it.''

He mentioned the M-1 Abrams tank, a multiple rocket launcher, attack
helicopters, an infantry fighting vehicle that carries a small squad but
resembles a light tank, plus electronic and chemical warfare equipment.

General Meyer cautioned, however, that ''the biggest challenge to getting there
will be the ability to man the new force.'' That, he said, was a major question
under study by the Manpower Task Force that President Reagan has established,
with Mr. Weinberger as its chairman.

Issue of a Draft Left Open

Asked whether the Army's needs would require a draft, General Meyer did not
respond directly. But he said: ''I haven't seen a solution yet which indicates
how you can fill up the National Guard and the reserves in the near term. I have
not seen an economic solution that responds to the needs of the guard and the
reserves in the near term.''

''The future is still a big question mark on whether we can man that force in a
volunteer environment,'' the general said. President Reagan, Mr. Weinberger and
manpower advisers have said they intend to retain the volunteer force as long as
possible and have contended that recent and proposed pay increases will make
military service attractive enough.

Senior officials concerned with manpower have said that the Administration
intends to ask Congress to approve a new G.I. bill giving extra benefits to
young men who join the ground combat arms, the Army and Marines. They contended
that such incentives would preclude the need for a draft.

Another question mark is sufficient air and sea transport to move the Army
overseas to battlefields. Provisions for that would be in the budgets of the Air
Force and Navy, but General Meyer said that all the service chiefs and the top
field commanders had told the civilian leaders of the Pentagon that such a
strategic transport should receive high priority.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TROUBLED VIETNAM VETERANS ACQUIRING STATUS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 747 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 15


It was last Thursday afternoon when Bobby Muller lifted the phone in the office
of the Vietnam Veterans of America and dialed the number of Robert P. Nimmo,
head of the Veterans Administration.

''I want to thank you very much for recognizing us,'' said Mr.  Muller,
executive director of the veterans group.  ''Bobby, it was a pleasure,'' Mr.
Nimmo replied. ''I look forward to a constructive and positive relationship.''
For Robert O. Muller, a 35-year-old former Marine lieutenant who was crippled in
the Vietnan War, the agency's decision to accredit the Vietnam veterans
organization marked the end of a troubled journey for a group that was formed in
the mid-1970's with the vague hope of ending what it termed the oblivion and
guilt suffered by many of the men and women who served in Vietnam.

On Same Basis With Others

''It means we've joined the ranks of the traditional veterans organizations,''
Mr. Muller said in the group's office on a bleak street in Northeast Washington.
''It puts us in their ballpark and places us on somewhat equal terms in being
able to raise our membership.''

Specifically, the decision by Mr. Nimmo, whose comments belittling the problems
of Vietnam veterans have stirred resentment, means that Mr. Muller's
8,000-member organization will receive space in the agency's regional offices.
It will be allowed to go before the agency to officially represent Vietnam
veterans seeking benefits.

Mr. Muller says, and others concur, that such major veterans' groups as the
American Legion, with 2.7 million members, and the Veterans of Foreign Wars,
with 1.9 million, have kept up their membership because of their ability to
''represent'' veterans in such connections.

''Finally,'' said Mr. Muller, ''we're on a far more equal footing with the
traditionals.'' A wiry, intense, blunt-spoken man, Mr. Muller is convinced that
national interest in the plight of Vietnam veterans is intertwined with the
extravagant return of the 52 hostages from the American Embassy in Teheran last
January.

Disparity of Welcomes Hit Home

Suddenly veterans surged into the 91 counseling centers across the nation to
express rage at the contrast between the welcome afforded the hostages and the
silence and even hostility that greeted Vietnam veterans a decade earlier.

''The return of the hostages stands as the single most important event to
benefit Vietnam veterans,'' said Mr. Muller. ''It crystallized the Vietnam
veteran as an issue of contemporary concern when people compared the reception
that America afforded the hostages with the lack of reception for Vietnam
veterans. It made clear to many the injustice.''

Beyond this, the election of President Reagan has buoyed the group somewhat,
although Administration programs to aid Vietnam veterans remain hazy.

After a White House meeting between Mr. Reagan and veterans' leaders, Mr. Muller
concluded, ''Ronald Reagan was spontaneous enough in response to our questions
for me to conclude that he's honestly sympathetic and supportive of the Vietnam
veteran.''

Stockman's Record Criticized

At the same July 17 meeting, however, Mr. Muller bluntly complained to Mr.
Reagan about David A. Stockman, the director of the Office of Management and
Budget, who had sought vainly to limit funds for storefront counseling centers.
According to Mr. Muller, he told the President that ''Stockman has particularly
aggrieved many Vietnam veterans'' because he opposed the conflict while in
college and spent the war years at Harvard Divinity School.

Mr. Reagan sat and listened, saying nothing in response, said Mr.  Muller.
Together with an expected increase in membership for the Vietnam veterans group,
which has offices in Washington and New York, Mr.  Muller foresees substantial
contributions in the next few weeks through rock concert benefits. The
organization has operated on a shoestring, and most corporations have declined
to contribute because, as one foundation head told Mr. Muller, ''you are a
legacy of Vietnam and therefore symbolic of Vietnam, and people are too nervous
to deal with that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS;
A LOYALIST REFLECTS ON THE REAGAN PLAN

BYLINE: By Rudloph G. Penner

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1177 words


President Reagan has been more successful in curbing growth of the Federal
Government than anyone could possibly have expected six months ago. Having
inherited a situation in which both Government spending and tax burdens were
rising rapidly relative to the gross national product, he has achieved
legislative successes in cutting spending and taxes that insure -absent any
highly improbable event - that the ratio of both outlays and receipts to G.N.P.
will be lower in 1984 than they are today.

At the same time, the President has advocated a highly deflationary monetary
policy, and, so far, the Federal Reserve Board is cooperating. If tight money
continues, the President is unlikely to accomplish his other goal of balancing
the 1984 budget. There will simply not be enough money in circulation to finance
the growth in nominal G.N.P. assumed by the Administration for the next three
years. If nominal G.N.P. growth is lower, either because inflation or real
economic growth is lower, tax receipts will be lower, and the dream of a
balanced budget will vanish yet again.

My prediction is that both real growth and inflation will be somewhat lower than
projected by the Administration and that deficits will be in the range of 2 to
2.5 percent of G.N.P. through 1984 with higher deficits possible during
recessions. Such a percentage would translate into deficit of $75 billion to
$100 billion in 1984. In the current fiscal year, my own guess is that the
deficit will be between $60 billion and $70 billion, which will also fall into
the range of 2 to 2.5 percent of the G.N.P.

Though deficits will be high, the tax policy changes enacted this month will
provide large incentives for business capital investment.  If inflation slows,
the new depreciation law is so generous that it, together with the investment
tax credit, effectively offsets the corporate tax burden on many types of new
equipment investment. In other words, with regard to much new investment, the
new policy is only slightly less radical than eliminating the entire corporate
tax.

The new tax law also reduces tax disincentives toward saving.  However, it is
highly improbable that domestic saving will rise enough to finance both the new
investment and large deficits.  Consequently, real interest rates are likely to
be high by historical standards. This will put a squeeze on housing, autos and
other interestsensitive consumer durables.

High real interest rates in the United States will also attract savings from
abroad. We can expect foreigners to finance a part of the Federal deficit by
buying Government bonds and increase business capital formation by buying
corporate bonds and equities. Thus, the dollar should remain strong relative to
other currencies.

While the scenario described above may result in erratic real growth as tight
monetary policies periodically collide with rising demands for credit, it is not
at all inconsistent with gradually falling inflation and a higher potential for
real economic growth by 1985. Why then are stock and bond markets so
unenthusiastic about the President's program?

First, in some theories of economics, the large deficits can cause accelerating
inflation even if the Administration sticks with its tight money policies. I am
skeptical about such theories, but even if I believed them, I would not be
terribly worried. I expect large deficits in part because I see lower inflation
and, therefore, lower tax receipts than projected by the Administration. Should
I be wrong and inflation accelerates, tax receipts will pour in much faster than
expenditures are increased and the deficit will soon disappear.

P UT another way, the situation is self-correcting, and double-digit inflation
would make it easier for the Administration to achieve its goal of balancing the
budget in 1984.

A more serious worry is that the Federal Reserve will not stick with a tight
money policy in the face of high real interest rates. If the Fed relents,
inflationary expectations will soar; nominal interest rates will rise, and
people who bought bonds at current rates of interest will lose a lot of money.

The Fed has done a lot of foolish things in the past and it may do more in the
future, but the adverse consequences of a shift to expansionary monetary policy
within the next few years are so apparent that I cannot imagine it happening. In
fact, I think that the risks are almost all on the other side. The Fed may be so
careful about not over-expanding that it will cause a very serious recession.

Financial analysts have recently been expressing considerable worry about the
size of Mr. Reagan's military buildup. While, in total, the military expansion
is less rapid relative to G.N.P. than that experienced during the Vietnam
escalation, it is more heavily tilted toward weapons procurement, and
bottlenecks in producing certain component parts and in hiring skilled
professionals such as engineers could develop.

I have grave difficulty believing that such problems will have a noticeable
impact in a $3 trillion to $4 trillion economy. But again assume that I am wrong
and that serious problems emerge. It seems odd that the Administration would
change its monetary policy in response to economic adversity, but not its
defense policy.

In fact, defense spending is highly controllable and purchases of weapons
systems can easily be slowed. Beyond that, I think it safe to predict that David
A. Stockman, Director of the Office of Management and Budget, will soon begin an
all-out attack on the Pentagon's budget. Moreover, the Pentagon looks vulnerable
to such an attack because it clearly does not have its act together as to how it
wants to spend the enormous sums promised by President Reagan. I shall be very
surprised if 1984 defense spending turns out to be as high as projected.

It is probable that other Administration policies will change if huge deficits
emerge. Future tax increases and a multitude of new user charges should not be
ruled out.

In sum, I do not find the current economic strategy to be that disturbing.
Indeed, it contains an unusually high ratio of good elements to bad. I would
feel much easier if the tax cuts had been reduced so that prospective deficits
would not be so large, but the large deficits are tolerable and future policy
changes will lower them somewhat. Wall Street should be more cheerful.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Rudolph G. Penner, Resident Scholar at the American Enterprise Institute for
Public Policy Research in Washington, was assistant director of economic policy
in President Ford's Office of Management and Budget.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEGOTIATING ON ARMS: IT'S NO ONE-WAY STREET AND GETTING THERE IS HALF THE FUN;
New Orleans - For some weeks now the White House has been pressed to enter
negotiations with the Soviet Union on arms control in Europe. President Reagan
has thought it necessary to delay. Along with many other Americans, the
President clearly would prefer to wait until our military strength is so
overwhelming that we could not possibly lose out in a negotiating process. The
new military budget is the price we pay for a strong negotiating position.

BYLINE: By S. Frederick Starr

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 722 words


Implicit in this attitude is the notion that whenever Soviet and American
negotiators sit down together, we end up the losers. This view was heard
frequently during the debate on the second strategic nuclear arms treaty. Not
without pride, critics of the treaty pointed out that Soviet leaders, with no
need to respond to domestic opinion, could plan and execute their strategy with
the freedom of chess players while American negotiators had to contend with the
intrusion of Congressional activists. It was also argued that democratic
elections, because they cause us to change negotiating teams frequently, give
the unchanging Soviet negotiators a further edge.  According to this pessimistic
view, democracy at home requires that we be babes-in-the-woods in negotiations
abroad.

History has been rewritten to bolster this image of American innocence in the
world of diplomacy. Woodrow Wilson's achievements in the Treaty of Versailles
are played down, the failure of his millennial hopes exaggerated. That Franklin
D. Roosevelt did a creditable job at Yalta is buried beneath the accusation that
he sold us down the river there. Adm. Charles Turner Joy, who negotiated the
Korean armistice, returned from Panmunjom to warn darkly against ''the creeping
disaster of unskilled efforts in negotiations between our world of freedom and
that of tyranny.'' The same refrain was repeated during the Vietnam negotiations
in Paris, and during the Helsinki meetings.

It could reasonably be argued that the only loss we suffered in these parleys
was in comparison with our boundless expectations. But such a view gains little
sympathy today, for we are in the grips of a state of mind that might be called
negotiaphobia. Negotiations are seen as ''their'' game, a form of international
struggle to which authoritarian regimes are peculiarly adapted, an arcane form
of psychological warfare rather than a practical process. And since the United
States is slated to lose in these shark-infested waters, we choose to avoid
them.

The United States pays a high price for its negotiaphobia.  Washington officials
and Congressmen are busy people; unless negotiations are on the national agenda,
they have difficulty scheduling time in which to consider great issues such as
arms limitations. Whatever their shortcomings, the strategic arms negotiations
made it possible for our civilian leaders to educate themselves in the awesome
complexities of nuclear weaponry.

Negotiations also provide important channels for informal communication between
the main world powers. Such informal channels can serve as a safety valve for
the inevitable tensions arising from the presence of two such mighty bulls in
the global china shop. To some extent, the product of negotiation is the process
itself.

Contact between this country and the Soviet Union has been severely curtailed
since the collapse of the second strategic arms treaty. The Soviet military move
into Afghanistan only completed a process that was well advanced before December
1979. Embassy personnel of both countries are isolated. Cultural and scientific
links have been greatly reduced. After nearly two years of this standoff, we
have a new generation of executive and Congressional leaders who have had no
contact with their opposite numbers in Moscow. It would be hard to argue that
this contributes to our national security.

Negotiations involve risks. Each side will sing paeans to parity but use every
device at its disposal to promote its own advantage. In order to limit the
risks, we must have our objectives clearly in mind, then muster expertise to
pursue them. But a country with thousands of skilled labor negotiators, hundreds
of specialists on the technology of armaments and scores of experts on the
Soviet Union is at no disadvantage at the negotiating table. Unless it thinks it
is.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
S. Frederick Starr, formerly secretary of the Kennan Institute for Advanced
Russian Studies at the Wilson Center in Washington, is vice president for
academic affairs at Tulane University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of suits of armor

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TROUBLES OF TIP O'NEILL

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5980 words


Martin Tolchin reports on the Congress for The New York Times. By Martin Tolchin
The afternoon was cool and brilliantly clear for a summer day in Washington, but
inside the House of Representatives, at the seat where Speaker Thomas P. (Tip)
O'Neill Jr. sat in rumpled solitude, gloom was heavy in the air. On the floor,
where members chatted or paced in the aisles, tension was palpable. When the
Speaker finally rose and moved to the rostrum - a large familiar figure with a
hank of off-white hair spilling across his forehead - Congressmen on both sides
of the aisle stood to applaud him.

They knew what he was going to say - that the tax-cut measure being offered by
the Reagan Administration was a ''terrible gamble,'' that it could wreak havoc
with the economy, education, health care.  They also knew that the Speaker's
cause was all but lost.

Tip O'Neill had tried to hold the Democratic majority of the House together in
the face of an all-out campaign by a skillful, determined President. The Speaker
had lost the first two rounds, the battles over the budget, in May and June.
Now, a month later, he was back on the ropes, facing a Congress filled with
young men with blow-dry hairdos who were more at home with computer printouts
and media advisers than with the Speaker's old-style, personal kind of politics.
They had been children when he first stood at this rostrum almost three decades
ago. The passionate, New Deal liberal had changed little since then, while many
of his listeners, even within his own party, were, in his view, defectors.

The Congressmen gave the Speaker a standing ovation, all right.  Then they broke
his heart. By a vote of 238 to 195, they approved Ronald Reagan's three-year
tax-cut package, the largest in the nation's history.

The President, in his six months in office, had engineered a revolutionary
change in the direction of Government, reducing its size, powers and appetites.
He had effectively taken control of the Congress, raising questions about the
ability of the House and Senate to compete on anything like an equal footing
with a popular President who knows how to use the power of his office.

Moreover, the Reagan victories had led many in Congress to entertain doubts
about Tip O'Neill and his leader ship. Was this the Speaker's last hurrah, or
would the durable old pol be able to round up his scattered troops and prepare
for new battles in the fall?

As Congressmen fled Washington for the August recess, his fellow Democrats
differed on the future of Mr. O'Neill. Representative John Conyers Jr., a
Michigan liberal, was calling for Mr. O'Neill's resignation, while Les Aspin,
the liberal from Wisconsin who had announced to his constituents in a newsletter
last winter that Tip was ''in a fog'' and had ''no idea where to go,'' was now
suggesting that the Speaker had begun to supply the fractured ranks of the party
with a sense of direction.

For the future of the Democratic Party, much depends on which point of view is
correct. When Congress reconvenes next month, Mr. O'Neill will be confronted
with the next round of dueling with the White House, and the Speaker, bloodied
and licking his wounds from the tax and budget defeats, will need all the craft
and courage within him to withstand the Reagan onslaught. Last November, the
Democrats lost control of the Senate for the first time in a quarter-century,
and in the House, 27 incumbents were defeated at the polls, reducing the size of
the majority to 51 (it is now 53), a precariously narrow margin, given the
divisions within the party. Next year, with Congressional redistricting cutting
into the Democratic bastions of the Northeast and Middle West, the party will be
in danger of losing even nominal control of the House. (There are now 244
Democrats and 191 Republicans in the House.)

The Democrats will use their summer recess for soul-searching and replenishment,
hoping to develop a strategy for the upcoming legislative battles. As yet, no
such strategy has emerged. It is possible that pressure from the Republican
right could force the White House to undertake a major effort to push across
''pro-family'' legislation on abortion and prayer in the schools that could
bring moderates back into the Democratic fold and attract a few Republicans as
well. Regardless, nearly any Democratic strategy will be defensive, shoring up
the party's flanks and hoping that the White House overreaches the limits of the
coalition that provided the President with his resounding summer successes.

Despite his loss of power, however, Tip O'Neill is still King of the Hill. He
exercises more authority over the unruly House than any other member of
Congress, and his only real rival is the President.  Yet all of Mr. O'Neill's
power, experience and resourcefulness were inadequate to the task of bringing to
heel the renegade ''boll weevils'' within his own party, the predominantly Sun
Belt, conservative Democrats who backed the President's economic packages, in
spite of the Speaker's attempts to extract loyalty.

Tip O'Neill is fond of saying that, ''in any other country in the world, the
Democrats would be five parties.'' In fact, they are three - liberal, moderate
and conservative - and they coexist uneasily in the 97th Congress. On the face
of it, though, the different kinds of Democrats cannot escape their ultimate
interdependence. Conservative Democrats, for example, would lose committee
chairmanships if the Democratic liberals were defeated at the polls and the
Republicans gained majority control of the chamber. Yet the three factions of
the party have gone their own ways.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, once his party's most dynamic spokesman for the poor,
the elderly and the sick, now occupies a position on the party's outermost
fringes. On a summer afternoon, seated on the deck of his wood-and-glass house
overlooking the Potomac, Mr. Kennedy lights a cigar and muses about the disarray
within his party. ''I don't question that there's a lot of soul-searching,'' he
says.  ''We're going through a tumultuous period in the party.'' The center of
gravity may have moved toward the right, but, he believes, the Democrats still
stand for something: They believe in Government and in Government's duty to help
the helpless. We do not need two Republican Parties, he says, both of them
fearful of Government, both protecting the interests of the rich.

A leader of the moderate Democrats, Representative James R. Jones of Oklahoma,
is chairman of the House Budget Committee. He was chief of staff in Lyndon B.
Johnson's White House, helping to put together many of the Great Society
programs. ''In our zeal to achieve our social goals,'' he says, rocking back and
forth in a black leather chair in his Capitol Hill office, ''we lost sight of
the management of Government. Too many excesses occurred. We weren't as
aggressive in checking the excesses as in reaching the social goals.''
Representative Leon E. Panetta, a moderate California Democrat, adds: ''We're
going through a self-analysis that we probably should have done a long time ago.
Our greatest failure has been the lack of fiscal discipline.''

An echo of that sentiment comes from Senator Ernest F. Hollings, a South
Carolina Democrat and one of the founders of the new 12-member conservative
Democratic caucus in the Senate, most of whose members come from the formerly
Solid South, where Republicans have made significant inroads and where many
voters idolize President Reagan.  For such Democratic lawmakers, conservatism is
the vehicle for political self-preservation. ''Fiscal responsibility is what
elected me to the Legislature 30 years ago,'' says Senator Hollings, ''and what
elected me Governor. When Tip O'Neill says, 'I'm the biggest spender; I got $10
million for knock-kneed kids,' that may be good for Tip, but it's bad for me.''

The Speaker's initial problem in the 97th Congress was how to cope with the 47
Democrats who formed the Conservative Democratic Forum in the House and were
under pressure from right-wing groups to oppose Mr. O'Neill's re-election as
Speaker, though they never proposed a serious challenger. The Speaker attempted
to appease the conservatives by giving them choice assignments on key leadership
committees, including Budget and Ways and Means. These appointments were
assailed by some liberal and moderate Democrats, not on the grounds of the
appointees' conservative philosophy, but because many of them had not proved
themselves loyal Democrats who would go along with the leadership when their
votes were urgently needed and their constituents were not directly affected.

Such fears were quickly realized. One conservative appointee, Representative
Phil Gramm of Texas, who was named to the Budget Committee, opposed the
Democrats' budget package and became the coauthor, with Representative Delbert
L. Latta, Republican of Ohio, of a budget bill endorsed by President Reagan.
Democrats believed that the Republicans had sought bipartisan authorship for the
bill in order to be able to offset the blame in the future if the President's
economic-recovery program proved a failure.

Mr. Gramm's mentor was Representative Jim Wright, a fellow Texas Democrat and
House majority leader. ''It's unfortunate that I was as gullible as I was,'' Mr.
Wright said afterward. ''He would never have been named a member of the Budget
Committee save for my intercession. He came to me during a recess and pleaded
with me to intercede, assuring me that he would be a team player. I told him of
the apprehension our colleagues had. Phil said, 'Jim, you can be sure that I'll
make my fight within the committee, and then I'll support what's done by the
committee.' ''

Mr. Gramm said that he offered no such assurances. In any event, Mr. Wright
sadly told a Democratic leadership meeting: ''Caesar had his Brutus, and I have
my Phil Gramm.''

Mr. Wright also was instrumental in placing another Texas Democrat, Kent Hance,
on the tax-writing Ways and Means Committee. Mr. Hance offered the same
assurances, Mr. Wright said, but ended up as cosponsor of the Reagan tax bill.

''He wasn't strong enough to withstand the pressures,'' Mr. Wright said of Mr.
Hance.  Nevertheless, the appointments of the conservatives enabled Mr.  O'Neill
to fend off a possible challenge to his Speakership. He was unanimously
re-elected, although Representative Charles W. Stenholm, a Texas Democrat and
''coordinator'' of the Conservative Democratic Forum, insists, ''That was the
toughest vote I ever had to cast.''

Mr. Stenholm claims that the objectives of the conservative forum are ''to
strengthen the party.'' ''We've always been a party of multiple philosophical
beliefs,'' he says, ''on which there has rarely been unanimity on any issue. For
a change, we're on the winning side of the votes. This is a House of
Representatives. We represent the people in our districts. We're voting the
people we represent. We consider ourselves just as good Democrats as any other
Democrats. We just believe that the leadership of our party has moved too far to
the left.''

The man charged with rationalizing such a confusion of political views was born
into politics 68 years ago in the working-class, non-Harvard section of
Cambridge, Mass. Thomas Philip O'Neill Jr. was the youngest of three children of
a city councilman in Cambridge whose home was a natural political center - the
Democratic faithful would gather on winter mornings, for example, to obtain
''snow buttons'' that entitled them to a day's work shoveling snow for the city,
county or state.

As far back as he can remember, Tip (a nickname favored by a baseball player who
could hit foul tips until pitchers walked him) worked on local campaigns,
distributing literature and getting out the vote. When he was 15, he worked in
Al Smith's Presidential campaign against Herbert Hoover. ''All I knew,'' he
recalls, ''was that Al Smith was an Irish Catholic and we had been suppressed
all our lives.''

Mr. O'Neill attended a succession of Roman Catholic schools, received a degree
from Boston College and entered the insurance business. He made his first run
for office in 1934, losing his bid to become a Cambridge city councilman by a
mere 150 votes and learning a valuable lesson. Discovering that he had lost the
vote of a woman for whom he had mowed lawns and performed errands, he asked why.
''You know, Tom,'' she replied, ''it's always nice to be asked.'' Mr. O'Neill
has taken little for granted since then.

Elected to the Massachussetts House of Representatives just two years later, he
rose to the position of Speaker, which he held until 1952. When Congressman John
F. Kennedy was elected to the Senate, Mr. O'Neill won his seat in the House.
Becoming the protege of John W.  McCormack, also from Massachusetts, who became
the Speaker in 1962 during the John F. Kennedy Administration, Mr. O'Neill was
brought into the House power structure; by his second term, he had been put on
the Rules Committee, a choice assignment for a young lawmaker. He became
majority leader in 1973, and four years later was voted Speaker. (The Speaker is
elected every two years at the beginning of the Congressional term.)

Throughout his leadership, Tip O'Neill has been an activist, one of the first of
the Democratic leaders to come out against United States involvement in the
Vietnam War, one of the first of them to suggest that President Nixon resign.
Eventually he played a major, behind-the-scenes role in the impeachment effort.
In 1977, he shepherded a controversial Congressional ethics code and a difficult
energy bill through Congress.

Though the two have frequently been compared, Mr. O'Neill has exercised far less
power as Speaker than the man who held the job during his freshman term in
Congress - the legendary Sam Rayburn.  ''Mr. Sam'' acquired his clout during the
World War II years, when the nation willingly ceded extraordinary power to its
elected officials.

Mr. O'Neill tells the story of a freshman Congressman who had run afoul of the
Justice Department on income-tax-evasion charges and went to see Mr. Sam for
help. Mr. Rayburn summoned the Attorney General to his office and persuaded him
not to press criminal charges. The Congressman was so grateful that he pledged
eternal loyalty to Mr. Rayburn, including his vote whenever the Speaker needed
it.

''Funny you should mention that,'' Mr. Rayburn told him. There was an
offshore-oil bill coming up the following week, and Mr. Rayburn needed his vote.
''Mr. Speaker, you've got my vote next week and whenever you need it as long as
I'm here,'' the freshman told Mr.  Rayburn.

When the Congressman returned to his hometown that weekend, however, the local
newspaper charged that he had sold his vote on offshore oil to get off the hook
on income-tax-evasion charges. The Congressman went back to see Mr. Rayburn the
following Monday and explained his dilemma. ''You promised me your vote on
offshore oil,'' Mr. Rayburn said, ''and I expect you to keep your promise. Sit
in the front row during the voting, and if I need your vote I'll signal you, and
I expect to get it.'' The freshman sat in the front row during the voting. Two
minutes before the end, the Speaker signaled him that his vote was not needed.
As the man heaved a huge sigh of relief, he noticed 17 other men in the front
row also heaving sighs of relief.

''If you want to know how this place has changed, that's one example,'' said Mr.
O'Neill, who doesn't have those extra votes to call upon, or even the basic
votes he needs.

Nevertheless, the Speaker of the House can exercise considerable power, because
he controls the Congressional equivalent of ''snow buttons'' - rewarding his
friends and depriving his opponents. He is in charge of the bureaucracy of the
institution, which gives him a large say in matters mundane and mighty. A
Congressman may want an overseas trip at taxpayers' expense or a better suite of
rooms in the House Office Building. He may want to be assigned to particular
committees because they are prestigious or because they rule on issues close to
the hearts of his constituents. All these are matters within the Speaker's
province. So is the fate of that bill the Congressman is so concerned about. It
may never get out of committee unless the Speaker goes to bat for it. He is also
the man who can keep it from getting stuck in the Rules Committee, through which
all measures must pass before they go to the floor, and he can determine the
form in which it arrives on the floor - whether amendments will be allowed or
not. He can also schedule the floor vote for a Monday morning or Friday
afternoon, depending on whether a small attendance will help or hurt the cause.

Part of a Speaker's influence over his fellow Representatives reflects the
political clout of his office and the manner in which he exercises it. A Speaker
is, automatically, a celebrity who can draw crowds and attract media attention,
and he can share that with a deserving colleague.

Tip O'Neill makes more than 100 fund-raising appearances a year on behalf of
Congressmen up for re-election. He is much sought-after for the task, more than
most of his predecessors, because he puts on a good show. Labor leaders and
corporate chairmen alike roar at his stories and respond to his personal warmth
-people feel good when he walks into a room.

Every day the Congress is in session, the Speaker holds a press conference 15
minutes before the House convenes. Occassionally, he will have a colleague by
his side. ''You know Congressman So-and-So,'' he'll say to the reporters. ''He's
been working on this bill dealing with such and such. You may want to ask him
about it.''

Mr. O'Neill metes out such favors carefully, painstakingly building
relationships with his colleagues - the kind of grass-roots approach that has
always been his hallmark. It has worked well, although, as the Speaker himself
sadly observes, the personal touch is fast disappearing from modern politics.
''All of that,'' he says, ''has gone by.''

The most dramatic example of the new politician was the man who became President
just as Mr. O'Neill took on the mantle of Speaker.  Jimmy Carter was a political
technocrat, a master of computers and polls, profoundly suspicious of machine
politicians. He was also a political loner, who placed little value on party
loyalty. Though the two men were of the same party, they had little in common.

An early confrontation came over a bill that called for the expenditure of $10.9
billion for water projects. The Speaker regarded the measure as necessary to the
survival of the areas involved, not to mention the political survival of the
Congressmen who represented those areas. Though Mr. Carter perceived the measure
as a boondoggle and fought it hard, the Speaker was determined, and with the
support of the then Senate majority leader, Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, he
made the President back down. Last year, he tangled with President Carter over
which social programs in the budget to cut, a confrontation that ended in
compromise.

Then came Ronald Reagan. On one level, the Speaker and the new President have
much in common. They are about the same age, and they share an Irish heritage
and a mutual love for (and skill at) storytelling. Their initial contacts were
friendly, if guarded. Last December, for example, President-elect Reagan made a
pilgrimage to the Capitol to meet with the Democratic leadership. Eventually,
everyone else left the room and the two men were alone. As the Speaker recalls,
he told the President, ''I'm an American first, a Democrat second. I'm not going
to obstruct your program. You'll get your vote on it in the House.''

Says David R. Gergen, assistant to the President for communications: ''We were
very sensitive to the fact that Tip had such a rocky relationship with Jimmy
Carter.'' Indeed, in the early days, the Speaker's views were carefully
solicited, and Edwin Meese, the President's counselor, called the House
regularly to attend to his needs. ''They both understand,'' Mr. Gergen says,
''that you have to be on speaking terms with those with whom you disagree.''

But there were tensions as the weeks went by, and disagreements surfaced in
small ways. On one occasion, the Speaker and his wife of 40 years, Millie, were
guests for dinner at the White House, and the President wore a tie handpainted
with an American eagle that the Speaker had given him. ''I didn't know Tip gave
you that tie,'' Mrs.  Reagan said. ''Yes,'' the Speaker replied without
thinking. ''I got three dozen for my staff for Christmas.''

A particularly bitter exchange took place early in June. Mr.  O'Neill was
interviewed on the ABC television show ''Issues and Answers,'' his first such
appearance in three years, a new effort on the part of a ''back-room
politician'' to be more visible. He called the G.O.P. tax package ''a complete
windfall for the rich.'' He then said of Mr. Reagan: ''He has no concern, no
regard, no care for the little man of America. And I understand that. Because of
his life style, he never meets those people. And consequently, he doesn't
understand their problems.''

At his next press conference, the President responded: ''I grew up in poverty
and got what education I got all by myself and so forth, and I think it is sheer
demagoguery to pretend that this economic program w ch we've submitted is not
aimed at helping the great cross section of people in this country that have
been burdened for too long by big Government and high taxes.''

The Speaker was stunned by the phrase ''sheer demagoguery.'' He said he could
not recall a similar attack on a Speaker. ''It is time,'' he said, ''for the
President to cool his rhetoric, stop his political broadsides and work sincerely
with Congress to get this economy moving again.''

But, ever the professional, the Speaker called the President to give him the
news about the tax vote, and Mr. O'Neill closed the conversation with the
assurance, ''No hard feelings, old pal.''

Ronald Reagan's budget provided the first major test of the Congressional
Democrats. It was a blueprint for a radical redirection of the size and scope of
Government, with major cutbacks in a broad range of programs for the needy,
including welfare, nutrition, education and health.

After surviving an attempt on his life, Mr. Reagan began an extraordinary
lobbying effort from his hospital bed that continued through his convalescence.
It included telephone calls, cuff links, tickets to the Presidential box in the
Kennedy Center and other White House perquisites. When Congressmen expressed
concern over some aspects of the cuts, such as mass transit or childhood
immunization, the President said that he only wanted them to agree on the size
of the cuts, and that there would be ample time later on to work out the
details.

The Democrats, on the other hand, were uncharacteristically silent. Instead of
orchestrating a counterattack, the Speaker used the Easter recess to make a trip
to Australia and New Zealand, stopping in Hawaii on the way home.

''Who the hell knew all that was going to happen when I was in New Zealand?''
the Speaker said, when asked whether he should have stayed home and mobilized
opposition to the President's budget.

The Speaker insists that opposition was hopeless. ''Don't you think I knew the
night the President was elected that he'd win his first major test around
here?'' he asked.

The hopelessness was communicated in his daily meetings with reporters,
beginning two weeks before the first budget vote in May, to the acute dismay of
Jim Jones, the Budget Committee chairman.  ''Only the Lord Himself could save
this one,'' the Speaker said, a few days before the vote.

Liberal and moderate Democrats were furious. ''He made it easy for everyone to
get off the hook,'' said Representative Benjamin S.  Rosenthal, Democrat of New
York. ''He gave them a free ride. He should have called them in and said, 'If
you're not with us on this, don't come into my office and ask for anything.' He
could have said, 'You know that extra room in the Rayburn Building you want, you
know that chairmanship you're after? Forget it.' ''

Stung by the criticism, the Speaker lumbered to the well and addressed the
244-member House Democratic caucus. ''This old dog wants to learn new tricks,''
he said. ''I have been criticized not only by the Republicans but by my own
party and by some of the members here, but I do not see anybody coming forward
with these new tricks they want to put in place.''

In the end, 63 Democrats joined the Republicans to give Mr.  Reagan's budget a
whopping 253-176 victory.

The President won his second victory in June with his package of budget cut,s
and his third victory came in July, when his tax cut passed by another huge
margin: 238-195.

Democrats initially opposed the notion of a big tax cut in an overheated,
inflationary economy. They feared that such a cut would only place more money in
the pockets of those who would spend it as soon as they got it, driving up
inflation and interest rates even further. The President countered that
opponents of a tax cut falsely believed that the Government could spend tax
dollars more wisely than those who earn them.

The White House, which originally wanted a ''clean bill'' - just a tax cut with
no amendments - engaged in a bidding war with the Democrats, eventually
incorporating Democratic proposals, including a reduction of the so-called
marriage penalty.

Democrats countered with a host of additional provisions to cut taxes for oil
producers and royalty owners, eliminate estate taxes on all estates of $600,000
or less, reduce gift taxes, provide help for thrift institutions, encourage
retirement savings, stimulate research and development, ease the marriage
penalties.

The White House, not to be outdone, added its own tax reductions for oil
producers, as well as other provisions, such as lowering the maximum estate tax
to 50 percent.

As in the budget battle, it was the President's persuasiveness and the ability
of the White House to mount a massive lobbying campaign that resulted in the
resounding victory on the House floor.

''A new coalition sprang up there,'' Mr. O'Neill said later. ''One faction broke
away from us - the ultraconservatives and some of the moderates, and when they
do that, the Republicans gain control.''

Now, Tip O'Neill is waiting. He is waiting for middle America to discover that
those budget cuts will harm them as well as the poor.  Only the rich would not
be hurt, he said.

''The monkey is off the Democrats' back,'' the Speaker said. ''The cuts, brutal
as they are, are the Reagan cuts. The deficit is the Reagan deficit. Reagan has
won a big victory, but the horse that runs fast doesn't always run long.''

The Democratic Party is now a leaderless party. Its identity will probably be
shaped more by the Reagan Administration than by its own warring parts. The
heart of the Democratic strategy -if it can be so dignified - is to await, and
exploit, the Administration's failures.

The party is hungry for new leadership. Nobody now speaks for the Democrats -not
the Speaker nor Ted Kennedy nor former Vice President Walter Mondale, nor
Illinois Representative Dan Rostenkowski. There are new potential leaders on the
horizon - Senators Gary Hart of Colorado or Paul Tsongas from Massachusetts or
Dale Bumpers from Arkansas - articulate men trying to redefine the party. Thus
far, however, the redefinitions seem vague and inadequate.

How much of the Democrats' rout can be attributed to the Speaker?  Could a
younger, more aggressive, more moderate Speaker have halted the Reagan
juggernaut?

Few on Capitol Hill think so. They believe that the Reagan successes stemmed
from a combination of a newly elected conservative President and a Congress in
which Democrats held a fragile majority that was offset by conservatives more
attuned to the Republican ideology than to the Democrats'.

Representative Jim Jones, the Budget Committee chairman, was a younger,
aggressive, more moderate Democrat, and he got nowhere in trying to put together
a Democratic alternative to the Reagan budget package. Mr. Jones is one of those
who seems destined for a leadership role in the Congress, as does Representative
Leon Panetta of California, who also played a major role in the budget battles.

Waiting in the wings, if the Speaker should retire next year, is Representative
Jim Wright, the majority leader, a moderate Texan who could be challenged by
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, a protege of the late Richard Daley and
chairman of the Ways and Means Committee.  Others on the leadership ladder
include Tom Foley of Washington, the Democratic whip, and Gillis Long of
Louisiana, chairman of the Democratic caucus.

It was a scene from another era, the annual reunion in July of Tip O'Neill's old
crowd at Barry's Corner, in North Cambridge, Mass. They are old men now, and
they revel in tales of their youth, stories of mischief and mayhem.

Earlier, making the rounds of the Eighth Congressional District of
Massachusetts, Mr. O'Neill had seemed, as he often does in Washington these
days, bent, burdened, saddened. He had gone through the motions at a clambake in
Somerville, Mass., pressing the flesh with most of the 1,000 guests who had come
to hear the annual report of their Congressman. He knew most of them by first
name. ''Lord love you, you look like your mother,'' he told one woman. ''How's
the golf, Johnny?'' he asked another supporter. They lined up to be photographed
with him, many observing sadly, as they turned away, that he was beginning to
look his age.

But as he walked into the Barry's Corner reunion on the second floor of the
V.F.W. hall, a light came into his eyes, a spring to his step, and the years
began to drop away. There were perhaps 100 men in the room, beer bottles in
hand. He knew each one by name and had a story to tell about most.

The invocation was delivered by Msgr. Vincent Mackey, one of the few in the room
who did not owe his job to the guest of honor.  ''Nothing in this life, not even
death, can ever separate us from God's love or the loyalty of our Barry's Corner
friends,'' he said.  And Father Dan Reidy told the assembled, ''I have a favor
to ask of you - don't die this year.''

The Speaker, who still lives in a frame house a few blocks away, led in the
reminiscences. ''Everybody who didn't walk by DiNapoli's fruit stand and grab a
tomato or an apple, raise your hand,'' he said, and the laughter began. There
was a nod to Frank Cahill, now a surgeon, ''the only one who went to the library
when it wasn't raining.'' There were stories about the third-base performance of
Jeremiah Sullivan, for whom Mr. O'Neill obtained a judgeship, and about others
who were the recipients of state and Federal jobs.

And there was talk of the President. ''I get to see the President quite often,
to be perfectly truthful,'' the Speaker said. ''I have a tremendous liking for
him. You people would like him, too. He's got the charm, he's got the grace,
he's got the humor. And he's kicking the hell out of me.''

And there were some of the Irish stories that he exchanges with the President,
like the one about Uncle Dinty, who got flattened by a steamroller whose
operator was distracted by a pretty girl. ''Flat as a pancake, he was,'' Tip
said. And when they went to give his widow the bad tidings, she couldn't open
the door. ''I'm indisposed,'' she said. ''I'm taking a bath. Just slip him under
the door.''

And the Speaker ended as he usually ends the reunions, by reciting a
long-memorized poem by Charles Hanson Towne. It was passed on to him years ago
by James Michael Curley, Boston's legendary Mayor, who thought the budding
politician's oratory would be improved by a touch of poetry.
''Around the corner I have a friend, In this great city that has no end; Yet
days go by, and weeks rush on, And before I know it a year is gone; And I never
see my old friend's face For life is a swift and terrible race.  He knows I like
him just as well As in the days when I rang his bell And he rang mine, We were
young then And now we are busy, tired men: Tired with playing a foolish game,
Tired with trying to make a name....'' Is Tip O'Neill ready to join his old
cronies in retirement? Is he ready to spend more time at Eastward Ho - the
magnificent golf course near his summer home in Harwich Port, on Cape Cod, where
every fairway but two has a view of both Cape Cod Bay and the Atlantic Ocean -
working on his driver and his fairway woods as he has been since Congress
recessed?

The Speaker is a proud man who will not easily be driven from office. But he
knows that he is considered a burden by many Democrats, too large a target in
the legislative battles and on Election Day. And he also knows that his problems
would be compounded if the Democrats lost even nominal control of the chamber.
It is possible that Mr. O'Neill, should he win re-election in 1982, would wind
up minority leader in the next Congress.

His best reason for not quitting is his son, Thomas P. O'Neill 3d, Lieutenant
Governor of Massachusetts, who is running for Governor.  Mr. O'Neill knows that
his Speakership will help attract contributions and media attention to his son's
campaign.

The Speaker probably is making up his mind this month, on the golf course. He
hits a nice ball, usually splitting the fairways, while entertaining guests with
recollections of a lifetime in politics. But the pressures of Washington have
become mercifully remote, as the Speaker revels in the sea breezes and the
sunshine.

On good days, he even breaks 90.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Tip O'Neill with President Reagan

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRAINING AND TECHNOLOGY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 78, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 232 words


The sputnik fix seems to be in vogue these days. Would another sputnik spur the
long-range technological development necessary to modernize our industry and
strengthen our economy? Since I have difficulty saying yes to this question,
allow me another scenario.

American anxiety following the sputnik launch, in 1957, led to an enormous
expansion of research and development, weighted heavily in favor of space
exploration and weapons development. As one consequence, United States
Government policy makers tended to favor military solutions to political
problems, as in Vietnam. As another, the American civilian economy began to
deteriorate by the late 1960's, particularly in relation to the economies of
West Germany and Japan.

Along the way, American young people came to see themselves as the tools of a
national mobilization effort instead of as members of a society. All too soon,
these young people concluded that their country's leaders held them in contempt,
and responded with uprisings on the campus.

By the mid-1970's, America's basic institutions were in disrepute, its economy
and educational attainments were faltering and its generations were suspicious
of one another.

Be careful of sputniks.  JOHN RABY New Providence, N.J.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FOR REFUGEES FROM VIETNAM, A CATCH-22 IN MACAO

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words

DATELINE: MACAO, Aug. 10


The continuing arrival of large numbers of Vietnamese refugees in Hong Kong and
in this Portuguese colony is not limited to people from the south of Vietnam.

Most of the refugees here and more than one-fifth of those in Hong Kong come
from the north, which has been under Communist rule since 1954.

Two distinct groups are prominent among those fleeing from the north: Roman
Catholics and ethnic Chinese. Both groups benefit from the indulgent attitude of
China, which grants informal transit assistance to all who flee Vietnam.

At the height of Vietnam's persecution of its Chinese minority, in 1978 and
1979, China accepted 263,000 ethnic Chinese as refugees and installed them on
large state farms in southern China.

A Mixed Blessing for Refugees

This characterized China in the language of international and national refugee
officials as a ''resettlement country,'' a mixed blessing from the refugees'
point of view. It means that all refugees who have come through China since this
mass resettlement are suspected of having already been resettled and are
therefore ineligible for permanent asylum in such countries as the United
States.

So far this year, Hong Kong has sent back 2,725 refugees who had been resettled
on Chinese farms. ''Thirty to forty have come back, some even two or even three
times,'' a Hong Kong official said. He said about 2,900 more are being held
until permission is received from China to return them.

Macao has no formal procedure for forcible repatriation of refugees. But last
month, when the total number of refugees around a pier at Taipa had reached
about 7,000, a mysterious exodus began, according to refugee officials.

At least 3,000 of the men, women and children, who had been living in the most
primitive conditions and fed largely by charitable organizations, are said to
have returned voluntarily to China, swimming and wading across a narrow channel
that separates Macao from the mainland.

Refugees Abandon Hope

The Rev. Lancelot M. Rodrigues, the United Nations official supervising a camp
for refugees whose status has been recognized, said many abandoned hope when
United Nations and Macao officials told them they were ''not real refugees.''

A United Nations official in Hong Kong confirmed that refugees coming through
China were being told that they had almost no chance of being accepted by
resettlement countries. The United States accounts for the resettlement of about
70 percent of all Indochinese refugees.

Refugee officials recognize that there is no real difference in motivation
between refugees coming out of Indochina through Southeast Asian countries and
those going through China. But the officials contend that the growing impatience
in resettlement countries with the unceasing flow makes such categorical
measures necessary.

The remaining refugees at Taipa pier show no inclination to return voluntarily
to China. ''We no longer want to live in a Communist country,'' said Yen Cam
Mau, a 35-year-old ethnic Chinese who was born and lived in northern Vietnam.
''We want to live in a free country, that is why we left.''

Chinese Cite Discrimination

Mr. Mau said he fled with his wife and three children because he felt that the
country of his birth had turned against him as a result of his ancestry.

''If a Chinese goes to a hospital, there is no room for him,'' he said. ''If
something is stolen from me and I complain, they make believe they don't hear
me. The Vietnamese who work with me get raises, I don't.'' Mr. Mau was a driver
of construction equipment.

He said they left Vietnam in February and headed north in a small boat. The
Chinese authorities admitted them with the understanding that they would proceed
toward Hong Kong, he said. But the Chinese warned them that the weather was bad
and that their boat was too small. The authorities suggested that they get
together with others and buy a larger, safer boat.

Four families sold their bicycles and watches and bought a larger boat in a
fishing village near Canton. They rowed for three days, occasionally being towed
by Chinese fishing boats, and arrived at the end of June. Mr. Mau said that
Chinese coastal patrols stopped the vessel, but let it proceed when they learned
that the passengers came from Vietnam.

Catholics Flee From North

Interviewed on one of the two small boats that brought them to Hong Kong from
Haiphong, Vietnam's major northern port, a group of 45 fishermen and their
families, all but two of them Roman Catholics, said they fled to escape from
religious discrimination.

A voluble woman, Mrs. Nguyen Thi Phuong, a 35-year-old mother whose eight
children escaped with her, said they had wanted to leave for a long time. She
said they learned from American and British broadcasts over the last two years
that rescue ships picked up refugees at sea.  She also showed a letter from a
nephew who resettled in Britain last year. It offered exact navigational
instructions on how to leave Haiphong.

The Catholic refugees, most of whom wore crucifixes and religious medals around
their necks, displayed a framed picture of Jesus together with a photograph of
Pope John Paul II.

It was very dangerous to escape from Haiphong, they said, adding that
discrimination against Catholics was becoming worse at a time of increasing food
shortages. ''They don't give us our ration of rice because they say if you are
Catholic God will feed you,'' Mrs. Phuong said.

The refugees also complained of official pressure against bringing up their
children as Catholics and discrimination in setting the quotas that each fishing
boat has to deliver to the state. They said the excessively high quotas left
them without enough money to send their children to school. Even though they
lived on their fishing boats, they said, they lacked the money for clothes,
school supplies and transport for their children.

''We don't want to be rich,'' one of the men said. ''We just want to go to any
country where we can earn enough to live and send our children to school.''

Mrs. Phuong added, ''If we can't find a place anywhere, we would rather stay
here and die.'' ''All depends on other countries,'' Mr. Mau said. ''We are
victims and cannot decide our fate. We wait for the decision of the authorities.
If they throw us into the sea, we cannot do anything.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Vietnamese refugees in Portuguese colony of
Macao

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
China Reports Repelling Vietnamese 'Invaders'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 125 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Aug. 16


Chinese soldiers repelled three border attacks by Vietnamese troops and killed a
number of the ''invaders,'' the official New China News Agency said today.

It said that nine Chinese frontier guards had been killed or wounded in a
570-round artillery barrage fired by the Vietnamese during clashes last night.

The report gave no other casualty figures, but it said that one attack in the
Fakashan area of China's Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region had been carried out
by a company of Vietnamese infantrymen.  China reported repeated battles in that
area from early May to mid-June, and said that about 400 Vietnamese were killed
there and along the Yunnan Province frontier.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY'S CHIEF OF STAFF REORGANIZES TOP LEVEL WITH 20 APPOINTMENTS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 16


It has been a summer of turbulence for the Army's senior generals as the Chief
of Staff, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, has named an almost entirely new cast of combat
commanders and resource managers to positions of top leadership.

By Labor Day, more than 20 of the generals who run the Army will have been
replaced at a time when General Meyer is continuing a campaign to rebuild the
military service from the aftereffects of the war in Vietnam, recruiting new
soldiers, retaining experienced sergeants and specialists and bringing the force
back to an adequate state of readiness.

General Meyer, at 52 years of age a relatively young general who was promoted to
Chief of Staff by President Carter over many senior officers, has focused in
recent months on the question of top leadership. ''I tried to keep a team
together for the first two years,'' he said in an interview, ''the team that was
in place when I came in.''

Leaders and Managers

But that team started to unravel this year with the retirements of two four-star
generals. In addition, many three-star and two-star generals came up against a
new regulation that requires generals to retire after 35 years of service rather
than at a specific age.

Moreover, General Meyer said, there were several unexpected voluntary
retirements among lieutenant generals and major generals who felt blocked by a
restriction that has frozen senior officers' pay at about $50,000.

Critics of today's Army have contended that managers rather than leaders make it
to the top. But General Meyer asserted that the new group was strong in combat
leadership.

''The whole crew who is going out to take command of corps and armies right now
are people who have spent the bulk of their lives in leadership at battalion, at
brigade, at division,'' he said. ''If you went to war, those are the kind of
guys you want out their leading soldiers.''

On the other hand, he said he also needed leaders with experience in resource
management. ''I don't need a flamboyant, swashbuckling guy charging down the
halls of the Pentagon right now,'' he added.

'Grounded in the Rudiments'

The general said he had chosen as senior battlefield commanders those who
''really understood how to use Army forces'' and ''were innovative in their
employment but yet were well grounded in the rudiments of soldiering.''

To head the new Rapid Deployment Force, General Meyer named Lieut.  Gen. Robert
C. Kingston, with whom he served in combat in Korea and Vietnam. General
Kingston has been a battalion and brigade commander and, most recently,
commanding general of the Second Infantry Division in Korea.

The new commander of the 18th Airborne Corps at Fort Bragg, N.@C., is Lieut.
Gen. Jack V. Mackmull, who commanded a helicopter assault group and then a
brigade in Vietnam and most recently served as commanding general of the 101st
Airborne Division at Fort Campbell, Ky.

Lieut. Gen. James B. Vaught, who led the aborted rescue mission into Iran last
year, has been named to lead the combined army of American and Korean troops in
South Korea. General Meyer defended the appointment, calling General Vaught ''a
very confident, very capable general who has been a superb troop leader and who
gets tremendous emotional support from the solidiers.''

Appointments at Home

To head the Army areas within the United States, General Meyer said he wanted
generals who had worked with reserve units, so to increase the integration of
active and reserve forces.

Lieut. Gen. David E. Grange Jr. will command the Sixth Army, with headquarters
in San Francisco. He spent 18 zmonths commanding a readiness region with
headquarters in Denver but has a long record of combat command.

Gen. Donald R. Keith, whose main experience is in weapons research and
development, will head the Material Development and Readiness Command here in
Washington, the service's main source of new weapons and equipment.

The new head of operations, Lieut. Gen. William R. Richardson, has spent much of
his career in command, with some staff experience.  Lieut. Gen. Maxwell R.
Thurman, the new head of personnel, has been primarily a manager but with some
command experience.

In the education of officers, Lieut. Gen. Willard W. Scott Jr. has been named
superintendent at West Point; the new commander of the infantry center at Fort
Benning, Ga., is Maj. Gen. Robert W. Wetzel; the commander of the middle-level
command and general staff college at Fort Leavenworth, Kan., is Lieut. Gen.
Howard F. Stone, and the commander of the Army training and doctrine command is
Gen. Glenn K.  Otis. All have had extensive experience as leaders of combat
units.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of General Edward L. Meyer

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS ASSAIL COMMENTS BY DOCTOR HEADING DEFOLIANT STUDY

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 633 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 17


A University of California physician, hired by the Government to design a study
on the effects of Agent Orange on American troops in Vietnam, was accused of
bias today by several veterans' groups because he has made statements that there
was ''little evidence'' that the defoliant had had any effect on the soldiers.

Dr. Gary H. Spivey, an epidemiologist at the School of Public Health at the
University of California at Los Angeles, told a California Assembly committee
July 31 that ''Agent Orange was used primarily in areas where few or no troops
were located'' and therefore, ''the likelihood of substantial exposure to ground
troops in Vietnam'' was not great.

Dr. Spivey also told the panel that ''there is to date little evidence'' of any
''specific human health effects'' as a result of the powerful herbicide. ''The
fear which is generated by the current publicity is very likely to be the most
serious consequence of the use of Agent Orange,'' he said.

Agent Orange was the code name for a defoliant sprayed by the Air Force on
Vietnamese jungles and crops to reduce food supplies and cover for the enemy. It
contains dioxin, one of the most toxic chemicals known, and veterans have blamed
the herbicide for causing cancer, a broad range of birth defects in their
children and liver damage, among other maladies.

Study First Ordered in 1979

This spring, the Veterans Administration awarded a $114,288 contract to Dr.
Spivey and Dr. Roger Detels, a colleague at the university, to design the study.
The study had been ordered in late 1979 by the Carter Administration.

The delay was partly the result of a lawsuit by the National Veterans Task Force
on Agent Orange, a coalition of groups dealing with Vietnam veterans and Agent
Orange. The suit, which was rejected, questioned the ability of the Veterans
Administration to design an unbiased study.

Today, Jon Furst, chairman of the veterans' task force, said Dr.  Spivey's
comments ''sound more like the words of a scientist who has answered the
questions without looking at the facts.''

''By these statements, Dr. Spivey has clearly lost all credibility in the eyes
of Vietnam veterans,'' he added.

Urges Removal From Study

Mr. Furst urged that Dr. Spivey and his associates ''immediately be relieved of
their duties'' on the study, and the an ''unbiased scientist'' be appointed.

Lewis M. Milford, director of the National Veterans Law Center, a public
interest group associated with American University, said that Dr. Spivey's
remarks ''demonstrate an obvious bias in favor of the Government's position that
Agent Orange has not harmed veterans.''

Reached at his office at U.C.L.A., Dr. Spivey said, ''The process of scientific
inquiry requires a scientist to review the evidence that exists and to use
conclusions from that review to design appropriate studies.''

Although Dr. Spivey and his colleagues had reviewed ''a tremendous variety of
sources,'' he said, there was scant evidence from existing scientific literature
about the effects of Agent Orange.

'Can't Tell One Way or Another'

''This doesn't mean the claims are wrong,'' Dr. Spivey said. ''The only thing
I've tried to say is we can't tell one way or another from the literature.''

He said that ''the only way we'll be able to see if the claims are right or
wrong is by doing the study.'' Dr. Spivey said he has completed a ''preliminary
draft'' of his proposals, which will be taken up by a series of independent
groups.  ''If there's any bias on my part it will be picked up in independent
review by peer groups,'' he said. ''That's the way science works.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Report Clears Hospitals In Veteran's Death

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 155 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Aug. 17


Two medical centers run by the Veterans Administration were exonerated today
after an investigation of the suicide of a Vietnam veteran who crashed his jeep
into the glass doors of one of the medical centers last spring.

Four doctors, two from the agency and two from outside, said that the
psychiatric care provided at Wadsworth and Brentwood V.A. medical centers was
''adequate and satisfactory.'' But activists called the report on the death of
former Sgt. James R.  Hopkins of the Marine Corps a ''whitewash, a total
farce.''

Mr. Hopkins crashed his jeep through the doors at Wadsworth, warned people to
take cover and fired several shots from his M-14 rifle into the celing and
walls. Later he was found dead, apparently of a drug overdose. In protests
following his death, some veterans took part in a 57-day hunger strike.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

I. Milton Sacks, 62, Professor And an Authority on Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 153 words

DATELINE: WALTHAM, Mass., Aug. 17


Dr. I. Milton Sacks, a professor of political science at Brandeis University and
an authority on Vietnam and Southeast Asia, died Friday at Park Hill Hospital in
Boston. He was 62 years old.

Mr. Sacks once served as director of Vietnamese affairs in the State
Department's intelligence bureau. He was also the host of a series of radio
programs devoted to Asia and United States foreign policy.

He was born in the Bronx and attended the City College of New York, the
University of California and Yale University, where he received his M.A. and
Ph.D. degrees. He joined the Brandeis faculty in 1955, and in 1969 he was a
visiting research professor at Southern Illinois University.

Mr. Sacks is survived by two children, a sister and his parents. A memorial
service will be held at Brandeis when the academic year begins.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 18, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REVOLUTIONARY CHANGES FOR SOLAR FIELD

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1822 words


President Reagan's decisions to slash the budget for the development of solar
energy, to decontrol oil prices and to force solar resources to compete on a
free-market basis with other fuels have combined to revolutionize the infant
solar energy industry in this country.

While industrialists are divided over whether that revolution represents a grand
opportunity or an unmitigated disaster, they all agree that the solar business
will never be the same.

Mr. Reagan's supporters argue that his reduction of Government funding for solar
development will put an end to the creeping ''solar socialism'' of the Carter
era. Through its largesse, they say, the previous Administration attracted a
great number of people who were enamored with the solar idea, but produced
equipment that only the Department of Energy could afford to buy.

''We totally concur with the Federal Government's approach,'' said J. Robert
Maxwell, director of solar programs for the Westinghouse Electric Corporation.
''In the past, if a guy took out a piece of glass, poured some fluid on it, held
it up to the sun and got some voltage off it, he made a headline and got some
Government funds.  Those days are over.

''It's time for big money commitments,'' Mr. Maxwell added. ''If you were in it
for the fun and excitement, it's time to get out.''

U.S. Holds the Lead, for Now

But the President's solar critics retort that his apparent deemphasis of solar
energy in favor of coal, oil and nuclear power will delay the development of
technology until the next century and squander the American lead over the
Japanese in this potentially multibillion-dollar industry.

''Reagan has created a self-fulfilling prophecy,'' said Denis A.  Hayes, former
director of the Government-funded Solar Energy Research Institute in Golden,
Colo., who was appointed by Mr. Carter but dismissed by Mr. Reagan, along with
370 members of his institute. ''He keeps saying that solar is an energy for the
year 2000, and by eliminating Federal involvement in near-term technology, he is
insuring that we won't get there by then.''

The program that spawned the solar controversy is tucked away deep inside Mr.
Reagan's budget bill. The President trimmed funding for solar energy projects to
$303 million in the fiscal year 1982 from the $707 million requested by Mr.
Carter for 1981. That compares with the $1.6 billion Mr. Reagan plans to spend
on fostering nuclear energy, or $300 million more than what Mr. Carter had
proposed for 1981.

Fewer Demonstrations

The biggest cut in the solar budget was in the funding of demonstration
projects, which are the lifeblood of some small companies. Previously, for
example, the Government might have paid a manufacturer to build a
high-visibility solar water heater on top of the neighborhood fire station to
demonstrate to builders or home owners that solar technology was viable.

Some research funds were also eliminated, and those that remain will be devoted
entirely to more complex solar technologies.  ''We are going to leave the demo
projects, like the solar french fries factory, to the private sector,'' said Jay
Vivari, spokesman for the Energy Department's solar program. ''We are going to
concentrate funding on long-term, high-risk, high-potential-payoff research and
development.''

Wide Range of Companies

The impact of the new budget will be felt unevenly throughout America's solar
industry, which comprises a variety of companies ranging from mom-and-pop
manufacturers of flat-plate thermal collectors that heat water, to oil companies
betting on hightechnology solar devices for the day when the crude oil runs out.

In addition to the development of what might be called direct solar energy,
which depends on the sun's rays, solar is used in a wider sense to include
biomass (wood and liquid fuels from vegetable matter and animal wastes), ocean
thermals (the differences in temperature in ocean currents) and wind.

The small manufacturers of low-technology solar collectors or passive solar
equipment, who did not depend on Government contracts, report that decontrol of
oil prices has finally made their end of the solar business viable. Passive
equipment depends primarily on collecting heat from the sun in containers filled
with liquids, usually water, and redistributing the heat through pipes.

''The solar-collector business is just now reaching maturity,'' said Brian D.
Pardo, president of the American Solar King Corporation, which has sold $5
million worth of solar water and homeheating units this year.

''When solar first got started, the people buying and selling solar equipment
were enthusiasts who were intrigued by the idea and weren't that choosy about
the product,'' he said. ''But when the price of oil went over a dollar a gallon,
solar home heaters became very economical, compared to electric or oil heat.

115,000 Home Installations

''The consumer buying solar equipment today is not doing it for a lark,'' Mr.
Pardo added. ''He is doing it to solve an economic problem. About 115,000 homes
installed solar heating equipment last year, and the companies surviving are
those that can sell to that consumer market, not to the Government.''

The oil and electric companies have tended to spurn solar collectors as
essentially a semiskilled ''plumbing job,'' involving small, separated markets
that are not suited to their technological strengths.

Instead, they have concentrated their capital on photovoltaics, which could
provide a significant portion of the nation's electricity by the end of the
decade. Photovoltaic technology involves a bank of silicon cells that convert
the radiation of the sun's rays to electric voltage.

The Carter Administration projected that solar in the wide sense would supply 20
percent of America's energy needs by 2000, with solar collectors accounting for
6 percent and photovoltaics for 1 percent. The rest would come from indirect
solar sources.

But with the new Administration emphasizing research in the higher technology,
the role of photovoltaics could be much greater.

Photovoltaic Costs High

Currently, however, the costly cells make such systems economical only for
communities - or places like an offshore oil platform - that are situated beyond
an electricity grid. Electricity generated by photovoltaic cells costs about $1
for a kilowatt-hour, compared with 5 cents to 11 cents for petroleum-generated
electricity.

Many of the major corporations dominating the photovoltaic field see the Reagan
approach as spurring their sales as well. The removal of Government subsidies,
they say, should eventually produce more realistic competition and greater
credibility for their space-age technology.

''Letting some of the nonviable companies who depended entirely on Government
grants run their natural course would be in our interest,'' said the director of
solar programs for a major American oil company. ''It is hard to recognize the
good products from the bad products, when the bad ones are getting intravenous
feeding from the Government.''

That sentiment was echoed by Robert Nath, vice president of marketing at Arco
Solar Inc., a subsidiary of Atlantic Richfield Inc.  ''Business executives,
telecommunications companies, utilites, hydroelectric companies are going to
start to see us more as a business now, not a hobby, not a
ban-the-nukes/save-the-whales bunch of guys who stand around airports and pass
out literature,'' Mr. Nath said.

Questions of Confidence

While other solar industrialists appreciate the President's decision to put
their business on a more competitive footing, they bitterly reproach him for not
using his office to encourage solar technology generally. His obvious preference
for nuclear and hydrocarbon fuels, they say, is being interpreted as a vote of
no confidence in solar.

''In a big organization there is always a battle over resources, and the outcome
of that battle depends a great deal on the national signals,'' said Daniel
Yergin, a lecturer on energy at the Harvard Business School. ''As far as solar
energy is concerned, the signals have turned to red.''

No one has learned that better than Joseph Lindmayer, president of the Solarex
Corporation, the nation's largest manufacturer of photovoltaic equipment.

''I had a man who was prepared to invest $10 million in our company,'' Mr.
Lindmayer said. ''He just came to me and said he didn't want to invest now
because the Government has decided to go nuclear. If Reagan wanted to get out of
solar,'' added Mr. Lindmayer, whose company is partly owned by the Standard Oil
Company (Indiana), ''at least he could have done it like Vietnam and called it a
victory. Instead he pulled out as if solar was a loser.''

Competition From Japan

Some solar executives also fear that by slowing Governmentsupported research,
the United States could lose its wide lead over Japan in the photovoltaic field.
The Government-backed ''Sunshine'' program there is designed to make Japan world
leaders in photovoltaic technology.

''We can easily lose our technological edge to the Japanese if the Government
does not make a commitment both in terms of financing and setting economic
goals,'' said Tony Adler, an investment banker specializing in solar energy with
Muller & Company. ''If the Japanese really get a strong patent position
worldwide, where are we going to get our photovoltaics from? Within 10 years, it
will be a billiondollar-a-year industry. That's a lot of exports.''

Mr. Adler said the smaller photovolatic companies that cannot survive without
Government contracts were now looking for research funding from venture
capitalists and utilities that had not yet entered the field. Several solar
executives at major companies already involved in photovoltaics said they had
been approached by smaller concerns seeking to be bought out.

Robert W. Willis, president of the Solenergy Corporation, a Woburn, Mass.,
manufacturer of photovoltaic cells with sales of $1 million last year, is
typical of those feeling the squeeze.

''I think I am the only small company left,'' Mr. Willis said. ''We used to
depend on the Government research projects to tell us what is good or bad. Now
we are going to have to do it all ourselves, which we can't afford. It's going
to make it a lot harder to get our costs down.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of solar disks installed at White House Photo of
photovoltaic cells

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 19, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

I.M.F. ROLE IN POLAND TLAKS SET

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 18


The International Monetary Fund will send a representative to a meeting in Paris
next month between the Polish Government and its Western creditors, heightening
speculation that Poland will seek membership in the 141-nation lending agency as
a means of dealing with its mounting financial problems.

A high-ranking Reagan Administration economic official said that the invitation
to attend the Sept. 9 meeting - being held to sign an agreement between Poland
and 460 Western banks to extend the deadline on more than $5 billion of Polish
debts - had been tendered by the Government in Warsaw.

The American official said that the United States, West Germany, Britain and
France were actively supporting Polish membership. That could open the door to a
loan by the fund to Poland under conditions, applied uniformly to all fund
debtors, that it improve its economic and balance-of-payments positions.

But the American official said the Soviet Union's attitude was still uncertain.
Poland had been a fund member until 1950, when under Soviet pressure it resigned
from what was then a predominantly Western institution. Now the bulk of the
membership of the fund, and its sister lending agency, the World Bank, comes
from the third world.

American officials believe that Moscow is divided on the issue today - one
Soviet faction still opposes Polish membership on ideological grounds, while
another argues that it could have practical benefits.

A fund spokesman, who initially declined to comment on the situation, said later
today, ''We have been invited to the Paris meeting and have accepted the
invitation.''

Past Practice Departure

The monetary fund's interest in Poland was seen in its latest international
survey, the World Economic Outlook, published in June, which, in a departure
from past practice, analyzed the economy of Poland as well as that of the Soviet
Union and other Eastern European nonmember economies.

The Polish discussion, which cited ''severe difficulties'' in recent years,
mainly as a consequence of the ''disappointing'' results of an ambitious
long-term growth strategy pursued in the first half of the 1970's, seemed to
hint that there had already been some contacts between the fund staff and the
Polish authorities.

The analysis further noted that interest payments on the overall Polish debt -
which last year was estimated at $23 billion and this year is expected to reach
as high as $28 billion -were absorbing an unusually high 30 percent of hard
currency export earnings.

By way of comparison, the report noted that for all nonoil developing countries,
interest payments in 1981 were projected to absorb only 7 percent of export
earnings.

Rumania Remains Member

Although Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam are still members of the monetary fund, only
Rumania, among the Warsaw Pact countries, belongs today. Rumania joined in 1972.
Yugoslavia is a member and was the host country at the annual meeting of the
fund and the World Bank (formally known as the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development) in September-October, 1979.

According to reports from Warsaw, Poland's Finance Minister, Marian Krzak, has
suggested publicly that fund membership could help Poland.  The issue came up
today at a meeting in Bad Reichenhall, West Germany, between Germany's Foreign
Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, and Poland's Foreign Minister, Jozef Czyrek.
Mr. Genscher told a news conference that he had urged such a course during four
hours of conversations with Mr. Czyrek.

According to Mr. Genscher, the Polish official indicated that the matter was
complex, but that a decision could be made in the near future.

A request for membership would entail a formal visit to Warsaw by fund staff
members and a recommendation by the fund's managing director, Jacques de
Larosiere, to the board of governors, representing existing members.

The final decision would be made by the board, but there is little doubt it
would be affirmative in light of the support already manifested by the United
States and Western European countries.  Analysts suggested that the issue may
well come up at this year's annual meeting of the fund and the World Bank to be
held in Washington in late September.

Before any fund loan could be made, a mission from the lending agency would
again be sent to Poland to ascertain criteria for restoring Poland's economic
stability.

These criteria, at the core of the fund's lending practice, would probably mean,
according to a high-ranking Reagan economic official, ''some radical changes in
economic policy'' to bring about the conditions under which Poland could repay
the debt.

Under I.M.F. rules, a debtor country has to sign a letter of intent setting
forth the economic policies it will follow as the condition for getting the
loan. Letters of intent are generally the subject of intense negotiations
between the fund staff and the authorities of the debtor country.

American analysts suggested that any letter of intent might well parallel
recommendations made last month by a Polish reform committee that, among other
things, called for a sharp cut in Government spending and steep rises in the
price of food.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 20, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Over the Gulf of Sidra

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 540 words


That was no idle decision to order the United States Sixth Fleet to conduct
maneuvers in the Gulf of Sidra, some 60 miles from the shores of Tripoli. The
aim, clearly deliberate, was to test Colonel Qaddafi, whose radical Libyan
regime lays sovereign claim to those waters. And two Libyan jets were downed by
American fighters, but only after those Soviet-built planes fired first. So runs
the Reagan Administration version of the episode, and what is wrong with that?

On the face of it, absolutely nothing. There is nothing new about disputes over
territorial waters, here or elsewhere. Other maritime nations have shown the
flag just as forcibly. The United States has had similar problems, and in these
waters, since the confrontations with the Barbary pirates of our early history.

For that matter, the same Sixth Fleet held maneuvers in the same gulf only two
years ago. That provoked Libyan protests - but no rockets.

Nor will most of the world feel much concern for Colonel Qaddafi, given the ugly
character of his regime, with its export of terrorism and its bullying
aggression in neighboring Chad. The Libyan accusations that America was engaged
in high-handed lawlessness can be discounted.

Is there any geographical justice to the Libyan contentions? Since 1973, Libya
has drawn a base line across the Gulf of Sidra and claimed that it lies entirely
within Libyan territorial waters. No, the United States has consistently
maintained. Everything that lies beyond the three-mile limit properly
constitutes international waters. If the legal argument is cloudy, the
Administration's disgust is not. From the outset, President Reagan has put
Colonel Qaddafi high on his enemies' list, and with reason. Libya's apparent
involvement in plotting assassinations in the United States has led to a full
break in diplomatic relations.
But no matter how widespread the American revulsion at Colonel Qaddafi, it does
not follow that the Reagan Administration automatically wins full benefit of any
doubt - not from a generation that remembers maritime milestones called the Bay
of Pigs and the Gulf of Tonkin.

The original Credibility Gap opened up, it will be recalled, when an American
President told less than the truth about a patrol boat attack in the latter, and
used that murky incident to justify the massive buildup in Vietnam. There may be
no more to yesterday's episode in the Gulf of Sidra than meets the eye, but in
this chastened era, Americans need doubly to be reassured.

So there are questions. If Washington's charge of aggressive action is
unanswerable, why not make it before the Security Council? What consideration
has been given to the safety of some 2,500 Americans, most of them oil company
employees, still living in Libya and within Colonel Qaddafi's reach? Was the
challenge timed in collusion with Egypt or Morocco, Libya's North African
adversaries?

Giving a black eye to Colonel Qaddafi won't hurt America's global standing. It
might even help. What would hurt is even a trace of deception.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 20, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT MOTIVATES WRITERS?

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words


CERTAINLY the genesis of any novel is as singular as its author's apprehension
of his craft: some writers start with an idea, a calculated theory that they
hope to illustrate; others find their book in an epiphany, a character or
incident glimpsed with sudden recognition. In the case of Francine du Plessix
Gray's new novel ''World Without End,'' it was a bit of both. The sight of a
fellow Intourist traveler - ''a sort of forlorn, middle-aged bachelor with
melancholy blue eyes'' - during a 1976 trip to the Soviet Union gave Mrs. Gray
her central character, Edmund, and it also gave her a theme, that of ''the
solitude of middle age.''

The theory that animated this vision was a good deal more complicated. A
philosopher manque who had planned at one time to get a doctorate and teach,
Mrs. Gray was fascinated by a certain Neoplatonic idea - the notion popular
during the Renaissance that it is friendship, not romantic love or sexual
passion, that provides human beings with the most lasting and valuable of
emotions. ''Love is an impetuous and fickle flame,'' wrote Montaigne in a
well-known essay, but friendship produces ''a gentle and universal warmth,
moderate and even.''

Embody 'Forgotten Corners

''It was a challenge,'' says Mrs. Gray, recalling her early struggles with the
book. ''I realized this novel would be relatively devoid of the sexual tensions
on which the novel form has thrived.  But the fact is, until the 18th century,
not only the Greeks and the Renaissance writers, but Montaigne and Bacon, up
through La Rochefoucauld believed that friendship was the essential ingredient
of the good life. And the way I evolved the novel, these three - Edmund, Claire
and Sophie - would be sunk without their friendship.  It is almost a kind of
angelic bond and the only deterrent to that solitude of middle age.''

Although ''World Without End'' appears at first glance to be less
autobiographical than Mrs. Gray's first novel, ''Lovers and Tyrants,'' she says
its three characters actually embody many ''forgotten corners'' of her own life.
Like Edmund, she grew up a child of the impoverished aristocracy, having come to
America with her Russian emigre mother. Like Claire, she has maintained a deep
commitment to social action. And like Sophie, she says she is ''plagued by a
diversity of interests.''

Before turning to fiction, Mrs. Gray spent some 10 years pursuing a career as an
artist - she is married to the painter Cleve Gray - and she also published some
highly acclaimed nonfiction, most notably ''Divine Disobedience,'' a study of
such Catholic radicals as Philip and Daniel Berrigan and Ivan Illich. Although
she continues to write essays and book reviews and is thinking of working on
another book of reportage, she has since given up both painting and her academic
aspirations. Still, she says she is able to investigate those roads not taken
through her fiction. ''There are things in one's life that get pushed aside for
pragmatic reasons,'' she says. ''It's a motivating force to write because
writing enables one to examine one's failed possibilities.''

Versatile Martin Amis

Last year, many American readers first became aware of Martin Amis as the
British author who charged that his novel ''The Rachel Papers'' had been
plagiarized by the American writer Jacob Epstein.  Some readers were also dimly
aware that he was the son of Kingsley Amis, the celebrated author of ''Lucky
Jim.'' In London, however, the former literary editor of The New Statesman has
firmly established a reputation of his own, having created in such novels as
''The Rachel Papers,'' ''Dead Babies,'' ''Success'' and his recently published
''Other People'' a recognizable fictional world. It is a place defined by
Swiftian excess and metropolitan satire, a place where variously shabby
characters partake of lust and violence and guilt in hopes of being allowed a
second chance.

Other Endeavors

In addition to his fiction, Mr. Amis has written frequently for the Times
Literary Supplement and the London Review of Books, and he will soon be filing a
regular letter from New York for The Observer. He will cover, he says,
''preferably the most vulgar and lurid things I can find,'' as well as the local
literary life - a subject on which he had already formed decided opinions.
''American writers are celebrities in the sense no English writer is,'' he said
the other day. ''The idea of an English writer doing what Salinger did'' -
becoming a recluse to avoid publicity - ''would make us die of laughter because
in England, you don't get anybody to bother you. No one would dream of going up
to an English writer and saying, 'What do you think of Vietnam?'

''I think it makes American writers more ambitious and that's a healthy thing
because they tackle bigger subjects. There's a fatal sort of quiet about the
English novel: you get these finely tuned little novels about middle-life
crises; you don't get 'Humboldt's Gift,' a big essay on American literary life,
or 'Good as Gold,' an examination of American politics. English writers don't
sound off the way they do in America.'' Apparently this largeness of vision,
combined with Americans' irreverence for language, is much to Mr.  Amis's own
taste: he says he is indebted more to such writers as Saul Bellow, Joseph Heller
and Kurt Vonnegut than to any English contemporaries.

Looks to Father as Model

The first and perhaps most lasting model, however, remains his father, Kingsley.
How did the younger Mr. Amis deal with this anxiety of influence? ''I sort of
purged it through imitation,'' he says. '' 'The Rachel Papers' is very like my
father, stylistically - writing about low events in a rather pompous,
mock-heroic style. It's sort of 'Lucky Jim,' 20 years on. And by doing it I got
rid of the whole problem - I wasn't tempted to look at my father's stuff and do
something entirely different.''

Since then, Mr. Amis feels, he has moved off in a direction of his own, and his
latest book, ''Other People'' - a ''mystery story'' about an amnesiac woman that
is also a kind of modernist mediation on the nature of memory and time - clearly
indicates that he has been reading lots of Nabokov and Borges. It is a
development, he says, that his father regards with something less than
enthusiasm.

''I think he likes 'The Rachel Papers' the most because it's the most like
his,'' he says. ''I like his stuff a lot more than he likes mine - that's how it
should be. He thinks my stuff is much too tricksy and mannered. And when I pick
up a copy of a book of mine I've given him, I notice that practically every page
has the corner turned down - up to about page 70 and then it stops. Still, the
only real rows we've had are over copyright problems. If we both notice
something about the way someone talks, he'll say 'I have that one,' and I say,
'no, I saw it first.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Francine du Plessix Gray photo of Martin Amis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 21, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT DEFENDS LIBYAN ENCOUNTER AS 'IMPRESSIVE' ACT

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1363 words

DATELINE: SANTA MONICA, Calif., Aug. 20


President Reagan today defended the reported downing of two Libyan jets and
vowed to continue the policy of prompt retaliation to make American power
''impressive to the enemies of freedom.''

His public comments were his first since the incident yesterday, in which the
United States said two Libyan fighters were shot down by Navy planes after
firing at the Americans. Mr. Reagan said the United States had planned naval
maneuvers in the Gulf of Sidra to show that this country would not honor Libya's
claim that the gulf was part of its internal waters.

But Mr. Regan denied that the naval exercises about 60 nautical miles off the
Libyan coast had been intended to provoke an incident or to destabilize the
Government of Col. Muammar el-Q@addafi.

Visit to a U.S. Carrier

''We decided it was time to recognize what are the international waters and
behave accordingly,'' Mr. Reagan said during a three-hour visit to the carrier
Constellation off the California coast.

He said the destruction of the Libyan planes was an appropriate response to an
attack. He also said that he was not alarmed that several hours elapsed before
his staff informed him of the air battle.

Colonel Qaddafi, who was visiting Southern Yemen, denounced the United States
for ''provocations and terror'' but remained silent on what action he might take
in response to the incident. (Page A11.)

4 Navy Crew Members Identified

The Pentagon, meanwhile, identified the four Navy F-14 crew members involved in
the incident.  As the Constellation cruised in gentle Pacific swells 65 miles
west of Los Angeles, Mr. Reagan watched exercises involving F-14 Tomcat jets of
the type involved in the dogfight with Libya's @Soviet-built SU-22 fighters. The
F-14's joined other Navy planes in a demonstration of bombing and strafing
tactics. The President sat on the four-acre flight deck as the Tomcats also
carried out booming, supersonic maneuvers.

Mr. Reagan interrupted his California vacation for a visit to the Constellation
that had been planned before the Libyan incident. But the ship provided an ideal
stage for him to defend and delineate further the foreign policy that
Administration officials said was typified by the American action.

In the carrier's cavernous hangar bay, Mr. Reagan delivered one of his most
aggressive speeches. ''Let friend and foe alike know America has the muscle to
back up its words, and ships like this and men like you are the muscle,'' he
told the cheering crew.

Standing in front of a parked Tomcat jet, Mr. Reagan said the Constellation's
firepower was impressive to him. ''But what is most important,'' he added, to
whoops of approval, ''it is also impressive to the enemies of freedom in the
world, and we had an example of that just night before last on the carrier
Nimitz.''

Earlier, in comments to reporters who accompanied him around the ship, Mr.
Reagan went further than Administration officials, such as Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger, in acknowledging that Libya's claim of control over the
Gulf of Sidra figured in the planning of the Navy exercises.

In 1973 Colonel Qaddafi established a line across the mouth of the Gulf of Sidra
as a ''base line,'' south of which Libya claimed as its internal waters.

'An Artificial Line'

Asked if the United States planned the activities to prove a point to the
Libyans, Mr. Reagan, sitting in the captain's chair of the aircraft carrier,
accused the Libyans of drawing ''an artificial line'' in the water.

''We conducted those maneuvers on the basis of what are international waters and
that artificial line that had been created,'' he said. ''This foray by the
Libyans was nothing new. They have frequently harassed our aircraft out beyond
that line in the Mediterranean. We decided it was time to recognize what are the
international waters and behave accordingly.''

Pressed again on whether the American actions were a provocation, Mr. Reagan
added: ''No, we were, as I say, faced with the knowledge that we could not go on
recognizing this violation of international waters and that we were going to
plan our maneuvers as we would have planned them without this artificial line.

Ships Sent to Other Regions

''Now if I can call your attention to the fact that we periodically send our
ships into the Black Sea just for the same reason, just as the Soviet Union
sends ships into the Caribbean, just to assure everyone is observing
international waters and the rules pertaining to them. This is a rule that has
to be followed. If our men are fired upon, they're going to fire.''

Mr. Reagan smiled when asked if he would be sorry to see Colonel Qaddafi fall
from power. ''Diplomacy,'' he said, ''would have me not answer that question.''

Mr. Reagan also dealt humorously with questions suggesting that Edwin Meese 3d,
the White House counselor, erred in not awakening Mr. Reagan the night of the
incident. Mr. Meese, staying in California with the President, learned of the
battle about 11:05 P.M., Pacific daylight time, and did not inform Mr. Reagan
until about 4:24 A.M.

''Yes,'' Mr. Reagan said, when asked if five hours was quick enough notice.
''4:30 in the morning, California time, is as early as I want to be awakened.''

Noting that the American pilots made the immediate decision to shoot down the
Libyan planes, Mr. Reagan said that ''there was no decision to be made'' by him
''or they would have awakened me, if there had been a decision.''

''But, the incident had taken place, there was no other reason, so they waited
to call me when they had all the full information,'' he said.

This morning, in remarks to the ship's crew over the intercom system, Mr. Reagan
said, ''We all sleep a little better at night knowing you're on duty.''

Mr. Reagan, Mr. Meese and James Goodrich, Under Secretary of the Navy, arrived
on the carrier by helicopter at 10:50 A.M. for a visit that Mr. Reagan clearly
enjoyed. It was a brilliant, sunny day at sea with California's tan coastal
mountains dimly visible through the haze.

Mr. Reagan sat on the flight deck in an armchair, smiling broadly as jets swept
by at eye level. Then, he arose and delivered a military-style salute as each of
the support ships in the Constellation's battle group steamed past in his honor.


----

Air Crews Identified

Special to the New York Times

WASHINGTON, Aug. 20 - The Pentagon today identified the air crews that
reportedly shot down two Libyan SU-22 fighters yesterday.  Comdr. Henry M.
Kleeman, a 38-year-old squadron commander and veteran of the Vietnam War, was
the commanding officer of one of the F-14 Tomcat fighter planes involved in the
incident.

Commander Kleeman, a graduate of the Naval Academy class of 1965, is from
Clinton, Ill., and is commanding officer of squadron VS-41, which is based in
Oceana, Va. His plane's radar intercept officer was identified as Lieut. David
J. Venlet, 27, of Pottstown, Pa., a 1976 graduate of Annapolis.

The other plane was piloted by Lieut. Lawrence M. Muczynski, 28, of Houston, a
1976 graduate of Annapolis. Serving as radar intercept officer was Lieut. James
P. Anderson, 29, of West Palm Beach, Fla.

U.S. Denies Libyan Claims

Libyan claims of downing one of the F-14's in the brief encounter were described
as ''totally false'' by Deputy Secretary of Defense Frank C. Carlucci.

''This was an unprovoked attack on our aircraft and not designed to push Libya
in any particular way,'' Mr. Carlucci said in an interview on the NBC News
''Today'' program.

Asked whether the Reagan Administration had a policy of trying to make life
''uncomfortable'' for Colonel Qaddafi, Mr. Carlucci said he knew of no such
policy. ''On the other hand, we take a decided position of opposition to some of
the aggressive acts of Mr. Qaddafi and his blatant support for international
terrorism,'' Mr. Carlucci added. ''Certainly we have a policy. And if that
policy makes Mr.  Qaddafi uncomfortable, so be it.''

''We filed our protests; our ships are moving out of the area; the exercise is
over, and we consider the incident closed,'' the Deputy Secretary said. The
maneuver began Tuesday and was concluded yesterday afternoon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of the crew members of the jets involved in the
dogfight map of the Mediterranean, showing site of air battle photos of
President Reagan

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 21, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

False Alarm Against Gun Control

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 478 words


In the eyes of the National Rifle Association, David Moorehead, a gunsmith and
disabled Vietnam veteran, is a hero for his service at home as well. Agents of
the Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms spent a lot of
time and money in 1976 prosecuting Mr. Moorehead for owning a machine gun. But
the weapon turned out to be an M-14 rifle, which he kept as a souvenir. And at
his acquittal, a Federal District Judge apologized for the shoddy treatment he
received at the hands of his Government.

A new film produced by the rifle association depicts the bureau's treatment of
Mr. Moorehead as routine. Representative John Dingell appears in the film to
call the bureau's agents ''Gestapos.'' The movie aims to persuade Congress to
abolish the agency.

We assume Congressmen are discriminating enough to know propaganda when they see
it. With virtually no control over guns in America, there is need for an agency
that tries to make the best of a bad situation.

In the two years since Glenn Dickerson became its director, the bureau has
shifted attention from individual violations to the thriving illegal interstate
traffic in guns. Its major targets are violent gangs, hate groups, narcotics
dealers (who often trade guns for drugs) and organized crime. During a recent
18-month period, two-thirds of its arrests were of persons with criminal
records.

Still, the N.R.A. campaign has hurt. The Administration cut more than $20
million from the agency's budget of $150 million, reducing its staff of 3,700 by
400. After another barrage of complaints, an effort to restore $5 million by the
House Appropriations Committee was recently defeated.

The N.R.A. also wants to weaken the bureau's main statutory powers, contained in
the already inadequate 1968 gun control act. The association supports a bill,
introduced by Senator James McClure and Representative Harold Volkmer, that
would loosen the curbs on interstate gun transactions and prohibit surprise
inspections of gun dealers' records. In all, 53 senators support the measure.

All this enthusiasm to restrain the agency is misguided. The proliferation of
illegal guns and gun trafficking is a national problem. If anything, the
firearms bureau isn't doing enough.

Indeed, a study by the Police Foundation three years ago concluded that the
bureau did not fully exploit the 1968 law. The foundation urged the agency to be
more aggressive and not to rely so much on voluntary compliance. The only change
worth considering is shifting the bureau to the Justice Department, for better
coordination with other law enforcement.

The propaganda should not be allowed to becloud the truth: this is no time to
weaken either the bureau or the gun control laws.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 22, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LOSS OF HOPE LEADS VIETNAMESE TO BRAVE THE SEA

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


Tran Thi Yen, her husband and their three young children fled from Vietnam
because, she said, ''we wanted to have a future for the children.'' Three other
young women from southern Vietnam nodded sympathetically, as if to say that they
had escaped for the same reason.

Today, three of the four are widows, and 9 of their 11 children are dead. How
many people died on their boat, how many families were lost without survivors,
will never be known. The 16 who made it as far as a refugee camp here know only
that there were more than 70 aboard when their boat left the southern fishing
port of Rach Gia on June 28.

While the debate goes on outside Vietnam over whether the thousands who continue
to flee do so merely to improve their material wellbeing, the ''boat people''
who reach shore give the same reasons that those who preceded them have been
giving since 1975 to explain their decision to flee.

Feelings of Hopelessness

The reasons can be summarized as a sense of hopelessness, a loss of faith that
Vietnam under its present regime will become a livable country again in their
lifetimes.

Some report that they never had any hope, because any connection, however
slight, with the regimes that governed in Saigon from 1954 until 1975 is held
against them and their families. Others say they greeted the Communist victory
with hope, believing that whatever their doubts about the system, the end of the
war meant peace, national reconciliation and reconstruction of the ravaged
country.

However modest their education, the refugees volunteer sooner or later that a
major factor was the absence of liberty.  The conversations are long because the
interpreter has been cautioned not to put questions in a leading way. Mrs. Yen
first cited her hopes for her children's future and then the fact that her
husband, a hairdresser, could not work at his job when the electricity was cut
off four days out of seven. The continual imposition of petty taxes also made
work fruitless, she said.

But they would not have stayed even if life were materially easier, the
25-year-old woman said, ''because we had no liberty.''

Perils Were Known in Advance

She is alone now and smiling determinedly so as not to burden an outsider with
her grief. Like the other boat people who have reached land, she said she and
her husband had known about the perils with which nature and man confront those
who set out in coastal fishing craft across the ocean, but they took the risk
willingly. What the survivors universally say is presumably also true for those
whose boats disappear without trace.

Hong Kong officials say that as the typhoon season advances, there is a
significant increase in the number of boats reaching here and neighboring Macao
on which many passengers have died from hunger, thirst and exposure, and many
survivors are in a state of serious malnutrition. Mrs. Yen's boat fits that
description.

About half of those aboard were from Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, the
others from towns and villages of the Mekong River delta. They included people
without a past that was objectionable to the present Vietnamese authorities as
well as junior officers and petty officials of the Saigon regime who had been
released from ''reeducation'' camps.

Objective Was Singapore

They set out in the hope of reaching Singapore or to find in the sea lanes
leading to that active port a freighter that would pick them up. But on their
second day at sea the waves became so high that they took a vote and decided to
turn back. The next day a wave carried away most of their food and water.

For four days they drifted helplessly, seeing neither ship nor shore. ''The
children began to die, the littlest ones first,'' said Dinh Hien, a former
lieutenant who after the death of the boat's owner acted as the group leader.

On the sixth day after their decision to turn back, their engine no longer
working, they spotted two fishing boats and hopes rose.  ''We had buried five
children in the sea the day before,'' said Mr.  Hien. The boats got close enough
for the refugees to shout at them, but their crews paid no heed. ''That day,
grown-ups began to die,'' Mr. Hien said.

Boat Drifts Away From Islands

Two islands came into sight, after a night of storm, and they ripped out planks
from the deck to try to improvise oars. ''But the force of man was not enough
against the force of nature,'' Mr. Hien said. ''The winds carried us away.''
Death continued to carry off passengers, and their near ones no longer kept the
bodies in hope of burying them on land.

Ships and boats passed close to them but none stopped, perhaps because the crews
did not see the clothes that they were waving or the fires they lit at night.

On the 15th day a freighter, the Maersk Pinto, stopped nearby and began lowering
food, water and clothes by rope. But the waves, higher than a house, the
survivors said, smashed their boat against the freighter and it capsized.

''They threw rings to us,'' Mr. Hien said, ''but most didn't have the strength
to reach them.'' Four men climbed for safety on ropes lowered from the ship, but
one fell to his death when he was near the top. ''I climbed with my teeth,''
said a teen-age boy. By the time the freighter had lowered a lifeboat, there
were only 13 left to be saved, two of them young children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 22, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Books of The Times

BYLINE: Manipulating the Past, By ANATOLE BROYARD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 775 words


SOUVENIRS. By W.D. Wetherell. 196 pages. Random House. $10.95.

''Patching up the past'' is what Elaine Collier does for a living.  She repairs
home movies, family albums, scrapbooks, letters and personal mementos. Perhaps
she takes such an interest in other people's lives because she herself has none.
She spends all her free time taking care of her widowed mother, who has been
mildly deranged by the death of her husband in Korea and by the fact that she
always wanted a son and never had one.

''There was never any telling,'' Elaine says, ''what clients wanted from their
pasts.'' Mostly, they seem to want it freshened or brightened up, improved a bit
if possible. Some pasts are full and others are empty. One middle-age woman
brings Elaine a tattered scrapbook of a cross-country trip she took when she was
a young girl with her father and her mother, who was dying of cancer.

The scrapbook contains receipts from hospitals in various small towns, copies of
prescriptions to ease her mother's pain, a leaflet warning farmers of
white-fringed beetles. It was the only life the woman had had and she wanted to
preserve it for reasons that can only remain mysterious to anyone else.

Truth or Distortion

In ''Souvenirs,'' his first novel, W.D. Wetherell has chosen a theme -how we
manipulate the past - which contains an implicit comment on how we write novels.
Shall we reproduce our pasts as faithfully as we can, or shall we distort them
to make a better story? Shall we stick to the lives we had, or invent those we
need to explain ourselves to ourselves?

Powers, a handsome, successful middle-age man, comes to Elaine with box-loads of
his dead son John's effects: films, photographs, letters, scrapbooks, the record
of an all-American boy's life until he was killed in Vietnam. He wants her to
edit John out of these mementos, to eliminate him and close up the hole he has
left in his parents' lives. Powers says that his wife is obsessed with a dead
son and this is the only way to save her. If the evidence of John disappears, he
argues, she will forget him. People, he says, only need an excuse to forget.

Elaine protests at first, but like a novelist, she finds the project
irresistible and begins editing John out of his parents' lives and his own, as
if he had never existed. But then a problem arises: what shall she do with all
the bits and pieces of John's life lying scattered all over her studio? She asks
his father and he tells her to do whatever she likes with them.

But she cannot throw them away: it would be like killing John a second time. It
wouldn't be fair to ''Souvenirs'' or to Mr. Wetherell to tell you what happens,
but a close reader of fiction should be able to make at least a preliminary
surmise.

Of course, John is a symbol of the American past, especially the 1960's and
Vietnam. But there's more to ''Souvenirs'' than that.  Though Mr. Wetherell's
parallels are a bit too tidy and though there are a few false notes in this
first novel, there's never any doubt that he's a promising writer.

A Sacrificial Victim

He has been just a little timid with Elaine. Instead of making her merely the
sacrificial victim of the plot, he might have given her more to do and to be.
What there is of her is consistently interesting. He writes, for example, that
''she had never been willing to date men her own age in college, finding that
she knew them so well that such a relationship seemed oddly incestuous.'' When
she thought about them afterward, ''she would feel a combination of emotions
difficult to describe - the happiness a baby might feel surrounded by other
babies in a small, comfortably heated room; the sadness and nostalgia a veteran
might feel reading about fellow soldiers who had fallen upon hard times.''

There are other good details. Perfumed love letters rot faster. And it is the
final salutations that fade first in most letters, because they are written more
carefully, the pen held more delicately. One of Elaine's habits, when she first
meets someone, is to imagine what he or she would look like weeping. And then
there is a vast thrift shop she visits, where everything ever discarded in this
country in the last 50 years seems to have ended up. It is the sort of place one
can imagine Kafka describing.

The central idea in ''Souvenirs'' is one that we all might want to paste in our
scrapbooks. That is, if anyone still keeps scrapbooks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of W.D. Wetherell

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 22, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words


Mid-air explosion of Taiwan jet reportely kills all 110 aboard 1
Polish press eases attacks on union, but tensions persist 3
''Boat people'' are still fleeing Vietnam, and for same reasons 3
Qaddafi, condemning U.S., vows to defend Gulf of Sidra 4
Egyptians view Israel with in- creasing skepticism 4
Students in Israel get arms training in immigration program 5
Iranian exiles plan new military actions against Islamic regime 5
Around the World 5

Government/Politics
Young Americans for Freedom enjoy an awaited rise to power 7
F.B.I. in agreement to limit political spying of groups in Chicago 7
Commission of Democrats examines nominating procedures 7
Miss Holtzman and Rosen meet in their first debate 26
Nassau official is convicted of perjury and obstructing justice 26
Koch begins campaigning, says Carey is vulnerable 27
Carey says he opposes casino gambling 27

General
Black businessman aids French family robbed in Los Angeles 5
Around the Nation 6
Fishermen try out Bighorn River, site of Crow protest 6
California expands spraying while talks open in Japan 6
Atlanta judge opened Williams' trial to camera coverage 8
Indianapolis man kills his children, his wife and her mother 8
City Hall basks in the summer doldrums 25
Deliberations begin in the trial of a former Customs official 26
At an Audubon camp in Connecticut, 33 adults soak up nature 26
Boy, 14, shot to death in dispute involving bicycle 27

Arts/Entertainment
Jones and Plummer in ''Othello'' at Stratford, Conn.  9
Progress made on improving N.Y.S. Theater's acoustics 9
Jean Fineberg quartet plays at Citicorp Atrium 9
Chamber Opera triple bill focuses on Salieri 11
''Souvenirs'' by W.D. Wetherell reviewed 12
Mostly Mozart features a mid- 18th-century chamber concert 12
''Comin'' At Ya,' a movie in 3-D 12
Christopher Cross concert at Radio City Music Hall 12

Industry/Labor
The White House denied a ''possible'' plan to end the air strike 8
Ford Motor Company will announce safety-related recalls 8
Eastern is cutting 3,000 jobs as revenues decline 8

Education/Welfare
Education Department revoking 30 ''unnecessary'' rules 8
Nashville School Board loses bid to press ahead on integration 24

Style
Consumer Saturday 21
When buying a video cassette recorder 21
De Gustibus: Guests are judged by how they judge the food 21
Electronic pest control comes under scrutiny 21
A sports store for women 21

Sports
George Vecsey on the worries of a wildlife group 16
Giants to start Dennis again in place of Haynes 16
Baird and Baker recall first Jets-Giants exhibition game 16
Sanchez stops Gomez in eighth, keeps featherweight title 17
Another round for Smokin' Joe Frazier 17
Royals defeat Yankees, 4-0 17
Mets lose third 3d straight, 2-0 17
College Football Association approves rival television pact 17
14 entered in tonight's Cane Pace at Yonkers 18
Seedings continue to cause problems in women's tennis 19
Tigers beat Rangers for 7th straight victory 19
U.S. leads Soviet in dual swim meet 20

Obituaries
Hung-hsun Ling, figured in building of China's railroads 14

Features/Notes
Man in the News: Arthur A. Hartman, outgoing envoy in Paris 2
Going Out Guide 10
Saturday News Quiz 12
About New York 27
Notes on People 48

News Analysis
Douglas Martin discusses impact of OPEC meeting 1

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 22

Mrs. Kirkpatrick's loud words The power of the prosecutor Jerry-built baseball
playoffs Letters 22
Barbara Lenmark-Ellis: troublemakers in the business world 23
Sidney Blumenthal: trickle-down effects from recent mergers 23
Thomas E. Lovejoy: falcons against pigeons in Manhattan 23
Gary F. Jonas: creating a viable small business policy 23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INVESTIGATORS SAY THAT EVIDENCE IN ATTACK ON LIBYAN GOES UNUSED

BYLINE: By Philip Taubman, Special to The New York Times; The following article
is based on reporting by Philip Taubman and Jeff F. Gerth and was written by Mr.
Taubman

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1451 words

DATELINE: FORT COLLINS, Colo., Aug. 22


Federal and local prosecutors have not actively pursued a large body of evidence
that investigators believe links the suspect in the attempted assassination of a
Libyan student here last year to a former agent for the Central Intelligence
Agency, according to officials here and in Washington.

The former agent, Edwin P. Wilson, is a fugitive from charges that he illegally
exported explosives to Libya and trained terrorists there.

The sole defendant in the Colorado shooting case is Eugene A.  Tafoya, who was
charged by the local District Attorney with shooting Mr. Zagallai twice in the
head on the evening of Oct. 14, 1980. His case is scheduled to go to trial in
Colorado district court early in November.

According to Federal law-enforcement officials, the evidence, discovered five
months ago, includes banking and corporate documents that suggest Mr. Wilson
arranged, and may have financed, the attack against the Libyan student, Faisal
Zagallai. The student was an outspoken critic of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the
Libyan leader.

No Indictment Planned

Various investigations of Mr. Wilson have been marked, according to officials,
by a lack of coordination and a general concern that if Mr. Wilson stands trial,
he could produce documents and other materials that could compromise national
security and prove embarrassing to several Federal agencies.

And despite the evidence, which several Federal investigators said would be
sufficient to indict Mr. Wilson as a co-conspirator in the case, prosecutors are
not now planning to indict Mr. Wilson.

Before he was indicted on the export charges, Mr. Wilson lived on a Virginia
estate outside Washington, ostensibly managing an importexport business that he
began in the 1970's while working as a consultant for a Navy intelligence unit.
As a contract agent for the C.I.A., he had played a role in the Bay of Pigs
invasion of Cuba and other undercover operations.

Lack of cooperation between Federal and local investigative agencies is partly
responsible for the failure to indict Mr. Wilson in the present case, according
to local and Federal law-enforcement officials. Stuart A. Van Meveren, the
Larimer County District Attorney, whose jurisdiction includes Fort Collins,
said, ''I don't even know if my office has all the evidence.''

However, according to interviews with a wide range of lawenforcement officials
familiar with the case, a more significant reason has been that the Government
has not been inclined to move aggressively against Mr. Wilson in areas where his
conduct has been questioned and criminal activity has been suspected.

A Lack of Coordination

At various times over the last five years, more than half a dozen Federal
agencies have investigated Mr. Wilson's business and financial activities, but,
officials have acknowledged in interviews, these inquiries were never
coordinated.

Gerald J. Rafferty, an assistant United States Attorney in Denver, the Justice
Department office that would most likely have jurisdiction for the filing of
Federal charges, said his office ''has no interested in the Tafoya matter.'' He
said that he assumed the Washington office was monitoring the case.

Carol E. Burce, an assistant United States Attorney in Washington, the office
that is prosecuting Mr. Wilson on the export charges, said her office was
''following developments'' in the Colorado case.  Other Justice Department
officials said there were no current plans to file Federal charges against
anyone in the Fort Collins shooting.

The Fort Collins case, investigators said, has been troubled by many of the same
jurisdictional and leadership problems that hampered previous investigations
involving Mr. Wilson.

No Single Prosecutor in Case

For example, no single prosecutor has overseen the gathering of evidence linking
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Tafoya, which was found last April in a court-authorized
search of Mr. Tafoya's residence in Truth or Consequences, N.M. And, both local
and Federal officials said, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, with limited
guidance from the United States Attorney's office in Washington, has not always
shared information with the authorities in Fort Collins.

The District Attorney here, Mr. Van Meveren, said he had no plans to charge Mr.
Wilson. He said, ''I'll leave the international aspects of the case to the
Federal authorities. We're not an investigative agency and the Fort Collins
police are not equipped to undertake a full-scale international investigation.''

Mr. Van Meveren added, ''I'm not in direct contact with anyone in the United
States Attorney's office in Denver or Washington.'' Mr. Van Meveren said that
his office, which has 10 attorneys to handle more than 1,000 felony cases a
year, did not have the ability to extend the investigation beyond Mr. Tafoya.

The evidence found in Mr. Tafoya's home in April included these materials,
according to court records here and Federal lawenforcement officials:

- Banking and other financial records, including deposit slips.  These showed
that after Mr. Tafoya visited Libya in January 1981, three months after the
attack on Mr. Zagallai, his checking account at the Western Bank in Truth or
Consequences was credited with a deposit of about $8,000 received in a wire
transfer from the Union Bank of Switzerland. On the basis of this and other
evidence investigators believe that Mr. Tafoya met with Mr. Wilson on his visit
to Tripoli, and that Mr. Wilson may have arranged for the deposit as a partial
payment to Mr. Tafoya for the assassination attempt.

- Entry stamps in four United States passports held by Mr. Tafoya.  The stamps
showed that he visited Libya and Malta in the summer of 1980 at the same time
Mr. Wilson was in those countries.  Investigators believe that the two men met
on these trips to discuss plans to attack Mr. Zagallai. It was at this time,
according to State Department officials, that Colonel Qaddafi was starting a
concerted effort to eliminate opponents to his regime living in the Middle East,
Europe and the United States. After the shooting of Mr.  Zagallai, the Libyan
Government said publicly that he was one of the opponents marked for
assassination.

- Incorporation papers for a company called Operational Systems International,
which Mr. Tafoya was apparently planning to file in Virginia. In the mid-1970's,
Mr. Wilson operated a company with the same name, according to corporate records
in Virginia. Investigators believe that Mr. Wilson may have been attempting to
establish Mr.  Tafoya in business.

- Seventeen pages of handwritten notes made by Mr. Tafoya, which included the
names, addresses and physical descriptions of former business associates of Mr.
Wilson. These notations also contained descriptions of individual behavior
patterns, such as comments about how these people traveled to work and spent
their leisure time. The notes also included the names and addresses of
corporations and individuals in Europe and in the United States with whom Mr.
Wilson, Federal prosecutors believe, is currently doing business.

- Mr. Tafoya's personal telephone book, which contained numbers for Mr. Wilson
in Libya, London and Geneva, as well as the name of a woman who was a close
friend of Mr. Wilson, and a code name identified by former associates of Mr.
Wilson as one he frequently used in telephone and Telex communications.

Wilson's Name Arises at Hearing

In an effort to ensure that Mr. Tafoya's $500,000 bail was not reduced at a
hearing July 8, the local prosecutors attempted to show the case had wider
implications by introducing other evidence linking Mr. Wilson to Mr. Tafoya in
court testimony on that day.

Randolph Ray Martinez, a Fort Collins police detective who has investigated the
attempted murder of Mr. Zagallai, testified at the hearing. He told the court
that a former business associate of Mr.  Wilson, Kevin P. Mulcahy, was familiar
with Mr. Wilson's use of Swiss bank accounts to pay a group of former Green
Berets recruited to travel to Libya in 1977 to help train terrorists there. Mr.
Tafoya had served with the Green Berets, or Army Special Forces, while in
Vietnam.

Mr. Martinez was cut off by Mr. Tafoya's defense attorney, a transcript of the
hearing shows. Mr. Wilson's name surfaced again only in later court hearings to
determine whether Mr. Martinez had violated a court order that barred anyone
involved in the case from discussing it with reporters.

Mr. Martinez, who traveled to London earlier this month in an effort to pursue
leads in the Tafoya case, refused to comment last week when asked about the case
and Mr. Wilson's involvement in it. He referred all questions to the district
attorney here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN EUROPE, IRONIC REACTION TO NEUTRON MOVE

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 715 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Aug. 16


While European leaders expressed dismay and anger about President Reagan's
decision to produce neutron weapons, some other Europeans were neither surprised
nor entirely displeased by the move.

''It's just another step in America's campaign of rearmament, and it's bound to
help our movement,'' said Meg Beresford, organizing secretary for European
Nuclear Disarmament, which is known as END.

Miss Beresford, 43 years old, has reason to be encouraged. As the group's only
full-time employee, she and a handful of other English and European political
activists have watched and helped foster the growth of the once-tiny nuclear
disarmament campaign into a politically significant force in England and
northern Europe.

''END has become a genuine grass-roots political movement, rather similar in
some ways to the American anti-Vietnam War movement,'' Miss Beresford said.
''Every day we get hundreds of letters from all kinds of people who have never
been politically active who want to help stop the bomb.''

The organization, which has received limited attention in the United States, is
a vocal alliance of European political activists, unions, churches and
individuals who favor nuclear disarmament, by reciprocal agreement wherever
possible, unilaterally if necessary.

Their goal, in the words of E.P. Thompson, a university professor and a founder
of the group, is to forge an alliance across the Continent that will be
dedicated to building a nuclear-free zone in Europe ''from Poland to Portugal,''
as the group's slogan describes it.

Started in April 1980, the movement has been fueled by the European perception
that if a nuclear war is fought by the United States and the Soviet Union,
Europe will be the battleground. This fear has been heightened by the strong
words of the Reagan Administration.

Even earlier, however, many Europeans were alarmed by a shift in emphasis in the
debates of military strategists from deterring any nuclear war toward how to
fight one with less than apocalyptic results.

Some people contend that the disarmament group has already peaked and that its
effort will ultimately fail because it is a chaotic coalition of parties with
widely divergent goals. French Government officials and military analysts say
the movement has little support in France, where the Government is strongly
pro-NATO, or in Italy.

The movement, however, has revived the once-moribund Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament, which flourished in Britain in the early 1960's. According to Miss
Beresford, who like most of the founders of European Nuclear Disarmament is also
an officer in the older organization, C.N.D. has 1,000 active groups in England
and they have grown by 3,500 members this year. The END Bulletin, she added,
which helps finance the movement, has about 5,000 subscribers in Britain.

In addition, a March for Peace, organized by women from Scandinavian countries
who walked to Paris, drew about 30,000 people to a rally in the French capital
on Aug. 6, the anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima.

Finally, the movement has had political consequences, including a polarization
of debate on the issue in many European countries.  Britain's Labor Party is
officially committed to unilateral disarmament, and many political analysts
believe that if it regained power it would be hard-pressed to disregard its
promises. Antinuclear views have strong political constituencies in the
Netherlands, Belgium, Norway, Demark, Sweden and West Germany.

Supporters of a stronger NATO agree with the comment by Julian Critchley, a
Conservative Member of Parliament and chairman of the party's military
committee, that the movement is more a matter of the heart than the head. But
they also believe that what they see as the Reagan Administration's
insensitivity to the significance of the movement and actions like the decision
on neutron weapons, which was announced without consulting Europeans, tend to
feed fears of nuclear holocaust that have helped give European Nuclear
Disarmament and similar groups political respectability.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MALAYSIANS DEPICT CHINA AS A THREAT

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, Aug. 22


Malaysia's month-old Government is emphasizing the theme that China remains a
major threat to the non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia, and it is urging
the United States to bear this in mind.

Worried by Peking's skillful exploitation of Vietnam's alliance with the Soviet
Union and invasion and continuing occupation of Cambodia, the Government of
Prime Minister Mahathir bin Mohammad has quickly moved to make public the
sentiments that have long been harbored here but have been muted while Malaysia
followed the policy of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

That policy, set largely by Thailand, on whose borders with Laos and Cambodia
Vietnamese forces are stationed, is to depict Vietnam as the principal threat to
the region and as a corollary to view China as a friendly power. China
collaborates with Thailand in supporting the anti-Vietnamese Cambodian forces
that operate on the Thai-Cambodian border.

There Was Previous Skepticism

Even under the previous Government of Prime Minister Hussein Onn, who retired
because of ill health, Malaysia and Indonesia regarded with skepticism the
anti-Hanoi line set by Thailand and Singapore.  But they gave their support
because loyalty to the Southeast Asian group demanded that they accept the lead
of Thailand, the association's so-called front-line nation.

But earlier this month, on a visit to Indonesia, Dr. Mahathir, a physician, in
effect broke with the policy by publicly stating that he did not believe that
Vietnam represented a dire threat to the rest of Southeast Asia. Since Vietnam
invaded Cambodia, Thailand has consistently depicted itself as under a military
threat.

In interviews here this week, two leading policy makers stressed the Chinese
threat, rather than the Vietnamese, to Southeast Asia, and they urged the United
States not to disregard the security interests of its friends in Southeast Asia.

In separate interviews, Malaysia's Deputy Prime Minister, Musa bin Hitam, and
its Foreign Minister, Muhammad Ghazali bin Shafie, voiced unusually strong
displeasure with the attitude of Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China when he
visited here earlier this month. On the issue that Malaysia considers the
touchstone of its relationship with Peking - Chinese support for insurgent
Communist movements in this region - Mr. Ghazali said, ''We didn't get
anything.''

Peking Ignores a Demand

An Asian diplomat who has studied the verbatim transcript of the Mahathir-Zhao
meeting, which he described as short and cool, confirmed the ministers'
assertion that Mr. Zhao did not respond to the standing Malaysian demand that
Peking publicly denounce its backing for the Communist Party of Malaya, which
remains in armed insurrection. Mr. Zhao reiterated that the Chinese Communist
Party owed ''moral and political support'' to the Malaysian Communists.

Mr. Musa, a former university lecturer in international relations, voiced
particular annoyance about the recent appearance of a new radio station of the
Malaysian Communists, after China had assured Malaysia that it would end the
transmissions that for many years had been beamed here from southern China. Mr.
Musa said that on its last day of broadcasting, the China-based station
announced that another station would continue the broadcasts.

A new station, believed to be a mobile unit somewhere in the jungle on either
side of the Malaysian-Thai border, indeed began broadcasting the day after the
Chinese station shut down. ''Somebody has to give funds and ideas to the new
radio,'' Mr. Ghazali said, alluding to what Malaysia believes to be continued
Chinese support.

Sympathy for Vietnam

The Malaysian leadership is ready to recognize a major Vietnamese role in
Southeast Asia, particularly in Cambodia and Laos, rather than insist, as does
China, on unremitting hostility toward Vietnam.  While Mr. Musa and Mr. Ghazali
condemned the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, they also spoke sympathetically
of Vietnam's struggle for national survival.

Mr. Ghazali said that Vietnam was entitled to play toward Laos and Cambodia a
role similar to that played by Indonesia toward its partners in the Southeast
Asian group - that of the biggest country in the group. ''The anchor,'' the
Foreign Minister said, ''but not the dominant power.''

A senior diplomat of a strongly anti-Vietnamese Asian nation said that in view
of two recent events, even Singapore and Thailand were attaching more weight to
the Malaysian view. The events were Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s
announcement in Peking in June that the United States was ready to consider arms
sales to China and America's unwillingness at last month's United Nations
conference on Cambodia to side fully with the five Asean nations when China
disapproved of parts of their resolution designed to preclude a return to power
of former Prime Minister Pol Pot.

The warmth of the Reagan Administration toward Peking has rung alarm bells
throughout non-Communist Southeast Asia. ''With the overemphasis and the
preoccupation with the threat from the Vietnam and the Soviet Union,'' Mr. Musa
said, ''we might fall into a Chinese trap.''

''The United States is comfortable in global terms with China,'' Mr. Ghazali
said. ''But from the regional viewpoint, China is dangerous to us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Veteran Acquitted in Assault

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 82 words


McKINNEY, Tex., Aug. 22 (UPI) - A 33-year-old Vietnam veteran who blamed a
combat flashback for a standoff with the police in which he fired a shotgun from
a window of his home has been found not guilty of aggravated assault by reason
of insanity. Michael Ashley, who served in the Air Force, said the verdict
yesterday was a victory for Vietnam veterans who suffered from trauma caused by
the war. His five-hour standoff with the police occurred Oct. 17, 1980.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OTHER WORLD EVENTS;
Debate Over Rank

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 129 words


One of Chairman Mao's not-so-great thoughts, in 1965, had it that military ranks
were uncomradely. So the Red Army abolished stars and bars, leaving four million
soldiers to count pockets on baggy green uniforms to decide whether they should
be bracing for brass. But there was no time for pocket-counting on the
battlefield, as Chinese strategists discovered during China's disastrous 1979
invasion of Vietnam. Since then, Chinese officials have debated whether to bring
back ranks. Last week, it seemed they had made up their minds when Chief of
Staff Yang Dezhi announced that ''to strengthen the modernization program in the
army,'' ranks would be coming back.  Yesterday, however, the Peking Government
denied its own report.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION;
Hasty Words;
On Agent Orange

BYLINE: By Caroline Rand Herron and Michael Wright

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 291 words


Agent Orange, like the war in which it was used extensively, has left behind a
long-lasting residue.  Last month, an epidemiologist who has been hired by the
Veterans Administration to design a study of the effects of Agent Orange - a
defoliant sprayed over broad swatches of Vietnam - on American troops told a
state legislative committee in California there was ''little evidence'' that
they were harmful or widespread. ''The fear which is generated by the current
publicity,'' said Dr. Gary H. Spivey, ''is very likely to be the most serious
consequence.''

Last week, spokesmen for several veterans organizations said Dr.  Spivey was
wasn't fit to conduct the inquiry (for which he and an associate will be paid
$114,288). ''By these statements, Dr. Spivey has clearly lost all credibility in
the eyes of Vietnam veterans,'' said Jon Furst, chairman of a coalition of
veterans groups. Such organizations, along with individual veterans, contended
that the herbicide is responsible for maladies ranging from cancer to liver
damage.

Dr. Spivey, on the staff of the School of Public Health at the University of
California at Los Angeles, denied that he had already made up his mind. He said
that he was only reflecting what he had found ''in the evidence that exists.''
And the evidence is pretty skimpy, he said. ''This doesn't mean that the claims
are wrong,'' the doctor said. ''The only thing I've tried to say is that we
can't tell one way or another from the literature.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Caroline Rand Herron and Michael Wright

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONFLICT IN REAGAN'S FAVORITE GOALS

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1231 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


There are very few general rules of politics that hold true almost all the time.
One that never fails is: Hold onto your wallets when they start talking about
future deficits and military spending. This year, you may need both hands.

President Reagan continues to insist publicly that he will increase military
spending by 7 percent a year after inflation for the next five years, cut social
spending by $130 billion over three years, reduce taxes by $750 billion over
five years and balance the Federal budget in 1984. Some of the President's
economic and budget advisers are now saying privately that this will not work
unless social spending is cut deeper and projected military spending is cut too.
And even then, they are skeptical about balancing the budget by 1984 because
they do not think that the tax cuts will stimulate enough economic growth to
overcome the $750 billion tax cut.

A group of legislators, calling themselves the Reform Caucus, seems to be saying
that whatever the growth rate, the only way to bring about needed increases in
military spending is to cut back on projected increases in military spending to
avoid a backlash, because more military increases while social programs are cut
further will only result in popular demands to end all increases for the
Pentagon. Led by people such as Senator Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado, and
Representative G. William Whitehurst, Republican of Vermont, the caucus wants
the Pentagon to take the initiative in finding economies, terminating
unnecessary military programs and devising new military strategies.

Meanwhile, a relatively silent minority of liberals, still concentrating on
trying to prove that Mr. Reagan's electoral landslide was merely an anti-Carter
vote that carried no mandate, thinks that the whole Reagan program is untenable,
that even a 5 percent real increase for the Pentagon may be excessive and that
trying to stimulate the economy by cutting taxes will lead only to larger and
larger budget deficits and runaway inflation.

These are all theories. What are the good hard facts and probable truths? There
aren't many to go on. If precedent is any guide, the prognosis for continued
increases in military spending is not good.  Except in wartime - World War II,
Korea and Vietnam - defense expenditures as a percentage of gross national
product and total Federal outlays generally decreased; they never increased by
more than 1 percent to 1.5 percent for more than one year.

At the same time, it is true that military spending is much less of a burden,
measured in terms of gross national product and Federal outlays, than 10 or 20
years ago. The Pentagon will receive 25 percent of the Federal budget in fiscal
1982 as compared with 32 percent in 1972 and 46 percent in 1962. Perhaps these
two ''facts'' will cancel each other out. Perhaps public tolerance for military
spending increases will depend on what the Russians are doing and how the
American economy fares.

It is likely that Federal budget outlays for the coming fiscal year will be
about $695 billion with $222 billion for defense and with a deficit of at least
$42.5 billion. How high that deficit might go next year and in the coming years
was very much the central issue for the Reagan White House last week. The blood
began to flow 10 days ago, when The New York Times reported that the deficit
could run to $60 billion. The word was that David A. Stockman, director of the
Office of Management and Budget and Treasury Secretary Donald T.  Regan wanted
to start slashing Pentagon spending by about $10 billion to $20 billion a year.
Meanwhile, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was also out in the California
sunshine trying to persuade the vacationing President to move on a new order of
strategic nuclear forces that would cost another $200 billion.

Mr. Reagan and his team were trapped between their two most cherished goals -
balancing the budget and building up military spending. Nothing could display
their agony better than the events of last Tuesday. White House communications
director David Gergen told reporters in Washington that because of economic
changes, ''There is an upward creep of perhaps a few billion, but the increase
in the (1982) deficit will be less than double-digit.'' Then Larry Speakes, the
deputy White House spokesman, said of the deficit, ''I doubt if it will be much
in excess of our $42 billion figure.'' Then Mr.  Reagan himself appeared, saying
there would be no increase at all.  How he could keep this pledge without
vetoing appropriations bills was not clear. He also let it be known that
military spending would increase 7 percent a year.

By week's end, this much did seem clear: The President was looking for a further
$75 billion to cut from the 1983 and 1984 budgets. Mr.  Gergen acknowledged this
would necessitate more social program cuts.  White House budgeteers continued to
say the new cuts would have to include Medicare and Social Security and the
Pentagon. Reporters were also told two other things that had the full ring of
truth. One was that Mr. Stockman was out in California basically seeking
''guidance'' from Mr. Reagan on what to cut. The other was that Mr.  Reagan
''has not made these choices yet.''

The best measure of political agony is slowness in making decisions. Whichever
way Mr. Reagan goes - for a balanced budget or for more military spending - he
will antagonize important constitutents. The strategy of many great leaders
under similar circumstances has been to temporize and hope for a miracle. But
this has not been Mr. Reagan's style so far. He seems to take a certain amount
of pleasure in making choices and sticking to them.

If he holds to this form, he is likely to choose economic over defense
imperatives. There seems to be an Eisenhower-like quality to his general
thinking, a sense that economic solvency is the essence of American strength and
security. A few well-placed Administration officials speculated that Mr. Reagan
might indeed go in that direction if he can find the right trappings and
explanations.

They point to the fact that Mr. Reagan delayed his expected decision on new
strategic nuclear weapons by three to five weeks to see if the ''package'' could
be so constructed as to compensate for missing pieces - such as no large and
complicated basing scheme for the MX. For example, they mused, a feeling of
America on the move again could derive as much from shooting down Libyan planes
as from stepped-up military spending. Mr. Reagan looks on the Pentagon budget as
a signal to the Soviets and the rest of the world. He may be discovering, they
said, other ways of signalling.

And yet, Mr. Reagan might just stick to pursuing both his stated goals for a
year, no matter what, just as he stuck to his position in the air controllers
strike. Presidents often act as if they were born under lucky stars. Like so
many before him, he got to the White House despite incredible odds and most
experts' advice that he had no chance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Financial graph

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Enough Said To Libya

BYLINE: By Joseph J. Sisco

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In downing two Libyan jets over international waters the United States has
accomplished both a successful military operation and a likely salutary
political demonstration. The Reagan Administration has made it a top policy
objective to restore the credibility and integrity of American power and
influence abroad.  This is based on the sound judgement that a world in which
American power is respected will be a more peaceful world in the long run. It is
within this context that the response to the Libyan air attack should be judged.

United States power and influence overseas will depend much more on fundamental
long-range considerations: Will we be able to make our economy sound again? Can
the needs of the military front line be provided within the limits of the
budgetary bottom line? Will the new Administration ultimately face up to the
politically sensitive decision calling for mandatory military service?Can we
deal with China so as to make the most of our options with both Moscow and
Peking and avoid giving each a card to play against us? Can we persue
effectively a policy of strength and negotiations with the Soviets?  Will we be
able to move towards a ''strategic consensus'' in the Middle East and the Gulf
while maintaining a key role in the peace process - one that meets our prime
concern over the Soviet challenge and the area's prime concern over the
Palestinian issue? And will we be better able to shape and influence the course
of events in the volatile third world?

Nevertheless, the Libyan jet shootdown, while no more than a blip on the
strategic and political radar screen of the Middle East and North Africa, does
mark a psychological and symbolic turnaround for the United States and eases the
post-Vietnam War inhibitions against applying our power effectively. There have
been too many stumbles in recent years: an American submarine rams a Japanese
ship; the failure to rescue the hostages in Iran; a tragic landing accident
taking a heavy toll of men and materiel on the same aircraft carrier, the
Nimitz, which made one wonder whether we could do anything military right. We
have become unaccustomed to a successful use of American military power.

We have moved from the role of world policeman in the 1960's, to a relative
noninvolvement in the 1970's, and this Administration now is seeking to develop
a policy of selective engagement of American power. Libya and the mercurial
meddler, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi who, with his recent de facto military
annexation of Chad, looks more like ''Il Duce'' of North Africa, has been
selected for attention by the Reagan Administration, and within the entire
confines of the councils of many governments one could almost hear the words,
''It could not happen to a nicer guy.''

A few months ago, a United States report gave credence to this view, listing 45
countries that have been the object of the Colonel's interference.

For some time now, the Administration has been eyeing the Colonel as a suitable
case for treatment and as an opportunity to display the country's new steel.
Based on the information thus far provided by the Pentagon, the attack on our
planes was not provoked, but neither was it totally an accidental happenstance.
The Gulf of Sidra was chosen deliberately. It was a test of Colonel Qaddafi. The
targets were both the Soviet Union and Libya.

Most of our European allies, judiciously quiet, remain nervous; Moscow, which is
in the throes of a crisis in the Soviet orbit and which distrusts Qaddafi, has
reacted in muted terms. With the exception of a few radical voices, there is not
likely to be any significant support of Libya from the Arab world, nor would any
cutoff of Libyan oil be joined by other OPEC countries. And Qaddafi would be
foolish indeed to take American hostages; this Administration is not apt to wait
14 months.

All this gives broad satisfaction, but sober afterthought is also in order. Is
this the end of the episode insofar as we are concerned, or is this only a first
step unless Colonel Qaddafi pulls in his horns. Moreover, while external
pressure may be helpful, any change in Libyan policy, if not leadership, largely
depends on the Libyan internal situation. And finally from our point of view, we
must be sensitive to the fact that the line between provocation, entrapment, and
readiness to respond militarily is a fine one.

It is legitimate for us to be ready to defend ourselves when attacked, but it
would be counterproductive if we are seen to be deliberately picking a fight.
This would give ammunition to those critics of the United States too prone to
see truculance rather than firmness and resolve. Such an American policy would
only feed neutralist tendencies in Europe, bolster Moscow's aims to sever us
from our NATO allies, and it would confuse those of our younger generation who
regrettably tend to view history as beginning and ending with the Vietnam War.

The show of military muscle and political will has been manifested; the point
has been well made. For our part, let us leave it at that, and a little less
crowing please. The F-14's have spoken most eloquently; there is no need for a
lot of additional rhetoric.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Joseph J. Sisco, a career diplomat, was Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs from 1974 to 1976.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA'S NEW FOREIGN POLICY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3957 words


Frank Church, former Democratic chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, now practices law in Washington. By Frank Church At his first White
House press conference, Ronald Reagan lambasted the Soviet Union. He said the
Russian leadership reserved ''the right to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat,''
in order to attain their goal of a one-world Communist state. His words, in one
sense, were right on target. He understood that most Americans would welcome his
indictment as reassurance that their tough-talking new President had no
intention of letting the Russianspush him around.

Like every other down-home American, I also distrust the Soviet Union. I too am
convinced that members of the Politburo, meeting at the Kremlin, dream of a
Communist world held firmly in their grasp.  But a sensible American policy
cannot rest upon Russian dreams; it must rest, instead, upon the real world in
which we live. The first six months of the Reagan Administration have been
marked by a collision between this real world and the single-minded anti-Soviet
ideology of the President and his principal advisers.

The Administration's view of the Soviet Union fails to distinguish between the
Russian leaders' more fanciful aspirations and their actual capabilities. The
attempt to translate this flawed analysis into foreign policy puts the United
States at odds with a diverse collection of stubbornly independent nations,
including our principal European allies, that are far less mesmerized by the
Kremlin than our present White House team.

In El Salvador, for example, the conflict between armed guerrillas and Goverment
forces is portrayed by the Reaganites as a ''textbook case'' of Soviet-inspired
insurgency, but Mexico, Venezuela and Western Europe disagree, viewing the
conflict as rooted in the intolerable condition of life in that beleaguered
land.

In the Middle East, the heralded journey by the Secretary of State, Alexander M.
Haig Jr., failed to elicit from Egypt, Israel, Jordan and Saudi Arabia a
''consensus of strategic concerns'' directed at the Soviet Union. The Saudis
said they regarded Israel, not Russia, as their principal enemy; they were happy
that the Reagan Administration had agreed to supply them with airborne radar
planes (Awacs), but they reserved the right to use the aircraft against Israel.
In two aerial attacks -against a reactor near Baghdad potentially capable of
supplying Iraq with nuclear weapons, and against a Palestinian guerrilla
headquarters in the center of Beirut - Israel showed it had different ideas from
Washington as to what constituted the greatest danger to its security.

In South Asia, we seem determined to repeat the mistake of 20 years ago, when we
armed the Pakistanis against the Soviet Union, only to see them turn the weapons
against India. Each of the combatants in the Indian-Pakistani war blamed the
United States for arming the other, while the Russians benefited in the role of
peacemaker. Now, because of the presence of Soviet forces in Afghanistan, Mr.
Reagan has approved a new $2-billion military aid package for Pakistan, although
there is every likelihood that most of the weapons will be deployed by the
Pakistanis, not along their Afghan, but along their Indian border.

In Africa, the Organization of African Unity has condemned the Reagan
Administration's view of the independence movement in Namibia as an insurgency
of Soviet origin. Black African governments regard the movement as a legitimate
indigenous force, and they see South Africa, not the Soviet Union, as their real
foe.

In Europe, leaders of the Western alliance had to caution Mr.  Reagan against
adhering to the position that he would not negotiate with Moscow on nuclear arms
limitations until the United States had rearmed. They warned that an American
failure to open talks with the Russians on curbing deployment of
intermediate-range missiles in Europe would undermine such public support as
remains for accepting these missiles at all. Reluctantly, the President had to
agree to commence the negotiations by the end of the year.

This experience illustrates President Reagan's fundamental foreignpolicy
dilemma: How can the perceptions of so many other countries, including our
closest allies, be reconciled with his own preconceptions?

For example, if the Japanese believed that the Russians were pounding at their
gates, would it be necessary for us to arm-twist them into making token
additions to their military budget? Or take venerable Great Britain, now
governed by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, Mr. Reagan's ideological twin. If
these two see the Russian threat in the same light, the actions of the Tory
Government belie its words. The United States Navy is being ex-panded on a crash
basis; the Royal Navy is retiring about a third of its largest ships.
Ironically, within the Western alliance, the United States alone has embarked
upon a massive rearmament program.

Faced with such inertia, it is small wonder that Mr. Haig carried with him to
Peking the keys to the American arsenal. He must have felt much relieved to
confer, at last, with leaders of an important government, albeit Communist, who
shared his apocalyptic view of the Soviet menace. Doubtlessly, Foreign Minister
Huang Hua relished hearing him use Chinese terminology when speaking of Soviet
''hegemonism'' as the source of the world's woes. And when Mr. Haig played the
''China card,'' offering to sell China lethal weapons, his hosts were pleased to
accept a status the United States has conferred on few Communist governments.

But the game played out in Peking was one of symbolism, not substance. Despite
its fierce talk, the People's Republic is not fixing to fight the U.S.S.R. Over
the past two years, Peking's military budget has been cut a full 20 percent.
Chinese rhetoric is one thing; China's intentions, another. The notion that
China can be enlisted in the ranks of our Pacific allies, forming part of a
giant phalanx thrust up against the Soviet Union, is a dream wrapped in a dogma
that bears no relation to reality.

There is the same lack of realism in the Reagan Administration's alignment with
right-wing regimes, no matter how brutish, with the aim of bolstering them as
bastions of anti-Communism. The courtship of the Argentine military dictatorship
is taking place at the very time the Government there stands discredited with
its own people, driven by economic distress either to seek a political exit or
revert to a bloodletting, savage even by Argentine standards.

Mr. Reagan has sought to justify his embrace of right-wing governments by
drawing a strange distinction between abuse of human rights by totalitarian
regimes, such as the Soviet one, and similar violations by merely authoritarian
rulers, such as those in Argentina. What this amounts to, in plain English, is a
deliberate downgrading of human rights. Yet ethical considerations have always
played a part in American foreign policy. As Vietnam and Chile demonstrated, a
policy that runs against the grain of American ideals will not be supported
indefinitely at home.

Admittedly, there is a certain appeal in dealing with regimes like those in
Argentina, Chile or Guatemala - as there was in dealing with Somoza's Nicaragua
or the Shah's Iran. Authority is concentrated in one man or a small group; it is
unnecessary to put up with the messiness of democratic government; agreements
are easily arrived at, and the bilateral business relations are usually cordial.
But the appearance of stability is often illusory. The harsh reality is that
people in poorer countries are not satisfied or resigned to their lot. A people
ripe for revolution will rise to the call without Leonid Brezhnev or Fidel
Castro - though neither, when an opportunity presents itself, is above lending a
hand. And, as we should have learned from our bitter experience in Iran, the
danger to us, when an American-supported dictatorship falls, is that the United
States becomes the scapegoat, equated in the eyes of the people with the hated
regime they have overthrown.

It is to President Carter's credit that he tried to portray the United States as
a country with sufficient self-respect to avoid courting the worst of the
right-wing police states. The Reagan Administration, on the other hand, bids
fair to confirming the darkest suspicions of foreign peoples striving to achieve
some improvement in their lives - that we prefer the apparent tranquillity of
''friendly'' authoritarian governments. If each of the upheavals that are
certain to continue occurring in the poorer countries is interpreted as an
externally inspired subversion of an otherwise acceptable social and economic
system, the new Administration will be tempted into virtually unlimited
interventions in civil conflicts aboard.

A swarm of such temptations may soon confront us in Central America and the
Caribbean. If we panic, by treating them as so many battlefields on which the
Soviet Union has chosen to wage war against us in our very own neighborhood,
then we are sure to revert to the discredited ''gunboat diplomacy'' of the past,
hustling in the Marines to suppress each local uprising. In the end, such
aggressive use of American power will rekindle throughout Latin America the
smoldering hatred of ''Yankee imperialism'' so largely assuaged by the Panama
Canal Treaties. How much better off we would be to adopt the attitude of our
democratic neighbors Mexico and Venezuela, whose policy is to influence the
direction of the inevitable changes in Central America rather than engage in a
futile, self-defeating attempt to stamp them out.

There is something schizophrenic about the Reagan Administration's obsession
with the Soviet Union. On the one hand, we are led to believe that the Russians
are out to dominate the world. On the other hand, in an American version of
historical inevitability, Mr.  Reagan assures us that we are seeing not only in
Poland but in ''the reports that are beginning to come out of Russia itself ...
an indication that Communism is an aberration ... the beginning of the end.'' In
short, the Russian Empire is cracking up. Mr. Haig endorses the President's
verdict: ''I think we are witnessing a historic unraveling of Marxist-Leninism
on the Soviet model.''

If this is the case, then why all the anxiety? I suggest it has less to do with
an overblown fear that the Soviet Union will ever dominate the world than with a
gnawing worry that the Russians, desperate to hold their crumbling empire
together, will lash out with their immense military machine.

For 30 years, we and the Russians have confronted each other across a nuclear no
man's land; each nation has squandered over a trillion dollars perfecting and
enlarging its stockpile of nuclear weapons.  Both nations acted out of fear that
one might somehow gain an advantage with which it could wipe the other off the
map. But once the stockpiles reached a level of overkill so large as to
guarantee the obliteration of both sides, no matter who possessed the greater
number of weapons, these dragon's teeth of doomsday became an irrational
compulsion. In their frenzied search for ''national security,'' the two nations
managed to make themselves not the safest but the most endangered in the world.

Our predicament is even worse than that of ''two tarantulas locked in a
bottle,'' for we are not alike, and the great differences between the two
societies antedate the 1917 Russian Revolution.  Alexis de Tocqueville, in his
classic work, ''Democracy in America,'' foretold the 20th-century conflict
between an open and democratic America and an autocratic, brooding, brutal
Russia. This real and continuing difference will not end soon. Nor is Russia
likely to give up its historic national ambitions for warm-water outlets,
strategic depth on its western frontiers and resistance to China's claims for
territorial adjustments. Neither can an aging Kremlin leadership of doctrinaire
Communists abandon its commitment to the ''historic inevitability'' of
revolutions elsewhere without losing its reason for being. And, given the
internal strife in the poorer countries of the world, there is plentiful
opportunity for meddling.

To state the above is merely to acknowledge a condition with which we have been
living for many years. Suddenly, however, without any major reversal or
precipitous shift in the balance of power between East and West, Mr. Reagan
proposes the largest peacetime arms buildup in American history. Military
outlays are projected to double over the next five years, rising from $159
billion to $343 billion.  Budgetary estimates show that, between fiscal 1982 and
1986, defense expenditures will rise an average of 11.1 percent per year (after
adjustment for inflation), outstripping both the 6 percent realgrowth rate
proposed by President Carter and the 10 percent annual increase that took place
during the Vietnam War.

These big spending figures make clear that the object of the Reagan
Administration is not necessarily to reduce the size of government.  Rather, it
is to shift resources from the civilian budget - aid to handicapped children,
food stamps, loans to students to finance their education, legal services for
the poor, and a variety of other civilian programs - to military expenditures.
Indeed, the rearmament program seems certain to defeat Reagan's pledge to
balance the budget, and it may, when combined with the tax cuts he proposes,
eliminate any chance for significantly reducing inflation.

What is the rationale for this huge arms buildup? What events in the world have
occurred to impart such a sense of urgency to the rearmament program? What
impels us to bring antique battleships out of mothballs to perform missions even
the Navy can't convincingly define? What leads us to reconsider building an
obsolescent B-1 bomber, each one of which will cost a staggering $200 million
and still lack the punch to penetrate new Russian radar defenses? Why must we
construct still more multibillion-dollar aircraft carriers, whose six-acre decks
can't be missed by Russian missiles, when we already have 13 of these behemoths,
compared with only two in the Soviet Navy? Admittedly, Moscow's continuing large
military expenditures make it necessary for the United States to prudently
increase its own procurement of advanced conventional weapons. But why this
cornucopia for the munition makers, this heedless spending?

President Reagan has given us no clue. He has made no foreignpolicy speech
delineating his thinking on the major issues of the day. And, aside from such
bromides as ''Moscow is the greatest source of international insecurity,'' his
Secretary of State is equally unenlightening. Perhaps, in an Administration so
oriented toward the military, we must look to the Secretary of Defense for an
explanation - and that explanation, to say the least, is mind-boggling.

During the 1950's and early 1960's, our Government based its defense planning on
a ''two and a half wars'' policy: The United States might have to fight the
Soviet Union, China and some smaller country (the ''half war'') simultaneously.
As we slowly came to accept the reality of the Sino-Soviet split, this doctrine
was acknowledged implausible. American strategic thinking changed to a ''one and
a half wars'' doctrine: The United States might have to fight, at the same time,
the Soviet Union in Europe and a lesser adversary elsewhere.

In a recent speech, the Secretary of Defense, Caspar Weinberger, seems to be
returning to the two-and-a-half-wars doctrine - and more. The Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, according to the Secretary, shows that the United States must be
prepared to fight protracted conventional wars in many places simultaneously.
''We have to be prepared,'' says Mr. Weinberger, ''to launch counteroffensives
in other regions and to exploit the aggressor's weaknesses wherever we might
find them. ... We must be prepared for waging a conventional war that may extend
to many parts of the globe.'' In other words, 40 years after the fact, the
Reagan Administration is getting the country ready for the Second World War.

But Afghanistan is a dubious example from which to draw such sweeping
conclusions. Afghanistan borders on the Soviet Union. It has a Moslem population
that has proved susceptible to the fundamentalist ferment sweeping the Moslem
world. The Soviet puppet government in Kabul appeared incapable of dealing with
the religious forces that toppled the Shah in Iran, and for many of the same
reasons.

It may be that the Russian invasion of Afghanistan is the first move in a
long-range Soviet plan to invade the oil-producing states of the Persian Gulf.
It is far more likely, though, that what the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
proves is that the U.S.S.R. is still prepared to crush any force on its border
it considers a danger to its own security. That President Reagan himself sees
Afghanistan in less than cataclysmic terms is evidenced by his lifting of the
grain embargo imposed by his predecessor in the aftermath of the Russian
invasion.  Afghanistan alone cannot explain the new strategic doctrine. The
doctrine seems rather to be based on the belief, reached independently of
Afghanistan, that the United States must be prepared to intervene anywhere and
everywhere to protect its ''vital interests.'' What those interests are is left
vague. Are they American business investments abroad? Are they the oilfields
along the Persian Gulf? There is no evidence that the Reagan people have worked
out a set of priorities, so that we would have enough military power to defend
our truly vital interests around the world but would not be drawn into repeated
interventions in situations in which our security is not really threatened.

The conclusion seems inescapable that the Reagan Administration has no rationale
for resurrecting the two-and-one-half-war doctrine. What is more, the doctrine
is inherently incredible. In order to take it seriously, one has to assume (1)
that in a non-nuclear land war in Europe, the United States and our European
allies would contain the Russian onslaught; (2) that the Russian, American and
Western European leaders, along with their military staffs, would be content to
slug it out in conventional fashion, without resorting to tactical nuclear
weapons; (3) that even if the war turned nuclear, it could be kept ''limited,''
so that there would be victor and vanquished at the end, and (4) that if nuclear
war could not be so limited, there would still be something worth having
afterward. To state these assumptions is to reveal their absurdity.

According to current projections of the strategic forces of both sides, the
Soviet Union by 1985 will outnumber us in land-based intercontinental ballistic
missiles by 1,398 to 1,054, and their warheads on these missiles will outnumber
ours by 6,654 to 2,154. The United States, however, will be vastly ahead of the
Soviet Union in submarine-launched missile warheads (6,560 to 1,500), and, with
land-based launchers becoming more vulnerable, our undersea force should be
wholly offsetting. (American and Soviet strategic bombers would be roughly equal
in number if the medium-range Soviet bomber Backfire is included in the
strategic balance.)

After presiding over the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's hearings on the
strategic-arms-limitation treaty signed in 1979, I concluded that imbalances in
strategic weapons in individual categories were acceptable, so long as the
overall strategic balance was maintained. Other Senators differed with this
assessment, believing it was necessary to maintain a balance in each category of
strategic weapons. The important point is that there was a consensus in the
committee - reflecting a consensus in Congress and the nation - that the
objective of our nuclear-arms-limitation strategy was equivalence or balance
with the Soviet Union, and that the issue for debate was how that balance could
best be maintained.

Mr. Weinberger, however, complains that we have allowed our ''strategic
superiority to be eroded.'' If the Secretary's words are to be taken at face
value, the national consensus is to be scrapped; the objective is no longer
equivalence but superiority. Yet there has been no exposition of the
Administration's thinking on this critical issue. How is superiority to be
achieved? What weapons systems will assure superiority for what period of time?
What, indeed, is the meaning of ''superiority,'' when the Soviet Union will
retain the power to strike back with sufficient force to devastate the United
States? Does it really matter how many times the rubble bounces?  Besides, what
reason is there to think that the Russians will not catch up with us, as they
always have before?  We in the United States have been fortunate in the past to
be protected by distance and ocean waters from invasion, strategic bombing and
the ravages of war. In the era of strategic nuclear weapons, there is no such
protection. There is no place to hide.  Official estimates are that between 70
million and 160 million Americans would die in a full-scale nuclear exchange
-and 20 million to 30 million more if the Soviet Union's targeters really tried
to kill people per se. Thus, 30 percent to 70 percent of us would die promptly.
Tens of millions more would die from fallout sickness, unchecked disease,
freezing temperatures and starvation induced by the collapse of agriculture and
food distribution.

Meanwhile, perhaps because they cannot contemplate their own irrelevance, the
war-game players on both sides, that peculiar priesthood engaged in refining
nuclear strategems, continue to pursue their exotic mental exercise in
self-contained plastic bubbles. McGeorge Bundy said it best: ''Think-tank
analysts can set levels of 'acceptable damage' well up in the hundreds of
millions of lives. ... They are in an unreal world. In the real world of real
political leaders - whether here or in the Soviet Union - a decision that would
bring even one hydrogen bomb on one city of one's own country would be
recognized in advance as a catastrophic blunder; 10 bombs on 10 cities would be
a disaster beyond history; and 100 bombs on 100 cities are unthinkable.''

Could it be that we now have a political leadership that is thinking the
unthinkable but does not have the political courage to level with the American
people? A national consensus arrived at more than 15 years ago as to the
deterrence value of nuclear weapons should not be reversed by stealth. It is not
enough for Mr. Reagan to resort to euphemisms like ''margin of safety'' if what
he really means is nuclear ''superiority.'' The President should say what he
means and put his case, if there is one, on the table for public debate.

In fairness, President Reagan has also said that he wishes to achieve real
reductions in nuclear arms by negotiations with the Russians. Although he has
criticized both strategic-arms-limitation treaties, he voluntarily observes
their terms. The first treaty, signed in 1972, has expired; the second was never
ratified; still, the President says he will abide by the provisions of each so
long as the Soviet Union does likewise, thus invoking the treaties in all but
name.

Let us hope - and pray -that the Administration's rigidly anti-Soviet ideology,
including its futile quest for an unobtainable nuclear ''superiority,'' gives
way to the urgent need for mutual strategic-arms reductions. In the
thermonuclear age, there is really only one reality: There can be no ''winner''
in a nuclear war. In George Kennan's passionate words, ''For the love of God, of
your children and of the civilization to which you belong, cease this madness.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Alexander Haig conferring with Jeane
Kirkpatrick photo of F-16, sold to Israel photo of U.S. Embassy in San Salvador
photo of Reagan at Ottawa meeting with heads of large industrial countries

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FAMILY AND FRIENDS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1486 words


OH!  By Mary Robison.  209 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $10.95.
ADULT EDUCATION By Annette Williams Jaffee.  230 pp. Princeton, N.J.: Ontario
Review Press. Distributed by Persea Books, New York. $12.95.

By KATHA POLLITT

MEET the Clevelands - rich, Midwestern, out to lunch.  Twenty-fouryear-old
Maureen, the unmarried mother of little Violet, has dedicated herself to sleep:
on the lawn, by the pool, in the car, on the floor. ''It's a gift,'' she says of
her formidable abilities in the napping line, which include slipping Vi the
occasional Librium to keep her quiet. Mo's older brother, Howdy, is a lounge
lizard at the local campus, where he dabbles in rock and roll, acting and
painting naked portraits of his family. Maybe he will marry the gardener's nasty
daughter. Maybe he won't.

Maureen and Howdy still live at home, where they pass the time drinking,
watching Charlie Chan movies on TV and bickering. Not surprisingly, they are the
despair of a number of people. Their father, for instance, feisty self-made
millionaire owner of a softdrink-and-miniature-golf empire; his girlfriend,
Virginia, treacly hostess of a religious TV program for children; Violet's
father, the caddish but dashing Chris, who abandoned Maureen when he won the
lottery but now wants to marry her and buzzes the house with a helicopter to
prove it; and Lola, the sarcastic, much-put-upon black maid, who writes poetry
and sleepwalks.

Like Ann Beattie and Raymond Carver, with whom she is often bracketed, Mary
Robison writes about American anomie, seventies style, in a way that mirrors the
very attitudes it depicts. Mo's depression and Howdy's solipsism are both
reflected in Miss Robi-
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Katha Pollitt is a poet and critic who lives in New York City.
son's flat, hip, deadpan voice, in her rejection of certain kinds of narrative
approaches - the analysis of motive, for example - in favor of a cool,
meticulous description of surfaces and reporting of dialogue.

Sometimes, this attention to surface pays off. Miss Robison has a poet's eye for
the unconscious surrealism of commercial America: ''A teen-ager in blue makeup
and an orange wig stood in front of Skyway's stream of automatic doors. He was
hawking helium balloons stamped with pictures of footwear.'' And she has a
playwright's ear for American speech, the things one hears people say all the
time but rarely sees written down. The stretches of banal conversation in which
no one listens to anyone else may go on too long, but a line as fresh and
accurate as Violet's ''Tell me what else about Grandma?'' is almost by itself
worth the price of the book.

I confess that I have trouble taking the Carver-Beattie-Robison school of
fiction as a profound and searching critique of the way we, particularly the
post-Vietnam young, live now, which is what its many admirers and imitators
would have me do. Granted, America is a land of Skyways and logo-bearing
balloons, a land where tornadoes strike without warning and men win lotteries
and desert their pregnant girl friends. But are we really as zonked out as
Maureen and Howdy? One could argue that the vision these writers share, of a
pared-down, emotionally drained, random world, reflects less the failures of
contemporary America than some obscurer failure to connect on the part of the
writers themselves.

If, for all that, I found myself enjoying ''Oh!'' it's because deep down Mary
Robison has an offbeat cheerfulness that undercuts her alienated stance and
keeps her sodden characters afloat. Unlike Ann Beattie, who lavishes a mournful
wistfulness on her upper-crust waifs, and unlike Raymond Carver, with his
obsessive violence, Miss Robison seems to think her characters are doing as well
as can be expected, under the circumstances. True, I don't quite understand what
circumstances she has in mind - That life is painful? That God doesn't exist?
That Vanzandt who used to patrol the golf course stepped into the propeller of a
pontoon plane in Hanoi? - anymore than I understand why Chris wants to marry
Maureen or why Mr.  Cleveland never told his kids their mother had died years
ago in a mental hospital or why I'm not supposed to agree with Virginia when she
says that the Clevelands problem is a lack of intelligence.

But earned or not, this buoyancy is Mary Robison's saving grace. It makes the
novel less pat, the way the exclamation point qualifies the blankness of the
title. Or, to put it another way: '' 'Secrets are the salt and pepper of life,'
Lola said, and then looked surprised at her own words.''

*

The pleasures and the problems of ''Adult Education,'' Annette Williams Jaffee's
first novel, are both set out in the very first paragraph:

''Becca met Ulli in an Adult Education course in Pre-Columbian Art. They were
both pregnant with their first children and sat like two Marimekko pumpkins in a
field of withering vines, a group of professors' widows. The widows were off to
Mexico when the course ended, with the instructor, who was as brown and round as
a Toltec jug. Becca later thought of them during the long winter of her
motherhood, imagined their knotty legs in support hose, climbing the Pyramid of
the Sun at Toetihuacan, an endless stairway to Paradise, while she shuffled back
and forth like a tired obedient cow. She knew from her Lamaze training that
Childbirth was the Ultimate Experience, but that winter she sometimes wished
she'd gone on the trip instead.''

As you can see, Miss Jaffee has fluency, energy, comic verve, and a less
pinpointable quality of sheer likeableness. As you can also see, ''Adult
Education'' is another version of the novel about the nice, bright, naive young
woman (in this case Becca Schuman, Bennington grad, would-be dancer and poet)
who marries a narcissistic heel (in this case Gerry the sociologist) and spends
the best years of her life as a frustrated housewife in the suburbs until she
finally comes to her senses and gets a divorce and a job.

In one way, though, Becca is a heroine with a difference. She has a woman
friend, Ulli, who is reserved and supremely competent - everything frazzled,
immature, impulsive Becca is not: ''Ulli's father was a Swedish count; Becca's
father was a Jewish prince.'' Whereas poor Becca was trapped into marriage at 21
through unplanned pregnancy, bullying parents, and her own culturally approved
low self-esteem, Ulli, who worked for a time as a fashion model, has had her
adventures and chose domesticity freely. ''Ah Becca,'' says Ulli, ''Every
housewife is not Emma Bovary.''

The friendship is more than a study in contrasts. Becca gives Ulli warmth: Ulli
cannot tell her husband how she was raped by her mother's lover when she was 14,
but she can tell Becca, who knows all about sexual exploitation, having been
manipulated by an adored drama teacher into posing for pornographic photos. And
little by little, over the decade of their friendship, Ulli gives Becca the
education in adulthood she so desperately needs. Even before Ulli dies, bravely
and horribly of cancer, Becca realizes that Ulli has been the central figure of
her emotional life. And this realization enables her not to marry Ulli's
husband, as Ulli has perhaps wished for her, but to strike out on her own at
last.

Annette Jaffee is a versatile writer, capable both of a hilarious chapter in
which freshly separated Becca visits her parents in Florida, and the long, sad
scenes of Ulli's dying. Like Becca herself, who tells us that her family
''tapdanced their way through Auschwitz,'' she sometimes overindulges a tendency
to go herself one better, and this introduces an occasional note of forced
emotion. We didn't need to have Becca fantasizing a lesbian scene with Ulli
while making love to Ulli's husband, any more than we needed Becca staging
gourmet picnics by Ulli's comatose body. What we could have used was more depth:
I would have liked to know more, much more, about Becca's and Ulli's marriages,
which seem identically empty, and more about Ulli herself, who sometimes seemed
too good to be true. As this debut shows, Annette Jaffee has the talent to write
an even better novel next time around.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Paperbacks: New and Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 27, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 901 words


LYNDON: An Oral Biography, by Merle Miller. (Ballantine, $9.95.) An account of
the career of President Lyndon B. Johnson, pieced together from hundreds of
tape-recorded interviews with persons who knew him well and connected by lengthy
passages of background material. Our reviewer Anthony Lewis called it ''a
sensitive, fascinating and often uproariously funny biography of a legislative
genius, a manipulator of men, a performer'' that is best when it pictures L.B.J.
at work in behalf of liberal causes, but is lacking, perhaps inevitably, when it
comes to explaining what lay behind the tragedy of Vietnam.

CLOSE RELATIONS, by Susan Isaacs. (Avon, $2.95.) Marcia Green, a 35-year-old
divorcee and speechwriter for a gubernatorial candidate, has a problem: Should
she marry her candidate's hard-drinking campaign manager, of whom her family
takes a bleak view, or the wealthy, handsome, sensitive, intelligent nephew of
an opposing candidate, to whom her kinfolk do not object? An entertaining novel
by a witty, wry observer of contemporary life as it's being lived in Manhattan's
political backrooms and in the apartments of its independent young women.

THE DESERT IS THEIRS, by Byrd Baylor. Illustrated by Peter Parnall. (Atheneum,
$2.95.) In free verse inspired by ancient myth and folklore and in line drawings
enriched by tones of blue, green, gold and dun, Byrd Baylor and Peter Parnall
celebrate the hawks, deer, pack rats, hard shiny plants and the strong brown
people who call the desert home. This picture-and-text book for readers 6 to 10
won a Caldecott Honor award in 1976.

HOLIDAY WITH A VENGEANCE, by Ritchie Perry. (Ballantine, $2.25.) Philis, the
British secret agent hero of a half dozen thrillers by John Allen, a.k.a.
Ritchie Perry, finds himself with an assignment in one of the Bahamas: to rescue
the kidnapped British consul. After he succeeds, the angry dictator of the
island has the consul killed, whereupon Philis starts his own revolution. ''It's
all unbelievable,'' Newgate Callendar observed, ''but it's also a lot of fun ...
tongue-in-cheek and insouciant.''

THE OLD NEIGHBORHOOD, by Avery Corman. (Bantam, $2.95.) After his marriage
fails, 40-year-old Steven Robbins, who was born Jewish and poor in the Bronx and
made it big in advertising in Manhattan, goes back to the half-Jewish,
half-Catholic neighborhood where he grew up, finds himself anew and goes on to
create a second career based on the current fascination with nostalgia. A
charming story whose gentle humor tickles like the fizz on a 1940 root-beer
float.

A HYMNAL: The Controversial Arts, by William F. Buckley Jr.  (Berkley, $3.50.)
Fifty-two pieces published in magazines between 1975 and 1978, in which a
provocative writer who can use such words as ''concinnity'' and ''synecdoche''
with aplomb and accuracy takes on a wide variety of matters - among them, his
25-year controversy with Yale over its curriculum, his debate with Ronald Reagan
about the Panama Canal, his views on gun control and birth control, what authors
are willing to do to make their books best sellers, why he finds pleasure in
sailing and skiing, what life is like at the Buckley menage. An abridged version
of a 1978 hardcover book.

EMMELINE, by Judith Rossner. (Pocket, $3.50.) In her sixth novel, Judith
Rossner, best known for her ''Looking for Mr. Goodbar,'' retells the true story
of a 19th-century Maine farm girl who, to save her family from destitution, goes
to work at an early age in a Lowell, Mass., cotton mill and, because of the
pressures she encounters there, is doomed to the life of a social outcast. Some
reviewers called it ''stunning'' and ''as haunting as a dark ballad.''

THE PRISON OF MY MIND, by Barbara Field Benziger. (Walker, $5.95.) To help other
sufferers and their families, Barbara Field Benziger, a wife and mother, has
used notes and a journal kept during a long bout with mental illness -
''pathological depression with suicidal tendencies'' - to write graphically and
often movingly of her experiences in psychiatrists' offices and three hospitals.
This 1969 work, bearing an introduction by Dr. Robert Coles, deserves a place on
the shelf somewhere below Clifford Beers's classic 1908 ''A Mind That Found
Itself'' (now out of print) and Hannah Green's 1964 ''I Never Promised You A
Rose Garden.'' (NAL/Signet, $1.95.)

THE ENIGMA OF STONEHENGE, by John Fowles and Barry Brukoff.  (Summit, $9.95.) An
album about the ancient monument on Salisbury Plain, a collaboration by a
literary man and an artist. The British novelist John Fowles draws on his
life-long fascination with Stonehenge to review the many ideas that have been
advanced to explain why and how the stones got there. The American photographer
Barry Brukoff records, in 60 black-and-white and color pictures, taken from all
angles and at every time of day, how it looked before it was fenced in for its
protection. One of these is reproduced above. Together the text and
illustrations evoke what Mr. Fowles calls ''the two Stonehenges, the one in
stone and the one in the mind.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Stonehenge

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KNOWLES GRADES TODAY'S PREPPIES

BYLINE: By ESTHER BLAUSTEIN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 13, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 875 words


SOUTHAMPTON AT the same time that ''The Official Preppy Handbook'' is selling
well in the bookstore here, John Knowles, the dean of writers about prep school
life, is living in the woods nearby. And if he were graded according to the
handbook by a recent visitor, he would not make the honors list.

He would get failing marks in at least four subjects: First, his house is, as he
puts it, ''in the rural, out-of-it side'' of Southampton. Also, his shirt did
not have an alligator on it. In addition, while correctly sockless, his feet
were not shod in loafers. Furthermore, he still is called Jack by his friends
instead of Jock, which is ''more classy,'' according to the guide.

Asked about the guidebook, Mr. Knowles said, ''I'm in it, I've been told, but I
haven't seen it.'' The fact is that his novel of some 20 years ago, ''A Separate
Peace,'' is required reading for preparatory school students.

''A Separate Peace'' was set at a boys' preparatory school in New Hampshire.
Published in 1960, it has become a modern classic and has sold more than eight
million copies. (''It still sells one-half million a year,'' Mr. Knowles said.
It was made into a motion picture, and it is ''taught all over the place,''
according to its author.)

''Kids deeply identify with it,'' he said. ''Teachers find it easy to involve
their students with it. It doesn't matter if they are girls. They fall in love
with one or the other boys. In fact, 60 percent of our mail is from girls or
women. Rivalry is not limited to men.''

Mr. Knowles said that his book ''was a phenomenon and still is'' because of its
theme's universality. He said that this year he got a letter from a group of
black teen-agers in a Brooklyn drug recovery program. ''They all signed the
letter, saying that it was the best book they ever read,'' he said. ''That's how
much the prep school setting mattered. Rivalry, admiration, fear, defiance - the
streets of Brooklyn have them, perhaps much more than a school in New
Hampshire.''

Last March, Mr. Knowles brought out a companion novel to ''A Separate Peace.''
It is called ''Peace Breaks Out,'' and it was published by Holt, Rinehart &
Winston. It will be released in March as a Bantam paperback.

The setting is the same prep school as the first novel's, but in 1945, 10 years
later.  ''I took a large chance in returning to a book that is related,'' Mr.
Knowles said, ''because I was inviting a comparison to a book that is a classic
in American literature. I could be accused of trying to cash in - but that
hasn't happened. The general reaction is respectful and favorable. None of the
danger seemed to materialize.''

Mr. Knowles may have chosen to go back in time, but the reason is not because he
is out of touch with today's youth. ''I'm around colleges a lot,'' he said.
''I've been the writer-in-residence at the University of North Carolina and
Princeton, spending a year at each. I also lecture at two or three universities
every year; I'm invited for a few days. The students are a very impressive
group.''

''I went to Yale because they invited me to spend two weeks,'' he said. ''The
students are bright and hard-working. And I think they are a lot more mature
than they were when I was going to college.  They have a more relaxed attitude
about sexuality than they used to have.

''These are big generalities, but they are generally true. I think the drug
epidemic is over. They still use drugs, but they have it under control. We don't
seem to have as many young people winding up in hospitals as we used to have.''

Turning to the attitude of youth on war, Mr. Knowles said that both the
beginning and the end of World War II were sudden and shocking for most
Americans. But today, he said, most people are rather numbed. ''We've had so
many years of fringe wars,'' he said, ''we're rather inured to that kind of
shock.''

But he said he would not be surprised if the prevalent attitude of young men had
gone ''back to the old attitude'' of fighting to protect the United States,
rather than the antidraft response during Vietnam. ''If there was some major
threat from Russia to this country,'' he said, ''I think they would react in the
same way, almost without exception,'' as the characters in ''A Separate Peace.''

Another similarity between today's young men and the students he has written
about is the kind of graduate who was ''radiating charm and confidence as he
crossed the beautiful campus toward Harvard, and then perhaps the Senate or Sing
Sing.''

''Of course,'' he said, ''there are still monsters being manufactured every day.
At the moment, they are just shooting Presidents and Popes. And we have to hope
they won't come into control of a country like Germany. We have to hope they
won't become Presidents.''

As for the students now into the preppy rage, he said, ''Anything that makes the
kids dress more neatly, I'm all in favor of.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Knowles

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Environews;
ILLEGAL DUMPING

BYLINE: By LEO H. CARNEY

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 18, Column 6; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1769 words


THREE garbage-hauling corporations awaiting trial on state charges of conspiring
to manipulate the garbage industry in northern New Jersey also are among those
accused last week by the Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission of
illegally dumping refuse there.

According to Robert C. Grant, a spokesman for the commission, Haulaway Inc. of
Hoboken, Louis Pinto of Montville and the Five Brothers Carting Company of New
York were among 17 companies cited by the commission for alleged illegal
dumping.

Another concern, Browning Ferris Inc., is under indictment for its operations in
Elizabeth. The company's Fairfield operation was cited by the commission last
week along with the 16 others.

A check of the commission's list last week with the indictment showed that the
three companies, and Browning Ferris's Elizabeth business, were among 52
individuals and corporations of the Trade Waste Association of New Jersey
indicted last October.

They were charged by the Attorney General's office with criminal bid rigging and
conspiracy to fix fees and to otherwise manipulate the garbage industry. A trial
is expected this fall.

A spokesman for the Attorney General's office said last week that injunctions
and maximum civil penalties would be sought against the 17 haulers from New
Jersey and New York who, despite written warnings, had continued to dump
illegally in the Hackensack Meadowlands.

''The action so far,'' said Richard F. Engel, a Deputy Attorney General assigned
to environmental matters, ''has been a notice to these companies that they are
in violation.''

''Now,'' he said, ''there will be a lawsuit to enforce the state statute and the
Hackensack Meadowlands master plan. We'll be asking for the maximum penalties,
$25,000 a day.''

Although state and commission officials have long known about the dumping, it
was not until a month ago that they realized its extent.  At that time, the
commission's garbage baler began full-scale operations here, receiving refuse
from municipalities in Hudson and Passaic Counties.

But, according to Mr. Grant, instead of the maximum of 2,000 tons a day, the
machine was being overloaded with 3,500 tons a day.  Garbage that had been
deposited in the baler was sifted by commission employees to determine its
origin, Mr. Grant said. The commission went to court last October and obtained
an injunction barring more than two dozen out-of-state haulers from dumping in
the Meadowlands.

A special committee of the Assembly, under the leadership of Raymond Lesniak,
Democrat of Elizabeth, will hold hearings next month on the relationship between
organized crime and the garbage industry. Mr. Lesniak has drafted two bills,
both of which seek to curtail the involvement of organized crime in municipal
bidding.

Toxic-Agent Auction

Top security agents of the Lakehurst Naval Air Engineering Center were on hand
recently when the Department of Defense auctioned 1,045 gallons of 2,4,5-T, a
component of Agent Orange.

According to Nick Grand, a spokesman for the naval center, Herbert Millstone, a
contractor from Warrington, Pa., submitted the high bid of $5,501 for 19 drums
of the herbicide. As of last week, however, the drums were still in storage at
adjacent Fort Dix. Mr. Grand said that there was some confusion as to whether
Mr. Millstone was qualified to receive the pesticide.

''First,'' Mr. Grand said, Mr. Millstone ''said he was going to resell it to a
chemical company and the company said it didn't know him and didn't want the
stuff. Then he said he was going to sell it to a friend.''

Mr. Grand said that the Defense Department would require the successful bidder
''to fill out another end-use certificate.'' Published reports in the last few
weeks have disclosed that requirements are lax in the sale of hazardous
chemicals and some reports have mentioned the objections of a group known as
Agent Orange Victims of New Jersey.

The group is part of a nationwide movement of veterans who say their exposure to
the herbicide in Vietnam has caused long-term illnesses in them and birth
defects in their children.

Steve Carfera, an environmental specialist with the state's Department of
Environmental Protection, said last week that a check with the Department of
Defense and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency showed that ''based on
the regulations that are in place now, the sales are legal.''

''There is a check of records by the Department of Defense,'' Mr.  Carfera said,
''But how far beyond that they go I couldn't say.'' Mr. Carfera also said that
the sale of used transformers containing polychlorinated biphenyls at military
bases in New Jersey and elsewhere was made only to licensed persons. However, a
spokesman for the Military Ocean Terminal in Bayonne, where transformers will be
sold Wednesday, said that ''anybody'' could buy them and that no license was
required.

$1.1 Million in Fines

Fines of $1.1 million have been levied by the state's Department of
Environmental Protection against polluters in the first seven months of this
year. Thomas A. Pluta, acting chief of the D.E.P.'s Bureau of Enforcement, said
last week that most of the fines resulted from garbage and hazardous waste
violations.

In this category - hazardous and solid waste - a total of $699,500 was
collected. The Imperial Oil Company of Marlboro Township, for example, was fined
$20,000 for operating an unregistered storage site.

The company is among several hazardous waste concerns around Burnt Fly Bog that
are suspected of polluting the Englishtown aquifer, a natural underground
reservoir that supplies much of Middlesex and Monmouth Counties with drinking
water.

Modern Transportation of Kearny was fined $15,000 for accepting organic wastes
in violation of its state permit.  The U.S. Metals Refining Corporation of
Carteret was fined $5,000 for failure to comply with a D.E.P. deadline for the
installation of pollution control equipment, according to Mr. Pluta. Fines
totaling about $400,000 were levied for violations of air pollution statutes,
the second-highest and the only other significant category of penalties,
according to figures provided by Mr. Pluta.

The other violation categories included pesticides, a total of $1,325; noise,
$11,600 and radiation, for which, Mr. Pluta said, there is no monetary penalty.
Herman Phillips, a spokesman for the Federal Environmental Protection Agency,
said last week that no figures were immediately available for fines levied by
the agency against polluters in New Jersey.

Pollution Accord

Gulf and Western Industries of Gloucester City, Camden County, has agreed to
build a treatment facility to control its pollution discharges into the Delaware
River.

The corporation manufactures about 135 tons a day of titanium dioxide. The
state's D.E.P said that this produced 11 million gallons of ethelyn, containing
sulfuric acid and ferrous sulphate, and made the company ''the largest
discharger on the East Coast''

Lance Miller, an enforcement officer for the department's division of water
resources, said last week that the company would be allowed to discharge the
ethelyn into the Delaware until 1983, when the first stages of its new
neutralization plant go on line. Full-scale treatment is not required until
1984.

Mr. Miller explained that Gulf and Western had been polluting the river for more
than 10 years and that negotiations with the state had taken several years. No
definite action had been taken against the company because, as Mr. Miller
explained it, it was not certain how the company could dispose of gypsum, a
compound that results from the neutralization of sulfuric acid.

However, the D.E.P. has told the company that it must find a market for the
gypsum - a substance used in wallboard and in certain cement processes - by
1983.

In lieu of a fine, Mr. Miller said, Gulf and Western will donate $300,000 to the
Gloucester City Municipal Water System, which is affected by other problems not
associated with Gulf and Western's discharges.

Another $200,000 will be given to an unspecific academic or research
organization to study pollution control technologies, he said.

One Good Tern ...

In what is said to be the first agreement of its kind in the state, a contractor
has agreed to re-establish a colony of endangered least terns that otherwise
would have been destroyed by a new housing development on the contractor's
property.

Deborah Morris, a biologist with the Endangered and Non-game Species Project of
the state D.E.P., said that the agreement had been reached between the state and
Brigantine Cove Associates.

The least tern is a small gray and white bird with a black skull cap and a
forked tail. It can be seen occasionally at the seashore, hovering over the
water and diving for surface fish.

The planned development would have displaced some 150 of the birds which, Miss
Morris said, represent the second largest tern colony in the state. The area is
on seven-tenths of an acre in the Gull Cove section of Brigantine. Miss Morris
said that the developer had agreed to create a new nesting site a half a mile
from the old one by next May, when the terns resume their breeding. A snow fence
will be erected, she said and broken shells - part of the birds' natural habitat
on sandy beaches - will be deposited at the site.

Furthermore, Brigantine Cove Associates will pay some $1,300 each season for a
''tern warden'' to monitor the birds' progress in their new environment and to
educate local residents about them.

The agreement, according to Miss Morris, was negotiated by Joan Galli, a
biologist with the Endangered and Non-game Species Project.  The least tern, on
the state's list of endangered species, nests in colonies on sandy beaches and
has been disturbed in recent years by increased beachfront development and human
recreational activities.  Its predators include cats, dogs, raccoons and gulls,
and its habitat is particularly susceptible to flooding.

Only 1,600 of the terns remain in New Jersey at some 20 sites, and this year
they produced 565 fledglings, according to the D.E.P.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

An 'Outraged Citizen' On the Byrne Arena

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 36, Column 2; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 186 words


The article by R.J. Codey (Aug. 9) supporting the naming of the Meadowlands
arena after our Governor does not reflect my viewpoint, even though, according
to that article, I risk being petty and political.

If other than the functional name should be used, we should honor our veterans,
particularly our Vietnam veterans, about whom so little has been done by way of
recognition. About 1,400 New Jerseyans were killed in Vietnam. To honor these
citizens, I propose naming the sports facility the New Jersey Vietnam Veterans
Arena, or some other appropriate designation.

It troubles me that Mr. Codey takes an adversary stance to defend the arena's
current name. There are many New Jerseyans like me who feel they had little
choice in picking the name, and if there had to be a naming, we who carry the
burden of never-ending bond issues and taxes should have had a say.

I hold no political office and have no axes to grind. I suppose I am just
another outraged citizen.  ANTHONY W. CAVALLARO Edison

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SCHMIDT OPEN TO A NEUTRON ROLE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: BONN, Aug. 24


Two weeks after President Reagan's decision to produce the neutron warhead,
Chancellor Helmut Schmidt has said that ''under certain conditions'' the weapon
could be stationed on West German soil.

Mr. Schmidt sought to allay growing resistance in the country and within his own
party to American arms policy by pointing out that the problem of deploying the
weapon in Europe was ''not acute'' and did not require ''immediate
negotiations.''

The Chancellor interrupted a holiday at the Brahmsee, a lake near Kiel, for his
first official comment on the issue in a television interview aired over the
weekend. Excerpts from his remarks were reprinted today in most West German
newspapers.

His statement brought new criticism from his own party, the Social Democrats.

Criticism From the Left

Willy Piecyk, the head of the leftist organization of young Socialists, accused
the Chancellor of having ''provoked the Social Democratic Party'' with his
stand. Peter Glotz, the party's secretary, warned that ''the American decision
to build the neutron weapon has caused many Germans to doubt whether the United
States is truly willing to move toward arms control.''

In his statement, Mr. Schmidt recalled that the German Cabinet had agreed on
certain conditions for the stationing of the neutron weapon as early as 1978
''after very careful considerations.''

He said the weapon must not be stationed exclusively on West German territory
but also in other European countries, that the stationing must be based on a
joint North Atlantic Treaty Organization decision, and that arms control
negotiations with the Russians must have failed to produce positive results.
''That was in 1978,'' Mr. Schmidt said. ''In principle I do not see that the
Cabinet should change its position.''

The Chancellor linked his stand on the weapons issue with a call to the United
States to show more sensibility toward European public opinion in making policy
pronouncements.

''I feel our American friends should be given the advice to watch closely the
effects of their political statements on the Europeans,'' he said. The
Americans, he added, must not permit a development ''where one day the Italians
and the Dutch, the Scandinavians and the Germans believe the Soviet Union to be
more ready to negotiate about arms control and cut down on armaments than their
own ally.''

He said everyone in the West must take care ''to rule out such utterly wrong and
misleading conclusions.'' But numerous leading personalities in his own party
already seem to have reached this very assessment.

Hans Koschnick, the Mayor of Bremen and a middle-of-the-road Socialist, said a
few days ago that the United States was ''wasting no opportunity for fueling
European uneasiness about its foreign policy.'' There was reason for concern, he
added, that the issue of American arms policy and the decision to produce the
neutron weapon ''may spark anti-American feelings in Europe much as did the
Vietnam War in the 1960's.''

Petition Is Circulated

Mr. Koschnick, who is the chairman of the Social Democrats' defense committee,
announced that he had signed a petition circulated by his local party board to
''ban the neutron weapon.'' The Bremen party statement called for disarmament in
East and West, he added.

A man even more outspoken in his criticism of the United States, Egon Bahr, a
former close aide to party leader Willy Brandt, told a television audience last
night that the Americans considered Western Europe ''their protectorate.''

The United States, he said at a panel discussion, ''are using NATO to run
Western Europe as their protectorate.'' The Europeans, he added, must at least
''seek codetermination for their own fate.'' One of the co-authors of Mr.
Brandt's policy of seeking detente with the East, Mr. Bahr had expressed his
opposition to the neutron warhead in 1978 when he called the American-produced
enhanced radiation weapon ''a perversion of human thinking.'' Mr. Brandt himself
was reported today by the West German news magazine, Der Spiegel, to have
suffered a rebuff when he called on President Francois Mitterrand of France last
week to find support for his party's widespread opposition to American
rearmament.

According to the report, Mr. Brandt told the Socialist leader of France that the
Germans were concerned over the arms arsenals amassed on their soil under
another country's control and over ''being treated like a colony by the United
States.'' President Mitterrand reportedly shrugged his shoulder and replied,
''those are the consequences of World War II.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

45 LIBYA INCIDENTS REPORTED BY NAVY;
News conference excerpts, page A10.

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 937 words

DATELINE: NAPLES, Aug. 24


The commander of the Sixth Fleet said today that American fighters intercepted
Libyan aircraft on 45 occasions during manuevers last week, but had not fired on
them until two Libyan SU-22's fired at two Navy F-14's.

The commander of the fleet, Vice Adm. William H. Rowden, also said at a news
conference aboard the U.S.S. Nimitz, that the air battle Wednesday that resulted
in the shooting down of the two Libyan airplanes took place slightly outside a
''designated'' area where the United States had said manuevers were taking
place, but still well within international waters. The Nimitz is anchored about
seven miles from here in the Bay of Naples below Mount Vesuvius.

The United States has said the two Soviet-built SU-22 fighters were shot down by
F-14 Tomcats from the Nimitz over an area of the Gulf of Sidra that is claimed
by Libya but is considered by the United States to be international waters.
Libya conceded yesterday that its planes fired first in the incident, but still
contends that eight American jets attacked its planes, and that one American jet
was shot down.

Comdr. Henry M. Kleemann, commanding officer of the squadron that brought down
the Libyan jets and pilot of the first of two F-14's to engage them, said the
two SU-22's were approaching head on and he was beginning a turn when he saw one
of the Libyan jets fire a missile from about 1,000 feet away.

''I decided we had been fired upon and they were likely to do it again,'' said
the pilot, who had flown in the Vietnam War. He illustrated his account of the
battle with wooden models of F-14's and a chart showing the spiraling maneuvers
by which he turned to attack one of the Libyan planes from the rear so that its
jet exhaust would attract his Sidewinder heat-seeking missile.

''There was no chance that I was not going to pull the trigger'' Commander
Kleemann said. ''It did go through my mind that it would cause a ruckus.'' His
superior officers said he had acted according to procedures laid down for
American airmen under fire and had not needed prior approval of his action.

Sixth Fleet commanders said all their aircraft had returned to the Nimitz. They
were not willing, however, to pinpoint the exact position where the Libyan
planes were brought down.

Admiral Rowden, while describing the maneuvers as routine and ''low risk'' made
clear that they were intended to counter Libya's eightyear-old claim to
sovereignty over the Gulf of Sidra, saying the exercises were designed ''as a
demonstration of our ability to employ freedom of navigation in international
waters.''

News Conference on Carrier

Reporters were taken aboard the Nimitz, a 1,092-foot-long nuclearpowered
carrier, after it anchored today in the Bay of Naples. The holding of a news
conference was regarded as a departure from the Sixth Fleet's normally more
reticent information policy. The pilots involved in the air battle on Aug. 19
were present, along with other officers, but their superiors frequently cut
short impromptu comments.

Admiral Rowden said shipping and aircraft in the Gulf of Sidra area had been
alerted on Aug. 12th and 14th that the exercises, involving missiles fired at
remote-controlled drones, would take place in a ''designated area whose
coordinates were published in notices to airmen and navigators.''

Some Libyan aircraft flying toward this area were apparently intercepted by
American aircraft far closer to the Libyan coast than has hitherto been
disclosed. Last week, the Defense Department said that numerous Libyan aircraft
had been intercepted, but until today it had never given an exact figure.

''About the closest we came in any instances would have been 25 miles to their
coast,'' said Rear Adm. James E. Service, commander of the Sixth Fleet's battle
force, who commanded last week's exercise from the Nimitz. Previous accounts of
the dogfight by American officials have concentrated on the downing of the two
Soviet-made planes, which, the Pentagon has said, occurred about 60 miles from
the Libyan coast, and within the designated area.

Outside 'Designated' Area

Admiral Service and Admiral Rowden insisted today that all the interceptions
took place over international waters and within international airspace. Asked,
however, whether the two Libyan planes were brought down within the
''designated'' area of the maneuvers, Admiral Rowden replied: ''We do not think
so. We think it took place slightly to the south.''

This would place the incident well within what the United States contends are
international waters and airspace, and also within the area claimed by Libya.
Only six Libyan aircraft penetrated the designated area, the Sixth Fleet
commanders said, but, apart from the two SU-22's, withdrew without opening fire
when intercepted.

''Designation'' of an area in notices to mariners and airmen was, the naval
officers said, only an advisory procedure. The purpose of American air patrols
outside the designated area was to prevent other vessels or aircraft from
straying into it.

Admiral Rowden said Libya had radioed a protest about the maneuvers to the
Nimitz on Aug. 19th after the SU-22's were shot down. The protest, he asserted,
did not refer to the dogfight.

Speaking of the reaction among the 6,000 men on the Nimitz to the air battles,
the admiral said there was ''no great jubilation'' but ''an extreme degree'' of
professional pride.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Henry Kleeman and Henry Venlet aboard the
Nimitz

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TO REFUGEES, MALAYSIAN ISLE NOW GIVES HOPE

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 696 words

DATELINE: PULAU BIDONG, Malaysia


At the height of the outflow of ''boat people'' from Vietnam, this island off
the coast of eastern Malaysia became a symbol of the magnitude of the problem
and the depth of the refugees' misery.

Pulau Bidong is a barren island, no more than a steep hill plunging into the sea
except on the side facing the mainland, which afforded a narrow strip of barren
land on which people could put up ramshackle shelters of branches, packing cases
and plastic sheeting. By mid-1979, more than 40,000 refugees were crowded
together in poverty here - and giving thanks that they had reached safety.

The Malaysian Government's capacity to handle the refugees was outstripped by
the onrush of people, who were mainly ethnic Chinese.  And in this conservative
Malay region, in which there had been a delicate racial balance between Malays
and ethnic Chinese, the Government was hard put to protect the refugees from
local hostility.

Malaysia was also deeply worried that the flow would never stop and that the
United States and other nations would be unwilling to take in so many refugees.

No Toilets and Undrinkable Water

The refugees lived without toilets, with few wells - and those yielding water
unfit to drink - and with their food supply dependent on deliveries by boats
that would sometimes not brave the choppy seas. There were more than 80 refugee
doctors at one time, but medicine and equipment was scarce.

The refugees felt neglected and cut off, even from mail. Their numbers continued
to mount, and few left for new homes. Their leaders and refugee officials feared
that the intensely crowded and unsanitary conditions, combined with a low state
of nutrition, exposed them to a grave risk of epidemic.

In July 1979, the turning point came. News coverage of the huge exodus, which
was provoked by Vietnam's expulsion of its Chinese minority, increased
international pressure both against the Hanoi Government and on Western
governments to raise their refugee quotas.  That month, President Carter doubled
the American quota to 168,000 Indochinese a year, and a United Nations-sponsored
international conference extracted an implicit Vietnamese assurance that the
outflow would stop.

Fewer Than 9,000 Remain

Today, Pulau Bidong shelters fewer than 9,000 refugees, or about half the
monthly arrival rate in the first half of 1979. The meticulous chart kept by the
refugees shows that 87,767 people have found shelter here since the camp was
opened in 1978, and all but those now here have been resettled, about two-thirds
in the United States.

Not only has Pulau Bidong's population dramatically decreased, but Malaysia has
also been able to close the other refugee camps that once dotted the east coast.
All refugees are now concentrated here.  When this camp housed more than 40,000,
more than 30,000 other refugees crowded camps north and south of here.

The total refugee population in Malaysia today is about 13,000. The other
refugees are in a transit camp in Kuala Lumpur, the capital, awaiting
transportation to their new countries.

Despite the spareness of the living conditions, the refugees still on the island
are in good spirits because the rapid rate of resettlement is limiting the
average stay to a few months.

Coniditons Are Better

Officials of the United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees, working with the
Malaysian Red Crescent Society, have improved living conditions from abysmal to
primitive. Rudimentary houses have been constructed, toilets built and water
supplies and drainage improved.  The decline in the population has relieved the
worst of the problems. Speedy boats now take an hour to cross between the island
and Kuala Trengganu, the provincial capital on the mainland.

Given this assistance, the refugees themselves have organized schools and a
variety of social services. There is a flourishing private market supplied by
Malaysian traders as well as Vietnamese bakers, cooks and seamstresses.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

POLICIES ON DOMESTIC SPYING BY U.S. AGENTS TO BE RELAXED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 566 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 24


The Reagan Administration intends to reduce the number of top-level officials
who must approve the use of spying tactics by United States intelligence agents
on American citizens and corporations, a top Justice Department official says.

The official, Richard Willard, Attorney General William French Smith's
intelligence adviser, said spying on Americans would be kept within the law, but
that an executive order issued by President Carter in 1978 had set up burdensome
requirements for approval.

''We've now tried to come up with a version that will be easier to read and more
manageable,'' Mr. Willard said in an interview. ''One of the problems is that
lawyers are not the only people who have to use these regulations. Agents in the
field think they can't do things that are really perfectly legal because the
regulations are so forbidding.''

Possible by Mid-September

Some intelligence community sources say the Reagan order, of which two earlier
versions were disclosed to the press, might be ready by mid-September.

The first draft, disclosed last spring, would have allowed the Central
Intelligence Agency to conduct domestic bugging and breakins and to infiltrate
domestic groups with foreign ties in an effort to influence their activities.
That draft also eliminated the requirement that the Attorney General approve
each use of intrusive tactics.

Since the first draft, Mr. Willard said: ''We have been able to avoid some of
the provisions that gave rise to misunderstandings. The C.I.A. never wanted to
get involved in domestic spying, but I think that in some of the early drafts
might have been thought to envision that kind of role for the C.I.A.''

A second disclosed draft trimmed domestic activities of the agency and partly
restored the Attorney General's role in approving the legality of some
operations.

'Give Agencies More Freedom'

In general, Mr. Willard said of the Reagan changes, ''Where there is flexibility
in the law, our inclination is to give intelligence agencies more freedom of
operation.''

''I don't think it's necessary for everything to come over to the Justice
Department in order to have a legal perspective on it,'' Mr.  Willard said,
noting that the intelligence agencies had their own lawyers. ''On the other
hand, when it comes to some very basic matters, the need for the Attorney
General's involvement has not been questioned in recent months by any of the
intelligence agencies.''

Mr. Willard serves on an interagency committee drafting the Reagan revision of
the 1978 order that sets rules for intelligence agencies.  President Carter's
order was designed to prevent recurrence of spying by intelligence agents on
citizens legally protesting the Vietnam war and civil rights policies.

That order requires approvals that go higher as the tactics get more intrusive.
Break-ins, bugging, television monitoring and mail opening require general
approval from the President and specific approval by the Attorney General for
each use.

Mr. Willard acknowledged that, with proper approval, the Carter order allows the
use of almost any technique. But an official of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation has testified that Mr. Carter never approved break-ins of American
homes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 25, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

New York;
PING-PONG FOR 36,000

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 869 words


The city's population of sidewalk people - the homeless, the disoriented, the
misfits - is in the tens of thousands and growing.  No one wants them.

There is no government policy. State mental institutions continue to dump them
on the streets. Community groups say they can live anywhere but in their
neighborhoods. Politicians, counting the votes of ''respectable'' citizens for
their next election, bend to these local fears and pressures.

But the sidewalk people are not going to fade away. On the contrary, present
belt-tightening fiscal and social policies - from Washington on down - guarantee
that these aimless, troubled and sometimes violent discards of our society are
going to increase.

A major report earlier this year by a respected non-profit social agency, the
Community Service Society, placed the number of homeless men and women in New
York City at 36,000. Other social agencies estimate it might be 50,000 or more.
The Koch administration suggests that the 36,000 figure is high but at the same
time acknowledges the numbers are on the rise.

When it happens thousands of miles away in Calcutta and Jakarta, those
wretchedly poor cities of the third world, we shake our heads at the miserable
condition of their sidewalk dwellers as if nothing like that could possibly
happen here.

And now it is here. And we would rather look away - or at least get the pitiful
rejects out of our sight.  One obvious reason for reaching for our blinders is
that these shelterless people with their vacant stares and bizarre behavior are
a persistent reminder that our traditional system of social assistance is
unravelling. People we used to look after are being left on the street. It is a
sure sign of a society's decay. And no mountain of Reaganomic arguments about
the need for budget balancing and self-sufficiency can sugarcoat that unpleasant
truth.

There is a widespread and mistaken notion that most of the homeless prefer their
nomadic existence to life in a public facility. The Community Service Society
report, harpooning that myth, said, ''The reality is that most have never been
offered the fundamental provisions of decent food and humane, noncoercive
shelter.''

Sarah Connell, the state's Regional Director of Mental Health, put it aptly: ''A
society is really judged by how it takes care of its least desirable people and
we are not doing a very good job at it.''

The latest excuse for a government policy is nothing more than what it has been
for some time: political sparring over who is to blame for the problem and over
how to deal with the superficial, shortrange goal of sweeping the homeless off
the streets.

The state government wants to place shelters for the homeless in neighborhoods
throughout the city, but is unwilling to provide the money necessary to run them
properly. The city government wants to establish larger institutions in
relatively remote, unpopulated areas, such as Ward's Island, ''to avoid any
unnecessary disruptions in residential areas.'' Community boards and local
politicians vehemently oppose even the use of outlying areas, arguing that the
undesirables will spill over and taint their neighborhoods. Anyone for
Ping-Pong?

For example, when the Koch administration recently proposed the housing of 400
derelicts for just a couple of winters in unused barracks at the former Floyd
Bennett Field in Brooklyn, where no one lives, civic groups in neighboring areas
protested that the idea was ''frightening'' and said ''the buildings must not be
turned into flophouses nor must the field become Brooklyn's Bowery.''

Meanwhile, winter is nearing and the numbers will not stop growing because the
reasons for the growth have not changed: tighter eligibility requirements for
welfare, more stringent standards of admission to mental hospitals, and
conversion into luxury housing of the single-room-occupancy hotels where these
marginal people used to take refuge - and from which they are now being evicted,
sometimes forcibly. The numbers have also been swollen by new and younger
derelicts, in their 20's and 30's - white men with drug problems and black men
who are unemployed and alienated, many of them Vietnam veterans.

No one suggests that the problem is easy of solution - these are not someone's
aging grandparents who have forgetfully wandered away from home -but something
better than Ping-Pong will have to be devised.

Governor Carey and Mayor Koch must commit themselves to producing a serious
long-range policy, backed by money and detailed programs.  Moreover, community
boards and civic groups - the legitimacy of their concerns notwithstanding -
cannot be allowed to tyrannize and petrify the process.

The sidewalk people, living in their pitiful clumps of rags and shopping bags,
have spread from their old confines in the seedier neighborhoods into nearly
every community in this city. They are everyone's responsibility. For they are
us.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 26, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TEAM OF EX-GREEN BERETS TRAINED TERRORISTS FOR LIBYAN GOVERNMENT

BYLINE: By Philip Taubman, Special to The New York Times; The following article
is based on reporting by Philip Taubman and Jeff Gerth and was written by Mr.
Taubman.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2167 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, Aug. 24


Four years ago, 10 men trained by the Army Special Forces to be America's elite
commando troops went to work for the Government of Libya, training terrorists.

According to participants in the operation, and Federal investigators who have
since tried to reconstruct the events, the men went to Libya with the knowledge
and endorsement of the United States Army. They apparently believed that they
were infiltrating the Libyan Government on behalf of the Central Intelligence
Agency.

Nine were retired members of the Special Forces, better known as Green Berets.
The 10th, who recruited the others for the mission, was a master sergeant in the
Green Berets and was on active duty. He had been recruited by a former agent for
the Central Intelligence Agency.

The belief of the 10 men that the mission was intended by the C.I.A. as an
infiltration of the Government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi was apparently shared
by ranking Green Beret officers.

Whether it was remains uncertain. The C.I.A. denies any involvement; many
participants, and some Federal investigators, believe the mission had at least
the tacit approval of the agency.

Its Organizer Is a Fugitive

What is certain, say the Federal investigators and the participants, is that the
operation was organized, financed and directed by Edwin P. Wilson, a former
Central Intelligence agent. In 1976, according to the investigators, Mr. Wilson
closed a business deal with Colonel Qaddafi to sell his expertise in
intelligence, arms and explosives to Libya for the training of terrorists.

Mr. Wilson was indicted in 1980 by a Federal grand jury on charges of illegally
exporting explosives to Libya. He is now a fugitive, believed to be living in
the Libyan city of Tripoli.

Mr. Wilson's use of Green Berets, like other aspects of his relationship with
Libya, has generated problems for the United States Government and raised
questions about the way Federal authorities handled the matter.

The Justice Department, after investigating the case and calling many of the
Green Berets before a grand jury for questioning in July 1979, produced no
indictments. One reason, investigators said, was the lack of any Federal law
prohibiting the training of terrorists outside the United States by American
citizens.

Slow to Accept Responsibility

The Army and the intelligence agency, investigators said, have been slow to
accept responsibility for the activity of those who were employees or former
employees when the operation began in 1977.

An informal Army review of the case, begun after the Justice Department started
its investigation, ended inconclusively, according to Defense Department
officials.

Lieut. Col. Harold Isaacson, a spokesman for the Special Forces, with
headquarters at Fort Bragg, N.C., said that the involvement of former Green
Berets in the Libyan operation, like the activities of former Green Berets in
general, was not the responsibility of the Special Forces. Army officials said
that inquiries had determined that the one active-duty officer involved, and the
superiors who endorsed his role, had apparently acted in good faith, believing
the mission was sanctioned by Central Intelligence.

William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, recently ordered a
review of agency policies to guard against the transfer of information and
technology by former agents to such countries as the Soviet Union and Libya. The
review was prompted by the case of Mr.  Wilson and Frank Terpil, another former
agent, in which agency connections were used in getting the explosives to Libya
illegally and in the training of terrorists there. Mr. Casey said the agency's
general counsel was ''reviewing our contracts to develop additional protections
against the kind of moonlighting and use of our contractors and technology which
occurred in the Wilson-Terpil situation.''

Call to Fayetteville

The involvement of the Green Berets in the Libyan training operation began on
July 21, 1977, when Luke F. Thompson, then a Special Forces master sergeant,
received a phone call at his home in Fayetteville, N.C., from a man who
identified himself as Patry Loomis. Mr. Thompson played a key role in numerous
covert operations in Vietnam and Latin America in the 1960's and 1970's,
according to intelligence officials,

According to Mr. Thompson, whose account was confirmed by other participants and
Federal investigators, Mr. Loomis said he was calling from Washington.

''He asked if I could go abroad to discuss a contract,'' Mr.  Thompson, now
retired, recalled in an interview here yesterday. ''He said it involved big
money and asked if I could get a hold of four or five other men with Special
Forces specialties who were prepared to travel fast.''

Mr. Thompson conditionally accepted Mr. Loomis's offer. At the same time, he
called military counterintelligence officials at Fort Bragg to report on the
conversation. ''I thought it might be something subversive, you know, maybe a
foreign power trying to lure us into something,'' he said.

Talked All Night, He Says

That evening two counterintelligence officials from Fort Bragg drove to Mr.
Thompson's house and the three talked over the conversation that Mr. Thompson
had had until early the following morning, Mr. Thompson said.

The next day, Mr. Loomis called again, this time to arrrange a meeting with Mr.
Thompson and the men he was recruiting. They picked the Sheraton Motor Inn in
Fayetteville. The time was to be the following day, July 23.

Mr. Thompson notified the counterintelligence officiers. ''They told me to keep
cooperating,'' he said.  On the day of the meeting, the counterintelligence
officers called Mr. Thompson. He recalled: ''They said: 'We've checked this to
the top and it's legal and aboveboard. You can pursue it as you desire.' ''
Satisfied that he was dealing with a Government operation, he said, he went to
the meeting.

Says He Was in Deep Cover

Mr. Loomis and a Washington lawyer, the account by Mr. Thompson continued,
escorted Mr. Thompson and three recently retired Green Berets to his room. After
turning up the volume on the television, according to Mr. Thompson, Mr. Loomis
identified himself as a Central Intelligence agent. ''He said he was with the
agency and had just recently come out of deep cover in Indonesia in the aircraft
industry,'' Mr. Thompson said.

Mr. Loomis offered no details about the operation, saying that information would
be provided outside the United States, but he did explain that the men would
receive $4,500 a month, plus bonuses. He told them to fly to Washington several
days later and he gave each man several $100 bills.

Investigators later determined that Mr. Loomis had approached Mr.  Thompson
shortly after being dismissed from the C.I.A. for helping Mr. Wilson obtain
explosive timers for Libya.

After the meeting, Mr. Thompson said he again called the counterintelligence
office at Fort Bragg. He told them of his plans to proceed to Washington and to
go abroad from there. ''They said to go ahead,'' recalled Mr. Thompson. Mr.
Thompson requested, and was granted, a special leave by his commanding officer.

Reports They Went to Zurich

In Washington, on July 25, Mr. Thompson and three former Green Berets were given
travel documents, $1,000 in cash, airplane tickets to Zurich via New York, and a
description of a man who would meet them at the Zurich airport. ''We were told
to stay in the international zone and not to go through customs in Zurich,'' Mr.
Thompson said.

He added: ''We had our war bags packed in a 400-pound locker, everything we
figured we might need for a direct action mission.'' The man waiting in Zurich
was identified as Mr. Wilson. After introductions, Mr. Thompson ran through a
list of questions he had prepared. ''As leader of the group, I wanted answers to
several key questions,'' he said. ''I wanted to know who exactly we were working
for, what the terms of our contract would be, what arrangements had been made
for health care, and what escape and evasion plans had been prepared.''

According to Mr. Thompson, Mr. Wilson told the men they would be working for
him. He did not elaborate. He also told them they would be going to Libya where
they should make themselves ''indispensable.'' Mr. Thompson said that they
assumed that Mr.  Wilson's meant that through being indispensable they would
gain intelligence information useful to the United States. Health care, if
necessary, would be provided at the best hospitals in Europe, and insurance
coverage for the men would be $250,000 for loss of life and $125,000 for loss of
limb.

Contract Not Necessary

No contract was necessary, Mr. Wilson said, because neither party was likely to
walk away from the project. ''If I welsh, you'd kill me,'' Mr. Thompson said
that Mr. Wilson had asserted, ''and if you welsh, I'll kill you.''

Mr. Wilson was reported to have said the payment would be $6,500 per month,
payable in any currency the men wanted. He also offered to set up Swiss bank
accounts for the men, according to Federal investigators.

From Zurich, the four men flew to Tripoli, Mr. Thompson said, where they were
greeted by a representative from the Delex International Corporation, a Virginia
company owned by Mr. Wilson. They were escorted out of the airport without a
customs check, the account continues, and taken to a military compound where
they met the chief of Libyan intelligence, Abdul Senussi.

''He wanted to know if we could supply a gas that would subdue 800 men for
several hours in a desert environment,'' Mr. Thompson said.  ''We told him that
there was no such agent. He then wanted to know all about the principles of land
warfare, things like vertical envelopment and the elements of surprise.''

When the session ended, the former sergeant said, the Americans were driven to
the Beach Hotel, where Douglas M. Schlacter, a friend and business associate of
Mr. Wilson, told them to relax. Mr.  Schlacter is under Federal investigation on
charges of involvement in illegally exporting explosives to Libya. He is
believed to be living in Africa.

They See Explosives Laboratory

About a week after their arrival in Tripoli, in the first week in August, Mr.
Thompson said, the Americans were taken to a palace outside Tripoli where they
were shown an explosives laboratory.

The investigators later determined that Mr. Wilson had hired another group of
Americans with expertise in explosives and had taken them to Tripoli to
manufacture terrorist bombs. The investigation of this operation led to the
indictment of Mr. Wilson and two others last year.

After touring the explosives shop, Mr. Thompson said, he and and his colleagues
were told to prepare a training course for Libyan commandos.

By this point, Mr. Thompson said, he was seriously concerned about the mission.
''I know the agency does bizarre things,'' he said, ''but working for Libyan
intelligence was too much.''

He decided he must return to the United States and tell the Special Forces about
his misgivings.  Leaving his companions behind, Mr. Thompson returned. When he
reached Fort Bragg, early in September, his superiors told him that the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, having been notified by military intelligence, was
investigating the Libyan operation. Mr.  Thompson was told to cooperate with the
investigation.

Requests for Supplies

While he was doing so, he said, several requests arrived from Tripoli for
supplies. Mr. Thompson told the military intelligence authorities, he said, and
was instructed to ship the requested goods, which included training manuals and
combat boots. The materials went during September and October.

After this, Mr. Thompson said, ''I got a call from the guys I knew in
counterintelligence. They told me it wasn't an Agency operation after all. At
that point, I didn't know what the hell was happening.''

Mr. Thompson eventually severed his connections to Mr. Wilson, but a half-dozen
other retired Green Berets went to Libya to train terrorists after his return to
Fort Bragg. It is not clear what they thought the operation was supposed to be
or whom they thought was sponsoring it. Federal investigators believe that
several may still be in Libya working for Mr. Wilson.

A major unresolved question is how the counterintelligence officers at Fort
Bragg decided that the mission was legitimate when Mr.  Thompson first spoke to
them.

Several Federal investigators said they believed that Mr. Wilson might have
secured unofficial approval from friends who held senior positions in the
clandestine services of Central Intelligence. In return, according to this
unconfirmed theory, the agency would benefit from intelligence collected by the
Americans working in Libya.

''Whatever happened, it's a sorry episode,'' one senior Justice Department
official said. Mr. Thompson, for his part, says he lives on ''full alert,''
concerned that death threats he has received since he left Libya may become a
reality.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Edwin P. Wilson

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              August 26, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SATIRE AT FILM FESTIVAL

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 302 words


A diverse collection of satirical American films, from Charlie Chaplin's 1940
''The Great Dictator,'' in which he played both Adolf Hitler and a Jewish
barber, to Thomas Cohen's ''The hungry i Reunion,'' a 1981 feature about the San
Francisco club that gave such comics as Lenny Bruce and Mort Sahl their starts,
will be presented at the 19th New York Film Festival in a series called ''Movies
for Cynics.''

Beginning Sept. 16 at 3 P.M. with ''The Great Dictator,'' these features will be
shown at the Paramount Theater, Broadway and 61st Street, through Sept. 22. They
were chosen because they ''questioned and challenged the prevailing political
and social mores,'' according to a festival spokesman.

Other films are: ''The Great McGinty,'' Preston Sturges's first film as
writer-director, 1940; ''The Americanization of Emily,'' an attack on heroism
and war by Arthur Hiller, 1964; ''Putney Swope,'' about a black advertising
executive, by Robert Downey, 1969; ''Taking Off,'' about teen-age runaways and
their middle-class parents, Milos Forman's first American film, 1971.

Also: ''Smile,'' about a California beauty contest, by Michael Ritchie, 1975;
''The Private Files of J. Edgar Hoover,'' by Larry Cohen, never released
commercially, 1977; ''Winter Kills,'' about the aftermath of a Presidential
assassination, by William Richert, 1979; ''First Family,'' about an American
President, his wife and daughter, by Buck Henry, 1980, and ''El Salvador:
Another Vietnam,'' by Glen Silber and Tete Vasconcellas, 1981.

Two short films to be shown during these programs are: Charles Braverman's
''Nixon: From Checkers to Watergate'' and ''An Acquired Taste,'' by Ralph
Arlyck, on a film maker's turning 40 years old.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. CONSIDERING SPECIAL RADIO BROADCASTS TO CUBA

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 657 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 26


The Reagan Administration is giving consideration to creating a radio station
that would broadcast to Cuba about its internal developments, Administration
officials said today.

The plan for the broadcasts, which would be similar to those of Radio Free
Europe to Eastern Europe and Radio Liberty to the Soviet Union, is one of the
priority projects under study to demonstrate firmness toward Cuban activities in
the Western Hemisphere and elsewhere. Along with Libya, the Administration has
accused Cuba of interfering in the affairs of other nations.

Officials said other steps being taken against Cuba include a pending request
for legislation that would allow the Navy and Coast Guard to stop any effort by
Cuba to repeat last year's refugee flow from the port of Mariel that brought
125,000 people to the United States, including many deemed undesirable by the
Americans.

The Administration also intends to stiffen a 20-year-old trade embargo against
Cuba to prevent what one official called ''leakage'' from American companies and
foreign affiliates of those companies.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. has called for both longterm and
short-range studies on what to do about Cuba. He has been upset over Cuban
support for insurgents in El Salvador and Guatemala and by Cuba's influence in
Nicaragua.

He has said that the United States would ''go to the source'' of the problem of
Cuban-led subversion and would not repeat the Vietnam experience. This has
suggested some kind of military confrontation, but officials have said that this
was not likely and that other steps could be taken first.

In a related development, the State Department said today that four more UH-1H
troop-carrying helicopters were being sent to El Salvador to help combat the
guerrillas. The Administration is considering additional economic and military
assistance to the Salvadoran Government, which already has 10 of these
helicopters.

Dean Fischer, the department spokesman, said that the insurgents in El Salvador
seem ''bent on paralyzing the Salvadorean economy through a systematic attack on
the electrical communications and transportation systems.''

He said the insurgents had been resupplied with arms and munitions. Another
official said the arms were coming from Cuba.The insurgent strategy has caused
problems in maintaining the flow of water, light and power to hospitals and
other institutions, Mr.  Fischer said.

Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, who is chairman of the
Foreign Relations subcommittee on the Western Hemisphere, introduced an
amendment in June that called for all broadcasts by the Voice of America to be
designated ''Radio Free Cuba.''

The Voice of America, which is an arm of the United States Governnment,
regularly beams broadcasts in Spanish to Cuba and other Latin American
countries, with emphasis on world news and developments in the United States.

The concept now under study, as explained by officials, would be to create a
separate agency for broadcasts to Cuba about internal developments and other
news being censored in the Cuban press.

A tentative name for the station would be ''Radio Broadcasting to Cuba,''
officials said. Legislation would be needed to provide funds for the operation.
Private foundations and individuals may be invited to contribute, and
transmission facilities may be rented in Florida or on some island to reduce the
costs.

Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, the models for the proposed station, were
originally financed clandestinely by the Central Intelligence Agency. In 1973,
Congress established a Board for International Broadcasting to oversee the
operations of these stations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books of the Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 978 words


By John Leonard
SENTIMENTAL IMPERIALISTS. The American Experience in East Asia. By James C.
Tomson Jr., Peter W. Stanley and John Curtis Perry. 323 pages.  Harper & Row.
$17.50.

TO characterize the American experience of East Asia, from approximately 1784
until the fall of Saigon, as ''sentimental'' or ''charming'' sounds silly, if
not monstrous. And yet a charm is magical and hypnotic. Attached to a bracelet,
it is supposed to arouse love. Our affair with the Orient - China, Japan, the
Philippines, Korea and the Archipelago of Chinese upstarts - was unrequited. We
gave them Christ and republicanism and consumer goods for which there was no
longer a domestic market; they agitated unto revolution, as if they had a right
to their own cultural integrity.  We ''lost.''

Not the least of the many virtues of this volume - compiled by students of John
K. Fairbank and Edwin O. Reischauer - is its suspicion of determinisms. We
sought, in East Asia, souls more than we sought customers. That we should have,
with such arrogance, presumed an intimacy with grace is astonishing; they didn't
buy Christ, and Coco-Cola was less than sacramental.

Grew Up in China

James C. Tomson Jr., director of Harvard's Nieman Fellows, grew up in China and
did time at the State Department and at the White House (1961-1966). Peter W.
Stanley is a professor of American and Philippine history at Carleton College.
John Curtis Perry, a professor of history at Tufts' Fletcher School of Law and
Diplomacy, is the author of ''Beneath the Eagle's Wings: Americans in Occupied
Japan.'' They have contrived a book to explain our botched romance with the East
- incurious and supercilious China, eager and avaricious Japan, abused Korea, a
trapped Philippines and a moralistic United States, as if Protestantism were a
steam engine full of uplifting guff, as if Pearl Buck and Henry Luce, guilty of
association with the missionary impulse, could solve the reactionary mysteries
of the East.

We invented this East, and not to create markets. We wanted congregations,
before we had a Navy to ordain them. China was perceived as a sort of moral
silly-putty; Japan was understood to be cherry blossoms, geishas and Mt. Fuji;
Korea, when we bothered to think about it at all, was a ''cultural filter'' or a
ping-pong ball between the Asian superpowers; the Philippines, our embarrassing
experiment in imperialism, would be grateful to us because we were nicer than
the Spanish. In our mucking about in East Asia, we were benign.

Imagine, then, our surprise when these little, yellow people failed to
appreciate Western avuncularism while adapting Western technology. Imagine our
chagrin when Japanese intellectuals decided that, from Armenia and Persia, ''two
streams'' of culture flowed; one stream, ''democratic, aggressive, inductive,''
would culminate in America; the other, ''imperial, conservative, deductive,''
would culminate in China. ''Young Japan,'' according to Uchimura Kanzo, ''has
the best of Europe and the best of Asia at her command. At her touch the circuit
is completed, and the healthy fluid shall overflow the earth.''

This was not an invention; it was a bad dream. We were supposed to be the
cutting edge of Westward Ho, of manifest destiny. Why, then, did it take
two-thirds of the American Army to subdue the Philippines in 1900? Why were we
involved in five wars in East Asia from 1898 on, and none before? How come
Japan, China, and the United States are, for the moment, in uneasy alliance?
Could Russia be an explanation?

''Sentimental Imperialists'' charms - and I mean to be ambivalent - because it
rejects vulgar Marxism and Luce Henryism. It reminds us that Manchuria is ''as
large as Germany and France combined'' and that if we were to ''iron Korea flat,
it would cover the earth.''

Two Koreas, in fact, are roughly the size of Minnesota and yet maintain ''the
world's fifth-largest armed force.'' It is about time we realized that these
nations, ancient and complicated, invented themselves long before our
missionaries and our diplomats and our occupying forces made snap judgments and
dropped atom bombs.

We are advised that our vandalizing of the East had less to do with a theory
about the rapid rate of capital formation than it had to do with a dream of
Christian cities on small green hills, as though the Yangtze were the Merrimack.
We are led to believe that whatever happened in Indochina after we lost there -
and surely Joan Baez is right in weeping - is none of our business. If we bleed
from the wrists, it is because we tried to grab what we couldn't be bothered to
understand.

What Is There to Win?

Finally, this book tells us with a flat lack of emphasis, we were - and still
are - racists. Skin is more important than money. Dreams are no substitute for
diplomacy; greed expresses itself metaphysically as well as economically.
Richard Nixon went to China to satisfy psychological needs that are
dishonorable, as if, by skateboard on the Great Wall, we were to win one for the
Gipper. One what?

''Sentimental Imperialists'' is straightforward and so cogent as to cause pain,
tells us more than we wanted to know about our East Asian delirium and shatters
the charm. It turns out that the sentimentalists are the monsters. Why didn't we
stay home? Aside from establishing the right of women to be educated, most of
what we did was pious genocide. We loved them to dust.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Peter Stanley, John Curtis Perry, James Thomson

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 27, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ROGER BALDWIN, 97, IS DEAD; CRUSADER FOR CIVIL RIGHTS FOUNDED THE

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2582 words


A.C.L.U.  Roger Baldwin, who founded the American Civil Liberties Union in 1920
and crusaded for the causes of freedom at home and abroad, died yesterday of
heart failure in Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J. He was 97 years old and
lived in Oakland, N.J.

During a brief hospital stay just before his birthday last Jan. 21, President
Carter awarded him the Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor. At
home later, Mr. Baldwin voiced his enduring philosophy:

''Never yield your courage - your courage to live, your courage to fight, to
resist, to develop your own lives, to be free. I'm talking about resistance to
wrong and fighting oppression.''

Ira Glasser, the A.C.L.U. director, who had visited him last week, and Norman
Dorsen, the organization's president, said in a statement yesterday that Mr.
Baldwin was ''one of the titans of American history'' and ''in a way one of our
country's founding fathers - they wrote the Constitution, and he invented a way
to enforce it.''

Defender of Liberties

An amiable Boston aristocrat, Roger Nash Baldwin was for decades the country's
unofficial agitator for, and defender of, its civil liberties. With patrician
dispassion, he battled ceaselessly for the concept that the guarantees of the
Constitution and the Bill of Rights apply equally to all.

He triumphed often enough that when he retired in 1950 as operating head of the
American Civil Liberties Union, he was esteemed by such disparate people as
Joseph L. Rauh Jr. of Americans for Democratic Action and General of the Army
Douglas MacArthur. This was a reversal of the situation in the 1920's and 30's,
when civil liberties were widely regarded as a radical cause and Mr. Baldwin was
often considered a dangerous eccentric and most probably a revolutionary.

Mr. Baldwin liked to classify himself as a reformer, and explained: ''I am dead
certain that human progress depends on those heretics, rebels and dreamers who
have been my kin in spirit and whose 'holy discontent' has challenged
established authority and created the expanding visions mankind may yet
realize.''

Although Mr. Baldwin tried hard not to be sectarian, he inevitably took on the
coloration of the people and the civil-liberties cases he defended. Since the
most in need of constitutional protection were often leftists, especially in the
1920's and 30's, he was sometimes regarded as a leftist himself.

Pursuing the 'Whole Truth'

''Well, I was guilty of that at one time,'' he said in a 1968 interview. ''I
mean, I began to think that I shouldn't defend people on the right, that the
only defense that mattered was on the left. I got over that. It didn't take
long. But there was a short period in my life when I was considerably influenced
by Marxist thought - that the real center in society was the organized underdog
in the trade unions. Which, of course, is true, but it's not the whole truth.

''And these people can become just as great tyrants as the other side. That's
what I didn't see - that helping them get freedom didn't help the cause of
freedom.''

Over the years, though, Mr. Baldwin and the A.C.L.U. defended in the courts
people of all political hues. The legal work was undertaken by volunteer
lawyers, among the most prominent being Arthur Garfield Hays, Morris Ernst,
Osmond K. Fraenkel and Clarence Darrow.

Mr. Baldwin was no single-minded zealot. He was probably the only member of the
Harvard Overseers' Committee on the Economics Departments who could flash a card
attesting that he had once been a Wobbly - a member of the Industrial Workers of
the World. He was perhaps the only Wobbly to have been an active participant in
the National Audubon Society and the American Political Science Association.

Remained an Activist

He used to spend weekends in a rustic camp he owned on the Hackensack River in
New Jersey. There he watched birds, canoed, observed nature, hiked and prepared
his own meals. His prowess with a skillet was notable.

Among Mr. Baldwin's principal other affiliations were the International League
for the Rights of Man, in which he remained active to the end; the National
Conference of Social Welfare, the National Urban League, the American League for
Peace and Democracy, the North American Committee for Spanish Democracy, the
Fellowship of Reconciliation, the Inter-American Association for Democracy and
Freedom, the Friends of the Soviet Union and Americans for Intellectual Freedom.

The first national committees on the A.C.L.U. exemplified his genius for getting
the most diverse individuals to cooperate for civil liberties. Dr. Harry F. Ward
and John Haynes Holmes, the liberal clergymen, were among its chairmen. William
Z. Foster, the Communist leader, sat cheek by jowl with Felix Frankfurter, the
Harvard law profesor and later Supreme Court Justice; the Rev. John A. Ryan, a
Roman Catholic priest, and John Dewey, the philosopher.

For the most part, Mr. Baldwin was not a direct participant in civil-liberties
struggles, but he was arrested once in a free speech and assembly incident. That
occurred in 1924 during a silk strike in Paterson, N.J., when the police had
closed the workers' halls on the ground that strike meetings were an incitement
to disorder.

Determined to Be Arrested

Mr. Baldwin recommended marching to City Hall and protesting. ''We got some
flags and a copy of the Constitution and set forth,'' he recounted. The police
broke up the meeting and arrested the march leaders.

''I looked on in some bewilderment.'' Mr. Baldwin recalled. ''I had organized
the affair and I was not arrested, I determined I would be.'' After spending the
night in a striker's home, he related, ''I went down to police headquarters and
asked for the captain'' and insisted upon being arrested. Uncomfortable at
booking the aristocratic Mr. Baldwin, the captain nonetheless locked him up.

Subsequently, Mr. Baldwin and the strike leaders were indicted for ''rout, riot
and unlawful assembly.'' He received a six-month sentence, a conviction that the
New Jersey Supreme Court unanimously reversed in a notable victory for the
A.C.L.U.

''Doing other people good'' was a philosophy on which he had been nurtured in
his childhood and that reflected his Unitarian background. He was born on Jan.
21, 1884, in Wellesley, Mass., a Boston suburb, to Frank Fenno Baldwin, a shoe
manufacturer, and the former Lucy Cushing Nash.

Reaches a Turning Point

He earned both a bachelor's and master's degree from Harvard, traveled in Europe
and became a sociology instructor in 1906 at Washington University in St. Louis.
At the same time, he worked in a neighborhood house among the poor.

He was named chief probation officer of the Juvenile Court and achieved a
national reputation in probation, social work and civic reform. His book,
''Juvenile Courts and Probation,'' written with Bernard Flexner, was for many
years a standard text.

In 1909, he attended a lecture that he called ''a turning point in my
intellectual life.'' The speaker was Emma Goldman, the anarchist.  ''What I
heard in that crowded working-class hall from a woman who spoke with passion and
intelligence,'' he said, ''was a challenge to society I had never heard before.
Here was a vision of the end of poverty and injustice by free association of
those who worked, by the abolition of privilege and by the organized power of
the exploited.

''In the years since I met Miss Goldman, I have never departed far from the
general philosophy represented in libertarian literature.  That is, in the goal
of a society with a minimum of compulsion, a maximum of individual freedom and
of voluntary association, and the abolition of exploitation and poverty.''

His 'First Impulse'

From 1910 to 1917, Mr. Baldwin was secretary of the reform Civic League of St.
Louis. In that job, he recalled, ''I got my first impulse to civil liberties''
when the police denied Margaret Sanger, the birth-control advocate, the right to
hold a meeting in a private hall.

When the United States entered World War I in 1917, he gave up his St. Louis job
to operate the Civil Liberties Bureau of the American Union Against Militarism,
which was reorganized in 1920 as the American Civil Liberties Union.

The chief work of the earlier bureaus was in defending draft resisters and
conscientious objectors. ''Up to then,'' Mr. Baldwin said, ''there had been only
scattered civil-liberties movements.  This was the first time the wholesale
attack on civil liberties forced a nonpartisan defense of the principles of the
Bill of Rights of a countrywide character.''

In 1918, Mr. Baldwin was convicted and sentenced to a year in jail for refusing
to be drafted. In a speech to the court, he said: ''The compelling motive for
refusing to comply with the draft act is my uncompromising opposition to the
principle of conscription of life by the state for any purpose whatever, in time
of war or peace.''

Wandered as Laborer

Under the threat of Hitlerism, he modified his views of the draft in World War
II, and was among those A.C.L.U. members who opposed organizational support in
the courts for draft resistance in the Vietnam conflict.

When Mr. Baldwin was released from prison in 1919 after nine months he spent a
year as a wandering blue-collar laborer. It was then that he joined the I.W.W.
Cooks and Waiters Union. ''I liked the I.W.W.  men,'' he recalled later. ''They
had guts, hope, a philosophy.''

As a common laborer, he roamed the Middle West, riding free in empty freight
cars. He also took part in the 1919 Pittsburgh steel strike as a union spy. He
returned to New York in 1920 to found the A.C.L.U. with Albert DeSiver and
Walter Nelles, both conservative lawyers with a passion for the legal rights of
the underdog.

In its early years, the A.C.L.U. defended many free-speech and assembly cases of
labor or left-wing origin. Under Mr. Baldwin's direction and with the assistance
of volunteer lawyers, the A.C.L.U.  helped abolish the infamous Pennsylvania
coal and iron police; defended John T. Scopes in the famous Tennessee ''Monkey
Trial'' of 1925, in which the case was lost but the cause won; took part in the
Sacco-Vanzetti case; was instrumental in lifting the barriers to James Joyce's
''Ulysses''; successfully challenged Mayor Frank Hague of Jersey City; achieved
free-press rights for the Jehovah's Witnesses, a religious sect; defended free
speech for Henry Ford, the Ku Klux Klan, the German-American Bund and 19 members
on the San Francisco Chamber of Commerce.

$2,500 Yearly Salary

Explaining the dazzling variety of his ''clients,'' Mr. Baldwin said, ''I always
felt from the beginning that you had to defend people you dislike and feared as
well as those you admired.''

Mr. Baldwin's associate in many causes was Norman Thomas, the Socialist leader.
Mr. Thomas would become impassioned and bang the table; Mr. Baldwin, with
clinical detachment, hunted for what he called ''an angle.''

Under Mr. Baldwin, the A.C.L.U. operated on a scarcity budget. His salary for
most of his term as director was $2,500 a year, on which, with $1,000 in private
income, he lived in plain style.

Indeed, he was famous for his sparse wardrobe - one rumpled suit did for years -
and for his Spartan luncheons and dinners. He used to carry a cheap notebook in
which he accounted for every penny he spent.

A Change of Heart

At the same time, he was a trustee of the American Fund for Public Service,
known as the Garland Fund for its founder, Charles Garland.  The fund started in
1920 with $800,000 and by the time it was dissolved 20 years later about $2
million had been given away -mostly for workers' education.

In the 20's and 30's, Mr. Baldwin was extremely active in the American left. A
member of no party, he was nonetheless amenable to helping the Communists,
Socialists and lefists generally through united front committees. By 1940,
however, he had experienced a change of heart toward the Communists, and he was
responsible that year for the removal of them and their friends from the
national board of the A.C.L.U.

The most dramatic ouster was that of Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, a former Wobbly and
longtime personal friend. Her removal came about when the board, at Mr.
Baldwin's urging, adopted a ''loyalty'' resolution barring from it or its staff
anyone ''who is a member of a political organization which supports totalitarian
dictatorship in any country, or who by his public declarations indicates his
support of such a principle.'' Miss Flynn declined to quit and was removed after
a hearing.

Explaining the incident, Mr. Baldwin said: ''In the 1930's, our board had about
eight of the 30 members who were partisans of the defense of Communist rights
and of the party line on rights. They never controlled decisions. I saw to that
by not bringing before the board touchy issues unless I was sure that a majority
of disinterested members would be present.

''But that minority became increasingly obstructive. The chairman, Dr. Ward,
sympathized with them, and though they won no decisions, feelings ran high when
the Nazi-Soviet pact exploded the myth that the Communists were a democratic
ally. The threat of a split was so immediate that I wrote the 1940 resolution in
an effort to clear the confusion as to where we stood.''

Helped MacArthur in Japan

One consequence of Mr. Baldwin's action, unforeseen in 1940, was that the
anti-Communist resolution became a pattern for governmental loyalty oaths, which
the A.C.L.U. later fought in court.

In World War II, Mr. Baldwin and the A.C.L.U. opposed the Government's removal
of 100,000 Japanese-Americans from their homes on the Pacific Coast. After the
war he was General MacArthur's official guest in Japan, where he helped to set
up a civil-liberties policy for the occupation authorities. He was likewise a
consultant in the American zone of occupied Germany.

Until a few years ago, he taught civil-liberties law at the University of Puerto
Rico. In his late years his vigor astonished his friends, especially when, at
the age of 84, he undertook a canoe trip on the Missouri River.

Mr. Baldwin's first wife was Madeleine Z. Doty, a lawyer and reformer, whom he
married in 1919. They were divorced after 15 years and she has since died. In
1936 he married Evelyn Preston, also a reformer, whose two sons took his name.
She died in 1962. They had one child, a daughter, Helen, now dead.

Mr. Baldwin is survived by a brother, Herbert, of Boston, and two stepsons
-Roger R., a computer engineer, who had lived with him in Oakland since last
June, and Carl, a Manhattan lawyer.

After a private cremation, a memorial service is to be planned for September.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Roger Baldwin

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CARTER SAYS REAGAN'S CHINA POLICY IS 'COMPATIBLE' WITH '78 ACCORDS

BYLINE: By JAMES P. STERBA, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 797 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Friday, Aug. 28


Former President Jimmy Carter today described Reagan Administration policies
toward China, including the ''prudent'' sale of defensive weapons to Taiwan and
the offer of such arms to the mainland, as ''compatible'' with the agreements he
negotiated three years ago with Peking's Deputy Party Chairman, Deng Xiaoping.

While Peking opposed any arms sales to Taiwan, Mr. Carter told reporters this
morning as he left Peking for Xian, ''We understood that there was a difference
of approach.''

No Time Limit, Carter Says

He said his Administration made it clear to Peking that the United States would
continue sales of defensive weapons to Taiwan without any time limit while the
island and the mainland settled their disputes ''peacefully and with patience.''

Chinese leaders made only mild protests against such sales by the Carter
Administration after the two nations normalized relations.Proposals by the
Reagan Administration to do the same, however, have evoked angry protests in
Peking along with indirect threats that if such sales continue, Chinese-American
relations would be seriously damaged.

Mr. Carter said that the Reagan Administration had soothed Peking's fears after
an awkward start early this year.

'Haig Explained It Pretty Well'

''I have not detected among the Chinese leaders any quandary about the Reagan
policy because, apparently, Secretary Haig explained it pretty well,'' Mr.
Carter said. Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. met with Chinese officials
in Peking in June.

Mr. Carter said that if he still was in the White House he would also have
offered to sell China defensive arms as the Reagan Administration has proposed.

Mr. Carter said that United States arms sales to Taiwan ''certainly should not
pose any threat whatsoever to the mainland.'' On China's disputes with the
Soviet Union in the north and with Vietnam in the south, Mr. Carter said: ''I
recognize that China is facing a possible threat from the north and south, and
we don't want to provide a new threat from the east.'' ''It was clear at the
time of normalization that the Chinese position was that there should be no arms
sales by the United States to Taiwan. Our approach was that arms sales to Taiwan
should be prudent and that the settlement of the issues between China and the
people of Taiwan should be carried out peacefully and with patience.  We
understood that there was a difference of approach.''

Mr. Carter said that, while there seemed to be a ''deviation from normalization
commitments'' by Mr. Reagan during last year's election campaign and early in
the Reagan Administration, ''I think the recent developments and explanations of
the Reagan policy have been very reassuring to me.''

He called the offer to sell defensive weapons to China ''a normal progression in
the evolving relationship between our two countries.'' The former President, who
arrived in China on Monday for a private 10-day visit, raised the Taiwan issue
yesterday during the taping of an interview for Chinese television by saying:

''We look upon this as still a very difficult and sensitive issue, but one to be
resolved by the Chinese people without interference from my country.''

Talks on Normalization

Asked by a reporter whether there had been unresolved differences three years
ago during the negotiations leading to a normalization of Chinese-American
relations, Mr. Carter said:

''I don't know of any difference between me and Deng Xiaoping on what was said
concerning the sale of arms to Taiwan. The Chinese had been adamantly opposed to
the sale of any arms to Taiwan, and our commitment was that it be handled with
prudence, that the arms be strictly defensive.''

Mr. Carter made his remarks during a day that culminated in a meeting at the
Great Hall of the People with Hu Yaobang, the Communist Party Chairman.

Reception at Great Hall

The meeting followed an unusually casual reception at the Great Hall at which
Mr. Carter acted as host. Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang talked with informal groups
of Americans and Chinese.

At the reception, Mr. Carter chided both China and the United States about the
need to get beyond obstacles in deepening their relationship. ''At this stage,''
he said, ''our relations are somewhat like riding a bicycle: if we don't move
forward, at a good pace, our relations may become unstable.''

''The recurring problem in Sino-American relations has been that rhetoric has
exceeded performance, that there has been more thunder than beneficial rain,''
he added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Deng Xiaoping with Jimmy Carter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK AND POL POT LEADER TO MEET IN SINGAPORE

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 755 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Aug. 27


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's deposed chief of state and former King, said
today that he would go from France to Singapore next week to meet with Prime
Minister Khieu Samphan, the nominal leader of the regime that was ousted by the
Vietnamese invasion.

Interviewed by telephone at his home in Mougins on the French Riviera, the
Prince said ''it would be saying too much'' that he was looking forward to
meeting a leader of the Cambodian regime that killed hundreds of thousands,
perhaps millions, of his fellow countrymen, including three of his children,
from 1975 to 1979.

The two Cambodians met last March in Pyongyang, North Korea, where the Prince
was then in exile. The meeting was arranged by China, which is trying gain
international acceptance of the forces resisting the Vietnamese occupation by
adding non-Communist elements. The strength of the resistance lies largely in
the Communist movement led by former Prime Minister Pol Pot, and strongly
supported by Peking.

Sources close to Son Sann, the leader of a third Cambodian grouping and a former
Prime Minister under Prince Sihanouk, said he would participate in the Singapore
meeting if Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore invited him, as he did the
Prince. But Mr. Son Sann said through an aide that his conditions for
participation in a united front remained nonnegotiable.

Coalition Government Sought

The conditions are the formation of a coalition Government that would occupy
Cambodia's United Nations seat, which is still held by the former Pol Pot
representative. Mr. Son Sann insists that his group should hold the Prime
Ministership and a majority of the ministerial posts, that the principal
Communist leaders exile themselves and that his guerrillas receive sufficient
equipment from outside forces to match the present overwhelming superiority of
the Pol Pot army.

Prince Sihanouk said he considered these demands ''unrealistic'' in view of the
disproportion of forces. He said he would seek no Government position but might
accept the Presidency of a united front that the Pol Pot group has offered him.

The Prince acknowledged with a bitter laugh a reminder that from 1970 he had
served as the powerless leader of a united front of which the Pol Pot forces
were the real strength. After they won the war, they put the Prince under house
arrest and killed his children and many other members of his family.

''The situation is no longer the same,'' he said. ''Now there are the
Vietnamese.'' Paradoxical as it may seem, the Prince said, the Vietnamese
occupation was a guarantee that the Pol Pot regime could not return. ''The
Vietnamese would never permit it.''

Forcing Hanoi to Negotiate

Prince Sihanouk believes the only hope for freeing his country from foreign
occupation is to bring the Vietnamese to the negotiating table by making life
untenable for them as the occupying power. While the present resistance forces
could never defeat the Vietnamese, he suggested that they could bring Hanoi to
see negotiation as the only way out of a costly stalemate in the field.

''If the Vietnamese were not there and the Khmer Rouge won, they would liquidate
me,'' the prince added, referring to the Pol Pot forces. With the Vietnamese in
Cambodia, he said he would take the risk of forming a common front with the
Communists alone and leave the door open for Mr. Son Sann to join later.

Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand have urged Mr. Son Sann to put aside his
objections and link forces with the Pol Pot group. In a strong statement
yesterday, Singapore's Second Deputy Prime Minister, Sinnathamby Rajaratnam,
suggested that personal ambition, prejudice and lack of patriotism played a role
in Mr. Son Sann's insistence on the effective removal of the Pol Pot leadership.
Mr. Son Sann is strongly anti-Communist and represents the class decimated by
the Pol Pot regime.

Prince Sihanouk said he would accept any help to make the Vietnamese leave,
including that of the United States. ''All that the Americans could give us
would be welcome except armed forces,'' the Prince said. ''We would accept
advisers but no combat soldiers.''

''Just like in the war against American imperialism I took the help of China and
Vietnam, I would accept the help of the Americans against Soviet-Vietnamese
imperialism,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FUGITIVE AGENT SAYS FORMER GREEN BERETS STILL WORK IN LIBYA

BYLINE: By United Press International

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 463 words


A former Central Intelligence Agency agent wanted in the United States on
charges of supplying explosives to Libya said yesterday that four former Green
Berets were still working for the Libyan leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, but he
denied that they were helping train terrorists.

The former agent, Edwin P. Wilson, was named Wednesday in a C.I.A.  statement
that said some of the agency's employees had supported him in his dealings with
Colonel Qadaffi. Mr. Wilson said that he had worked as a middleman for a Swiss
concern, which he declined to name, that recruits former members of the Army's
Special Forces to work in Libya.

'Low-Level Army Tactics'

''Almost without exception, they were staff sergeants, tech sergeants, master
sergeants,'' he said in an interview broadcast on the ABC News television
program ''World News Tonight.'' He appeared only in silhouette.

''Their forte was just like Vietnam, to teach low-level army tactics,'' he
added. ''Squad tactics, compass reading, map reading, platoon tactics,
instruction on fire maneuver ... low-level things.''

The C.I.A. statement was issued in response to a New York Times article saying
that 10 men trained by the Army Special Forces went to work for the Libyan
Government in 1977, apparently believing they were infiltrating the Libyan
Government on behalf of the Central Intelligence Agency.

The agency said that it had not encouraged the activities in Libya and that two
employees who had provided support for the project had been forced to resign as
a result.

Mr. Wilson also said he believed that the United States had until recently
secretly supported the North African country.

Faces Federal Indictments

The fugitive, who is living in Tripoli, Libya, was indicted by a Federal grand
jury in Washington in April 1980 on charges of illegally supplying explosive
timers to Libya, setting up a terrorist training school there and conspiring to
commit political assassinations.

Mr. Wilson said that an American named Brower had worked with a Libyan who
imported explosives from the United States for the government in Tripoli. Jerome
S. Brower, a California explosives manufacturer, was indicted with Mr. Wilson
and pleaded guilty earlier this year to one count of illegally shipping
explosives.

In discussing accusations that he sold explosive timers, Mr. Wilson said: ''The
timers were not to be used other than from our point of view, other than in a
training position. So we discussed this with the local people, we held a small
training school for minefield clearing, for clearing boobytraps.''

ABC said that Mr. Wilson had denied asking anyone to kill Libyan dissidents in
Cairo and Denver and promised to return to the United States for a court
appearance ''when the heat's off.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DATE WITH JUDY COLLINS AT THE SAVOY

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words


WHILE pop music today has many fine interpretive singers, perhaps none is as
discriminating in the choice of material as Judy Collins, who will appear at the
Savoy, 141 West 44th Street, tomorrow night at 9 with a four-piece band (tickets
are $10.50 and $12.50; information: 921-9490). In the last 20 years, Miss
Collins has helped establish a canon of modern pop standards that spans 50
years, embraces several languages and treats such disparate songwriters as Bob
Dylan, Stephen Sondheim, Jacques Brel, Ned Rorem and Leonard Cohen as artistic
equals. Even so, Miss Collins, a 42-year-old veteran of 18 albums (including
three anthologies), is still often routinely labeled a folk singer.

''I don't mind being called a folk singer, as long as that means the music comes
from the heart,'' Miss Collins said the other day over coffee in her spacious
apartment on Manhattan's Upper West Side. ''My father was a radio entertainer,
and I grew up around great music of all kinds. I've always felt that a good
song, whether you find it in a folk form or on a Rodgers and Hart lead sheet is
something that's going to last. For the last three years, I haven't even played
the guitar on stage. It had become a crutch that prevented me from learning how
to move freely.''

Miss Collins ''rebelled'' into folk music when she was a teen-ager growing up in
Colorado. Her previous musical training had been on classical piano with Antonia
Brico, the teacher and conductor who was the subject of Miss Collins's
award-winning documentary film, ''Antonia: Portrait of a Woman,'' seven years
ago.

Along with Joan Baez, Miss Collins became one of the two most prominent female
voices in the folk boom of the late 1950's and early 60's. But after recording
two albums of traditional material, she began singing the urban folk songs of
Bob Dylan and others. From then on, her repertory rapidly expanded. On her sixth
album, ''In My Life'' (1966), Miss Collins presented a heady mixture of Dylan,
Brel, Brecht-Weill, John Lennon and Paul McCartney and Randy Newman songs.

A Strong Debussy Influence

A year later, the album ''Wildflowers'' yielded Miss Collins her first big hit,
singing Joni Mitchell's ''Both Sides Now,'' the song that established Miss
Mitchell as a major pop composer.  ''Wildflowers'' also marked Miss Collins's
debut as a writer, with three original songs, including the impressionistic
''Since You Asked,'' the first of several songs with a strong Debussy influence.
Like all of Miss Collins's songs, it was composed on the piano.

On ''Who Knows Where the Time Goes'' (1968), Miss Collins experimented further
by using country-rock musicians and scored a sizable hit with Ian Tyson's
country-flavored ''Someday Soon.'' From that album, Miss Collins's song ''My
Father'' has become something of a standard.

The album ''Judith'' (1975) mixed prerock chestnuts like ''I'll Be Seeing You,''
with more recent rock songs like the Rolling Stones' ''Salt of the Earth.'' It
also gave Miss Collins an international hit with Stephen Sondheim's ''Send In
the Clowns.''

'' 'Send In the Clowns' was two years old when I first heard it,'' Miss Collins
recalls, ''and Sinatra had already recorded it. But as soon as I heard it, I
knew it belonged to me. I have that feeling of deja vu sometimes about a song.
It's almost as though I knew it from another life.''

A Dynamic Relationship

Miss Collins has since recorded three more Sondheim songs. The obscure and
lovely ''I Remember Sky,'' which was composed for the television musical
''Evening Primrose'' in 1966, is the high point of her ''Hard Times for Lovers''
album, while her most recent album, ''Running for My Life,'' includes two songs
from ''Sweeney Todd.''

Miss Collins views her relationship to any song she sings as dynamic and
constantly deepening.  ''First you have to know how to do what you want to do
with a particular song,'' she said. ''Then there's the next step, which is
turning the song into your own. If someone else were to choose the same
material, it would be a totally different experience, where the personality of
the singer stamps whatever it is, and then you hear that person through the
material. One of the things that troubles me about writers who sing their own
songs is that they often seem unable to interpret what they write very
effectively because they can't take the necessary step back from it. It's
something I constantly have to remember myself.''

Miss Collins's singing career has not been without its problems.  Four years
ago, she had a hemangioma removed from her left vocal cord. And after she
appeared on ''Saturday Night Live'' with a bad case of the flu, there were
reports that she had lost her voice.

Miss Collins says, however, that her recovery from the operation was perfect and
that with voice lessons, her range has expanded to a solid three octaves. To
protect her voice, she now leads an abstinent life, having completely given up
smoking and drinking.

Miss Collins also remains staunchly political. In the early 1960's, she worked
for voter registration in Mississippi, and in the late 60's she was very active
in the antiwar movement.

Writing Skills Honed

''Integration and the Vietnam War were the two great issues of my day,'' she
maintains. ''More recently, there has been the cause of abortion rights.''

Musically, Miss Collins continues to hone her own writing skills, while keeping
an eye out for young songwriting talent. Her favorite young writer today is Hugh
Prestwood, who wrote the title song of her album before last, ''Hard Times for
Lovers.'' Some other up-andcoming writers she admires include Wendy Waldman, a
West Coast writer, and Kate and Anna McGarrigle, the Canadian sisters. Next
month, Miss Collins is set to go into the studio with Arif Mardin, the producer,
to cut her 19th album. She will have performed many of the songs in concert for
months ahead of time.

Perhaps the one artist with whom Miss Collins identifies most closely in terms
of development is the late Jacques Brel, whose love song to his homeland,
''Marieke,'' has become one of her signature songs.

''Brel began as a troubadour with a guitar and nothing else,'' Miss Collins
said, ''but I saw him work as early as 1968 in New York with a full orchestra.
And I said to myself, that's where I'm moving.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Judy Collins (pg.1)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 28, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: THE KALBS ON VIETNAM

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words


AT the publication party for Marvin and Bernard Kalb's biography, ''Kissinger,''
in 1974, someone asked the Secretary of State what he thought about the book.
Mr. Kissinger replied that he had not yet had a chance to read it, but that he
loved the title.

Now the brothers Kalb, correspondents for NBC News, are back with another
collaboration, ''The Last Ambassador'' (Little-Brown), about the fall of Saigon
in April 1975. While there are sure to be attempts to match the characters in
the book with the people who were actually in Saigon at the Communist takeover,
the book is a novel complete with the usual disclaimer that the characters are
products of the imagination.

The Kissinger book listed Marvin Kalb's name first on the title page, as did the
novel ''In the National Interest,'' which he wrote with the television newsman
Ted Koppel in 1977. ''The Last Ambassador'' lists Bernard first. ''That's only
right,'' said Marvin, the younger brother. ''Bernie was able to feel and breathe
and live Vietnam in a way I never was. I was in and out, but he lived there,
knew the place, and in that sense this is really his book. When the book talks
about the smell of Saigon, the heat, what it's like to fly over the country into
the highlands, that's Bernie Kalb 100 percent.''

Bernard Kalb, who lived for more than a decade in Southeast Asia, where three of
his four daughters were born, acknowledged his contribution. ''But things like
the bureaucratic art of selfprotection in the face of disaster and official
cover-ups all along the line, they are the perspectives of Marvin, who has been
covering the State Department for almost 20 years.''

The brothers said that the book grew out of their long discussions about Vietnam
over the years. ''We talked it out at lunches, dinners, even in the corridor of
our office,'' Marvin Kalb said. ''As we would talk, we would argue and compare
ideas and write notes. We wrote out an outline of more than 100 pages, and what
Bernie wrote went through my typewriter, and what I wrote went through his
typewriter. Then Bernie's wife, Phyllis, took all the material and all the
drafts and made it seamless.''

The brothers originally planned to write a work of nonfiction, and they
interviewed dozens of witnesses to those last turbulent days.  But writing a
detailed history while working as journalists presented problems, and so did the
difficulty of writing current history.  ''It's sometimes terribly difficult to
get three men who were in the same room at the same time to tell you the same
story,'' Marvin Kalb said. ''Each person tends to glorify his own role and so to
distort the role of others that it becomes nearly impossible to sort it all out
satisfactorily. So we made a U-turn and incorporated our research into the
novel.''

''We have a line in the preface to our Kissinger book, signed by both of us, in
which we say that any errors in the book are my brother's,'' Bernard Kalb said.
''Now if people ask who really wrote this book, I'll wait to see if the reviews
are great, and then I'll say I wrote it.''

In September 1968 a finback whale was beached in Wellfleet Harbor on Cape Cod.
Stranded, it lay there dying, occasionally struggling and groaning, while a few
bystanders formed a kind of wake. One of the bystanders was Stanley Kunitz, the
Pulitzer Prize-winning poet.  ''Finally, on the next morning, while I was about
one foot away from it, it opened its eyes and stared at me,'' he said. ''There
was an act of recognition. Then it gave a great groan and died.''

Mr. Kunitz jotted a note in his workbook, in which he sets down occasional
lines, phrases and metaphors. ''For all those years I thought of it as a
possibility for a poem I had to write,'' he said, ''but the narrative element
was difficult to master. When Harvard asked me to read a poem during
commencement week this year, I thought this was the time to write the poem. I
worked on it all spring.''

Mr. Kunitz later read the work at Cambridge University. Now Atlantic Monthly has
accepted it, and ''The Wellfleet Whale,'' a 150-line poem in five episodes, is
scheduled for publication late this year or early next.

''Often that's the way things happen with poems. They simmer and simmer, and
then they make the right connections, and suddenly they're alive and
thrashing,'' Mr. Kunitz said. ''But it doesn't usually take 13 years.''

In April 1945, with United States troops overrunning southern Okinawa, the
desperate Japanese high command decided to strike at the invading force with the
Yamato, the biggest battleship ever built.  Because there were not enough planes
or pilots to provide air cover, the Yamato sailed into combat accompanied only
by eight escort ships. Intercepted by American carrier planes 200 miles from
Okinawa, it was sunk in two hours with a loss of more than 3,000 lives.

''A Glorious Way to Die'' is the chronicle of that suicidal mission by Russell
Spurr, an editor of the Hong Kong-based Far Eastern Economic Review. It is also
one of two books scheduled for publication in the fall by Newmarket Press, a new
trade publishing company founded by Esther Margolis, who resigned last year as a
senior vice president of Bantam Books to start her own company.

Newmarket plans to publish 6 to 10 hard-cover and trade-paperback books a year,
fiction and nonfiction, and it has signed up several novels. Miss Margolis
acquired the Spurr book while she was at Bantam, after having met the author in
Hong Kong during a business trip to China, and she subsequently acquired
hard-cover and book-club rights for)Newmarket.

Mr. Spurr, a Briton who served in the Royal Indian Navy during World War II,
first learned of the Yamato during the occupation of Japan, when he was assigned
to Kure, the navy base in southern Honshu, where the ship was built. He took
notes at the time, but he stored them away until the mid-1970's when, during an
interview with one of Japan's leading naval historians, he noticed a picture of
the Yamato on the wall. His interest reawakened, he interviewed Japanese and
Americans who had witnessed the climactic battle. ''He had been doing all the
research on his own, but he hadn't written the manuscript,'' Miss Margolis said,
''and when he told me about it at dinner, I was fascinated.'' The book is a
Literary Guild alternate selection and a full selection of the Military Book
Club. Miss Margolis is pleased - and surprised. ''I never thought over the years
that the first book I'd publish would be about the kamikaze mission of a
battleship.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Marvin and Bernard Kalb

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               August 29, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SIFTING DIFFERENT VIEWS OF THE SAME FATAL EVENT

BYLINE: By PAUL L. MONTGOMERY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1498 words


James Robert Bruinel Herbert, a 32-year-old dealer in antique weapons, a Vietnam
War veteran and the former armorer in his National Guard company, was shot to
death by a police officer just after midnight on April 24 in the Washington
Heights section of Manhattan.

In the three-month investigation that followed, the case became a laboratory
example of the conflicting versions of events and often inconclusive physical
evidence that authorities will be called upon to resolve in the 150 or so
incidents of police officers shooting civilians that will happen in the city
this year.

The night of the shooting, the police said, Susan Medicis and Jose Sanchez, two
officers of the 30th Precinct, were in a patrol car investigating a report of a
disorderly man. They said Mr. Herbert came from the shadows near the southeast
corner of 160th Street and Broadway. They said he ignored a warning from Officer
Medicis, pulled a pistol and fired a shot before Officer Medicis returned fire,
killing him.

Officer Medicis, a six-year veteran, had not previously used her revolver
outside the police firing range. Officer Sanchez had twice before shot at
civilians, once in the course of a robbery and once in subduing a disorderly
man. Neither officer had ever been the subject of a civilian complaint.

Angry Talk at Funeral

Mr. Herbert had been arrested twice in the past, but never convicted. In 1974,
he was charged with menacing and possession of an unloaded weapon, and in 1977
he was charged with menacing and possession of a loaded gun. Both charges were
dismissed.

At Mr. Herbert's funeral at St. Philip's Episcopal Church on West 134th Street,
there was angry talk from the victim's family and friends that he had been slain
without reason. There was virtual unanimity that Mr. Herbert would not have
fired at an officer. The friends he had made in the business of selling
bayonets, uniforms and other collectors' items from his apartment on West 155th
Street said such a thing was unthinkable.

''I've known Jim 15 years, and I never saw him once lose his temper enough to be
violent in any way, shape or form,'' said John Walker, a florist in Rockland
County who had been associated with Mr. Herbert in the weapons business.
''Saying he pulled a gun on a police officer is ludicrous. He had a lot of
friends who were police officers.''

In the next week, several people Mr. Herbert had known came forward to describe
his last hours. His father, a retired court officer from New Rochelle, N.Y.,
hired a lawyer to press the family's case against the city.

A Friend's Version

One friend, Ronnie Hart, a clerk at a brokerage firm who lives on 156th Street
and Riverside Drive, said Mr. Herbert had visited him until about 8 P.M. the
night he was killed. He said Mr. Herbert was in good spirits and talked of his
plans to go to a gun show in Allentown, Pa., the next day.

Mr. Hart said Mr. Herbert told him he would be carrying several thousand dollars
to make a bid on a collection for a customer. ''He said something about the
'water gun,' using it for protection,'' Mr.  Hart recalled. He explained that
the reference was to a Navy model 9-millimeter Luger of World War I vintage that
Mr. Herbert had owned for several years. (Under Federal and state rules, such a
Luger would qualify as a viable weapon and should have been licensed. Mr.
Herbert had no gun license.)

''We had one beer and then he left,'' Mr. Hart said. ''He told me he wasn't
drinking. He was a good person and a good businessman. I guess you could say the
only vice he had was drinking.'' Mr. Hart said he did not know if Mr. Herbert
had the Luger with him.

About an hour after he left Mr. Hart, Mr. Herbert showed up at the apartment of
an old friend, Luis Torres, a few doors from where he was later killed. Mr.
Torres said he thought Mr. Herbert might have visited the National Guard armory
at 168th Street and Broadway. No one at the armory remembered seeing him that
night.

'They Had No Reason'

Mr. Torres said he and Mr. Herbert shared a six-pack of beer and a pint of
blackberry brandy. He said that Mr. Herbert had showed him the Luger and that,
when he left, he had thrust it in his belt at the back of his pants under his
jacket, putting a clip containing bullets either in his jacket pocket or in an
attache case.

During the interview, a week after the shooting, Mr. Torres castigated the
police conduct, though he acknowledged he had not seen the actual incident. ''It
was unnecessary,'' he said. ''I don't know why he was standing out there, maybe
he was staying out of the rain, but he wasn't drunk and they had no reason to
shoot him. They murdered him, is the way I would put it.''

Teddy Thomas, 38, who lives in a tenement apartment halfway down the block, said
he was saying goodbye to visitors on his stoop when he saw a lone police officer
coming down the block from Broadway, looking over her shoulder at some youths on
the corner who were taunting her. He said a man stepped from a doorway in front
of her, startling her, and that the officer drew her revolver.

Mr. Thomas said the man raised both hands in front of him in a gesture of ''Hey,
what are you doing?'' and that the officer shot him without warning. He said her
partner then shot the man in the back when the man was lying under a car with
only his torso exposed on the sidewalk.

Vantage Point 50 Yards Away

The spot from which Mr. Thomas said he saw the shooting was across the street
and about 50 yards from where the incident occurred. A street light nearby gives
some illumination to the scene of the shooting.

Mr. Thomas, in the interview, said he was sure the victim had nothing in his
hands when he was shot and was also sure the woman's partner had fired a shot
into the man's back.

As is standard in such cases, an assistant district attorney, Kenneth Schachter,
was dispatched that night to interview witnesses and conduct the investigation.
The office of the Manhattan District Attorney declined to permit Mr. Schachter
to be interviewed because he was involved in the grand jury presentation, which
is secret under law. However, interviews with other authorities involved in the
case gave an outline of the findings of the investigation.

The Medical Examiner's report showed that Mr. Herbert had been shot twice in the
chest and once in the left palm. The palm wound might have come from one of the
bullets that struck his chest, according to the report. He also had cuts and
bruises on his face. Both bullets that were recovered came from Officer
Medicis's gun. There was no evidence of a bullet wound in the victim's back.

Youths Recall Shouting

Four youths who were standing directly across the street from the shooting said
that they saw Officers Medicis and Sanchez get out of their patrol car. The
youths said that before they ran away, they heard Officer Medicis shout: ''Don't
move! Don't put your hand in your pocket!''

Three police officers from a crime-scene unit who arrived immediately after the
shooting said that the victim, lying face down on the sidewalk, had a Luger in
his hand when they examined him. The pistol had been fired, according to the
investigators, although they could not determine if the firing had been recent.
No bullet from Mr. Herbert's gun was recovered.

According to the investigation, Mr. Herbert had become involved in a dispute
with a friend with whom he was drinking - Mr. Torres - and had been punched in
the face. The police had a recording of a call to the 911 emergency number
describing the argument and stating that the man was banging on the door. The
caller said he was Luis Torres and gave Mr. Torres's address. The call resulted
in the dispatch of Officers Medicis and Sanchez.

Tests from the stoop where Mr. Thomas said he was standing showed that he could
not have seen a body under a car across the street from him and 50 yards away.

Different Versions

For the grand jury presentation, the authorities thus had nine witnesses -five
police officers and the four youths - who agreed with the official version of
events insofar as they had seen them. None of the physical evidence supported
the alternate version given by Mr.  Herbert's friends.

The evidence was presented to the grand jury in the July term. ''We did a
thorough and complete investigation,'' said Mary de Bourbon of the Manhattan
District Attorney's office. ''We asked anyone who had any evidence to testify
and, as far as we know, they all did.''

On July 24, the last day of the grand jury's term, the 22 jurors voted ''no
bill'' in the case, meaning that the two officers were cleared.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TAIWAN'S AID TO REFUGEES GOES UNRECOGNIZED

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 616 words

DATELINE: TAIPEI, Taiwan


In the flow of statistics from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to record the number o people fleeing from Indochina,
more than 12,000 men, women and children have never been taken into account.
They are the Vietnamese and ethnic Chinese form Vietnam who have made their way
to Taiwan.

Because Nationalist China is no longer a member of the United Nations, the High
Commissioner's headquarters in Geneva and its offices throughout Asia have
chosen to ignore those refugees.

Nor has the international community included in its reports the financial
assistance that has been donated by Taipei for the care and feeding of refugees
in camps in other Asian countries.

PERMANENT SETTLEMENT OFFERED

Taiwan is one of the few countries in Asia that not only grants temporary asylum
to refugees but also offers to all who reach its shores permanent settlement.
That is a policy that the United Nations had prompted throughout Asia but has
failed to achieve in any of the Southeast Asian countries that are the first
harbors of the refugees.

In view of Taiwan's diplomatic isolation and its rejection of contacts with
Communist nations and similar attitudes among Communist countries, it is also
surprising that a continuing flow of ethnic Chinese from Vietnam arrives here
with the full consent of both Governments involved.

So far 4,407 Chinese, mainly from Ho Chi Minh City, the former South Vietnamese
capital of Saigon, have arrived here for permanent resettlement. Thirty
planeloads of refugees have left Vietnam for Bangkok, and from there chartered
planes have delivered them to Taipei.  The unpublicized population transfer
began in 1976, and the latest planeload of 147 refugees arrived May 8.

RED CROSS GROUP IS INTERMEDIARY

The International Committee of the Red Cross acts as intermediary between the
Government in Hanoi and a nominally nongovernmental organization here, the Free
China Relief Association.  The relief group was formed by the Taiwan Government
to care for refugees from the mainland, and it has been entrusted with caring
from those fleeing from Vietnam.

The relief organization was also the Taiwan Government's agent in channeling
material assistance to other countries that have large refugee populations in
transit.

Taiwan has so far contributed 30,000 tons of rice, valued at $10 million, to
Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, Hong Kong and Macao, and it has donated
$2.2 million in cash to countries that offer asylum to refugees.  It has also
given $500,000 to an American organization, the International Rescue Committee,
for a resettlement fund.

FEW 'BOAT PEOPLE' STAY

Thirty-four groups of Vietnamese "boat people" have made their way to Taiwan,
mainly picked up at sea by passing freighters.  Only 56 of the 1,792 refugees
have accepted Taiwan's offer of resettlement; most want to join relatives in
other countries, usually the United States.

The absence of foreign embassies and consulates in Taipei has made departure for
other countries difficult.  Only the United States occasionally sends officials
here to process the cases.

The unwillingness of the United Nations refugee body - "For political reasons,"
one of its officials said - to act as intermediary prolongs the refugees' search
for a new home, according to the Rev. Peter Mertens, a Belgian Roman Catholic
missionary who assists the refugees.

The United States has accepted 1,393 boat people from Taiwan, and other
countries have taken only 63.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHITE HOUSE TOUR LEADER COURTED AND CRITICIZED

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 54, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 29


Six thousand visitors troop through the White House each day, and there are days
when an equal number must be turned away. A Brownie troop from Indiana, an
elderly group from Des Moines, 1,500 members of the Daughters of the American
Revolution, the Gay Men's Chorus from San Francisco, a needlepoint club from
Detroit, 350 contestants in the National Spelling Bee and 30,000 Boy Scouts in
town for their National Jamboree - all want the tour.  Saying no is not easy.

''I'm always in tears,'' Carol McCain, head of the White House Visitors Center,
said with a smile and a shake of her head, ''but I love the job. I'm really
having a ball.''

Mrs. McCain, 43 years old, met Ronald and Nancy Reagan in 1973 shortly after her
husband, Capt. John McCain of the Navy, was freed from a prisoner-of-war camp in
Vietnam. The two couples became friendly, and Mrs. McCain worked for Mr. Reagan
in the 1976 Presidential primary in Florida, where the McCains were then living.
They were recently divorced.

In the fall of 1979, Mrs. McCain signed on again, doing scheduling and advance
work for Nancy Reagan, working on arrangements for the Republican National
Convention and the inauguration.

Being Courted and Criticized

The plum at the end of that political sojourn was a job in which she would find
herself courted and criticized, sought after and denounced.

Almost everyone who comes to Washington wants to visit the White House, which is
open for tours Tuesday through Saturday from 7 A.M.  to 12:30 P.M. The
early-morning guided tours, available only through Congressional offices or
other Federal agencies, are limited to 1,200 people each day. Mrs. McCain's
phone rings continually with the special pleas, and it is often the
Representative or the Cabinet officer on the line.

A few months ago Representative Thomas J. Downey, Democrat of Suffolk, a critic
of the Reagan Administration, charged unfair treatment at the hands of the
Visitors Center when his request for a tour by 65 Boy Scouts and 35 adults was
denied and his weekly allotment of tour tickets was suspended. Mrs. McCain
dismissed the incident as a ''misunderstanding,'' but she acknowledged: ''I was
a political person before I got into this, so I do pay attention to votes.
Because I am a conservative I know which Congressmen are conservative, but I
can't say that is a big influence. This office is nonpartisan and supported by
taxpayers' dollars, and I would try to help out Tip O'Neill as much as any
Republican Congressman.''

First-Come, First-Served Tours

At 10 o'clock the White House is opened to the public on a firstcome,
first-served basis. In an effort to eliminate the waiting period in the summer,
the White House now distributes 6,000 tour tickets a day on the Ellipse,
beginning at 8 A.M. The tickets designate a specific time to appear at the White
House gate, and they are often snapped up within the hour.

The most enjoyable parts of her job, Mrs. McCain said, are the special events
that the Visitors Center helps to plan, such as the annual Easter egg roll and
the South Lawn arrival ceremonies for visiting heads of state, to which guests
are invited.

''And would you believe it?'' she asked, ''Here it is with temperatures in the
90's, and we are already having meetings to plan next winter's Christmas
candlelight tours.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Carol McCain, White House tour director

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER SUMMER'S SUPERHEROES COMES A SERIO-COMIC AUTUMN

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2097 words


The cartoon superheroes we've been watching all summer have finally zoomed back
to the planets they came from, making room for the more substantial films coming
up. The coming season looks like it will be the movies' serious one. Last year's
somber hit, ''Ordinary People,'' made such a successful September debut that a
number of similarly weighty-sounding projects are now scheduled for the autumn
of 1981.

This fall and early winter will bring film adaptations of two important novels
(''Ragtime'' and ''The French Lieutenant's Woman'') and two successful plays
(''On Golden Pond,'' ''Whose Life Is It, Anyway?''), biographical films about
John Reed and D.H. Lawrence, and a musical effort from Francis Ford Coppola. It
will also bring new films by two of Hollywood's most venerable veterans, George
Cukor and Billy Wilder. There will be an October encore of the enormously
successful revival of Abel Gance's silent epic, ''Napoleon.''

The new season will feature a number of stellar performers in highly
attention-getting roles. Faye Dunaway will play Joan Crawford in ''Mommie
Dearest,'' and Robert Duvall and Robert De Niro will be cast as brothers -one a
detective, one a powerful clergyman - in ''True Confessions.'' Jane Fonda will
play a former movie queen turned corporate chairman in ''Roll Over,'' with Kris
Kristofferson as an international financier. And Burt Reynolds will play a man
who hires a woman to bear his child in ''Paternity.'' Sissy Spacek, Richard
Dreyfuss, Meryl Streep, Warren Beatty, Diane Keaton, Katharine Hepburn, Henry
Fonda, Fred Astaire and James Cagney will also return to the screen in
forthcoming movies.

And fall will, of course, bring the 19th New York Film Festival, which opens on
Sept. 25 with ''Chariots of Fire.'' Directed by Hugh Hudson, starring Ben Cross
and Ian Charleson, this British film is about two track stars competing in the
1924 Olympics - a Jewish law student fighting anti-Semitism, and a young man
whose athletic career conflicts with his plans to become a missionary in China.
The supporting cast includes Sir John Gielgud, Lindsay Anderson, Dennis
Christopher, Brad Davis and Patrick Magee. The Festival's closing night film
will be Andrzej Wajda's ''Man of Iron,'' a Polish film combining fiction and
documentary footage and following in the footsteps of Mr. Wajda's earlier ''Man
of Marble.''

France is particularly well represented on the Festival's roster this year.
French selections include Bertrand Blier's ''Beau Pere,'' in which a young girl
seduces her stepfather, played by Patrick Dewaere; Francois Truffaut's ''The
Woman Next Door,'' about a longseparated couple who reunite, with Gerard
Depardieu and Fanny Ardent; Jacques Rivette's ''Le Pont du Nord,'' starring
Bulle Ogier and her daughter Pascale; ''Passe Ton Bac d'Abord'' (''Graduate
First''), by Maurice Pialat, about teen-agers preparing to graduate from high
school in northern France; and ''The Aviator's Wife,'' the beginning of a new
series of films from Eric Rohmer. Mr. Rohmer is following his Six Moral Tales
with a group of Comedies and Proverbs.

Also in the Festival are Louis Malle's ''My Dinner With Andre,'' Agnes Varda's
''Mural Murals,'' Ken Loach's ''Looks and Smiles,'' Ettore Scola's ''Passion
d'Amore,'' Wim Wender's ''Lightning Over Water,'' Istvan Szabo's ''Mephisto,''
Krzysztof Zanussi's ''Contract,'' Frank Ripploh's ''Taxi to the John,'' Ahmed el
Manouni's ''Transes,'' Kazimierz Kutz's ''The Beads of One Rosary,'' and ''Fit
To Be Untied,'' an Italian film with four different directors. In addition,
there will be eight more American films of various lengths, to be shown on four
double bills.

Three of the screen's leading actresses will appear in major roles this
September. Meryl Streep will star in ''The French Lieutenant's Woman,'' directed
by Karel Reisz, with a screenplay by Harold Pinter based on John Fowles's novel.
Miss Streep and Jeremy Irons will play both the Victorian lovers of Mr. Fowles's
book and two modern-day actors who have an affair while making a movie of the
Victorian romance. ''The French Lieutenant's Woman'' premieres Sept. 18, along
with ''Raggedy Man,'' which stars Sissy Spacek as a woman trying to raise two
children alone during World War II. ''Raggedy Man'' was directed by the
production designer Jack Fisk, whose credits include ''Days of Heaven'' and
''Heart Beat,'' and who is Miss Spacek's husband. And on Sept. 16, ''Mommie
Dearest'' will premiere, directed by Frank Perry and starring Faye Dunaway as
Joan Crawford. Mara Hobel and Diana Scarwid play her daughter Christina at
different ages.

Among the season's most long-awaited releases are two elaborate productions with
early 20th-century settings. ''Reds,'' scheduled for Dec. 4, was directed by
Warren Beatty and stars Mr. Beatty as John Reed, the American reporter turned
revolutionary. ''Reds'' is expected to have a three and a half hour running
time, with a story set between 1915 and 1920, against the background of World
War I and the Russian Revolution. It also stars Diane Keaton as Louise Bryant,
Mr. Reed's wife, and Jack Nicholson as Eugene O'Neill. ''Ragtime,'' Milos
Forman's screen version of E.L. Doctorow's novel, is also due in December, on
the 18th. Included in its cast are James Cagney as Police Commissioner Waldo,
Howard Rollins as Coalhouse Walker, Mary Steenburgen as Mother, Brad Dourif as
Brother, Elizabeth McGovern as Evelyn Nesbit and Norman Mailer as Stanford
White.

''On Golden Pond,'' scheduled for Dec. 6, will star Katharine Hepburn, Henry
Fonda and Jane Fonda as family members who spend a summer together in Vermont.
Based on the successful play, ''On Golden Pond'' is one of two stage adaptations
expected in late fall. The other is ''Whose Life Is It, Anyway?'' directed by
John Badham, starring Richard Dreyfuss and John Cassavetes. It is due in
November or December.

These promise to be among the more serious stories in a season that will also
concentrate heavily on comedy. Billy Wilder's ''Buddy, Buddy,'' scheduled for
Dec. 18, stars Walter Matthau and Jack Lemmon as a hit-man and a potential
suicide who wind up becoming friends when they stay in the same hotel. Neil
Simon's ''Only When I Laugh,'' with Marsha Mason and Kristy McNichol, is based
on his play ''The Gingerbread Lady,'' about an estranged mother and daughter who
get to know each other again. It opens Sept. 23. ''Neighbors,'' based on Thomas
Berger's novel and directed by John Avildsen, stars John Belushi, Dan Aykroyd
and Cathy Moriarty in a story about a couple dismayed to see who has just moved
in next door. It opens in December. And ''Heartbeeps,'' starring Andy Kaufman
and Bernadette Peters and due on Dec. 18, will be about two robots in the year
1995. They fall in love, run off together and build a baby.

Francis Coppola's ''One From The Heart,'' starring Frederic Forrest, Teri Garr,
Nastassia Kinski and Raul Julia, is a romantic film that employs music, sets and
general atmosphere to amplify a love story involving two couples over a Fourth
of July weekend. It will open in December if not sooner, and it underscores the
fact that conventional love stories will be few and far between this fall.
''Continental Divide,'' starring John Belushi and Blair Brown, directed by
Michael Apted and written by Lawrence Kasdan, is about a muckraking columnist
who falls in love wih an ornithologist. It opens Sept. 18. ''Paternity,''
starring Burt Reynolds and Beverly D'Angelo, directed by David Steinberg,
depicts a man who hires a young woman to bear his child. ''Tattoo,'' with Bruce
Dern and Maud Adams, due Oct. 9, is about an artist so infatuated with a model
that he wants desperately to tattoo her.

''Shoot The Moon,'' directed by Alan Parker, stars Albert Finney and Diane
Keaton as a married couple who can't fall out of love, and Karen Allen as
someone who offers them a chance to try. It opens in December. ''Circle of
Two,'' directed by Jules Dassin, features Richard Burton and Tatum O'Neal as a
60-year-old artist and a 16-year-old schoolgirl who fall in love. It opens Sept.
11. And in ''Modern Problems,'' due Dec. 18, Chevy Chase plays an air traffic
controller with an ex-wife, a girlfriend and telekinetic powers.

Unusual occupations will predominate among this season's movie characters.
''True Confessions,'' based on John Gregory Dunne's novel and directed Ulu
Grosbard, stars Robert Duvall and Robert De Niro as a police detective and a
Catholic monsignor whose interests conflict during a murder investigation. It
opens Sept. 25. George Cukor's ''Rich and Famous'' is a remake of ''Old
Acquaintance,'' with Candice Bergen and Jacqueline Bisset as old friends who are
writers, one a successful pulp novelist and the other a more serious sort. It
opens Oct. 9. Peter Falk plays a manager of women wrestlers in ''All The
Marbles,'' due Oct. 23. And Ryan O'Neal enters the garment business in ''So
Fine,'' opening Sept. 25. He plays a college professor about to receive tenure
when he is called upon to take over his father's clothing company. He becomes
instrumental in the invention of the ultimate designer jeans.

Sally Field will play an investigative reporter working on a labor story in
Sydney Pollack's ''Absence of Malice,'' with Paul Newman as a labor figure she
accidentally implicates. It opens in December.  George C. Scott and Timothy
Hutton are an officer and a cadet in ''Taps,'' Harold Becker's film about an
insurrection at a military academy, opening Dec. 18. Powers Boothe and Keith
Carradine are members of the National Guard on maneuvers in Louisiana bayou
country where their unit is ambushed, in Walter Hill's ''Southern Comfort,''
opening Sept. 25. And Ian McKellen is D.H. Lawrence in ''Priest of Love,'' a
biographical film directed by Christopher Miles. It also stars Janet Suzman and
Ava Gardner.

Included on the fall schedule are films by two major directors who have not been
heard from recently. Arthur Penn's ''Four Friends,'' with a screenplay by Steve
Tesich, will open Dec. 13. It tells a story of three boys and a girl growing up
together in the 50's and 60's, attending high school and college, witnessing the
Vietnam War.  Bernardo Bertolucci's ''Tragedy of a Ridiculous Man'' stars Anouk
Aimee and Ugo Tognazzi, and is due to open Oct. 16. It is described as a
satirical film, with a plot involving a kidnapping.

Musicals: Steve Martin and Bernadette Peters will star in ''Pennies From
Heaven,'' with Mr. Martin playing a sheet music salesman who tries to make the
lyrics of his songs come true. It opens Dec. 11.  And ''Zoot Suit,'' a movie
version of the musical about Los Angeles Chicanos during World War II, opens
Oct. 2. It was directed by Luis Valdez, and stars Edward James Olmos. Adventure
stories: Burt Reynolds plays a vice squad detective in ''Sharky's Machine,''
which he also directed. It opens at Christmas. Treat Williams and Robert Duvall
co-star in ''Pursuit of D.B. Cooper,'' about the first skyjacker, who has never
been found. It opens Nov. 13. And in ''Silence of the North,'' due on Oct. 23,
Ellen Burstyn plays a woman living an isolated life in a northern climate, and
coping with the elements.

Miscellaneous movies: what season is without them? This December brings ''Quest
For Fire,'' directed by Jean-Jacques Annaud, a serious exploration of
prehistoric life among Cro-Magnon men.  ''Tim,'' a new Australian film directed
by Michael Pate, stars Piper Laurie and Mel Gibson in a love story about an
older woman and younger man, and opens Sept. 17. ''Lulu,'' directed by Ronald
Chase, is billed as an original interpretation of the play by Frank Wedekind and
the Alan Berg opera, and ''Blood Wedding'' is a new film by Carlos Saura; both
are due in October. ''Carbon Copy'' opens in early fall and stars George Segal
as a white man who discovers he has a grown-up black son. It was directed by
Michael Schultz and co-stars Susan Saint James.

Horror, the supernatural and the strange: December will bring ''Ghost Story,''
which stars Fred Astaire, Melvyn Douglas, Douglas Fairbanks, Jr., and John
Houseman. They play members of a men's club who accidentally committed a murder
in their youth. The film also stars Patricia Neal. And Michael Crichton's
''Looker,'' starring Albert Finney and James Coburn and opening Oct. 23,
involves the bizarre murders of beautiful models. It has something to do with
duplicating them by computer, and using them to exercise mind control during TV
commercials. And what would October be without ''Halloween II?'' It opens on the
30th. We won't even have to wonder.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jane Fonda and Kris Kristofferson in 'Rollover'
photo of Sissy Spacek in 'Raggedy Man' photo of Lemmon and Matthau in 'Buddy,
Buddy' photo of Ian McKellan and Janet Suzman in 'Priest of Love'

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LITTLE MISSILE THAT COULD AND THEREFORE IS

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2313 words


WASHINGTON IN about one year, the first cruise missiles will be attached to a
long-range B-52 bomber. Over the next six years, thousands of these torpedo-like
pilotless aircraft, some with nuclear warheads and some with conventional
warheads, will be loaded onto submarines, surface ships, ground launchers and
tactical aircraft. The cost of it all will be at least $15 billion - not that
expensive by Pentagon standards but higher than anticipated. The repercussions
of the deployments will be enormous - in added American firepower, in relations
with Western European allies (it is slated for deployment in Europe in 1983) and
for the future of arms control.

The weapons system is a marvel of American technology that, in the beginning,
none of the United States armed services really wanted.  Now there seems to be
no stopping the technology, as the services find more and more uses for it. As
Richard K. Betts, editor of a forthcoming Brookings Institution book on the
subject, puts it: ''The technology has outstripped our ability to incorporate
all models of the missile into missions that make sense and into overall
strategy.''

It is, in short, a somewhat dramatic but still typical story of a modern-day
American weapon system.  The German V-1 ''buzz bomb'' that terrorized London
during World War II was a cruise missile. But it was big, could not fly far and
was not at all accurate. In 1958 the terrain-contour-matching technique known as
Tercom was patented, and altitude maps, made by satellite instrumentaton and
stored in missile computers, became a way of determining location during flight.
Then came microelectronic devices called scanning devises or radar altimeters,
that allowed for rapid updating of that information during flight, by
continuously measuring heights and comparing them with elevations stored in the
computer map.

All that was needed was a small and efficient jet engine to allow for long
flight. That came toward the mid-1970's. The modern cruise missile, that could
fly 1500 miles and more with great theoretical accuracy, at a speed of about 500
mph at an altitude of between 200 and 600 feet, was born. Since it was quite
small, it would make only a tiny impression on the radar screen, much smaller
than a piloted aircraft. The wonder weapon was even more appealing because it
was cheap - something like one-half million dollars per missile.

The scientists of industry had created a substitute for the multibillion dollar
aircraft. That was precisely what troubled the Air Force and the Navy.

The foremost consideration of Air Force scions was the very capability that had
led to the establishment of the Air Force in the first place - the penetrating
bomber. In particular, the Air Force was looking to replace the aging B-52, said
to be becoming vulnerable to Soviet air defenses, with the new B-1 bomber.

The backbone of the Navy is the aircraft carrier. The carrier admirals feared a
competitor. The Navy men associated with attack submarines did not want their
mission - hunting and killing enemy submarines - to be compromised. Only the
Navy men from the smaller surface ships, who had learned a hard lesson from the
1967 sinking of an Israeli ship by Egyptian use of four Soviet-built Styx cruise
missiles, carefully nurtured their own short-range anti-ship cruise missile
program.
Army's Successful Flight

The last thing the Army generals felt they needed was another missile program to
deplete already limited funds for tanks and battlefield missiles and artillery.
Besides, they were developing the medium-range Pershing ballistic missile for
use in Europe. They ran away from a ground-launched cruise missile program and
have been running successfully ever since.

In fact, the Air Force was about to kill its last cruise missile program when
fate intervened in the form of Henry A. Kissinger and the strategic arms
limitations talks with Moscow. According to Kissinger aides, hoping to pry
concessions from Moscow in return for severely limiting the new missile, the
Secretary of State threw it on the table. For a variety of reasons, the
negotiations got nowhere.  But for bargaining purposes, the cruise missile
program could no longer be abandoned.

By 1976, the Air Force wanted to buy more than 250 B-1's at about $100 million
per copy. Jimmy Carter, who had campaigned against the bomber as a costly white
elephant, killed the program early in his term, deciding to modernize B-52's to
carry the virtually untested air-launched cruise missile instead. That too meant
the 1,500-mile ALCM had to be protected in the SALT negotiations.

Nor, it seemed, would Mr. Carter be permitted to compromise on or severely limit
the equally untested versions of the ground-launched cruise missile, or GLCM,
and the sea-launched cruise missile, or SLCM. America's European allies were
never quite certain whether Mr.  Kissinger was seeking to bargain the weapons
away. When the Carter Administration acknowledged trying to do just that, they
exploded.  Washington was only looking after its own interests, they felt, and
doing nothing to counter weapons such the Backfire bomber or SS-20 missile that
could attack Europe. Cruise missile installation was urged as a tangible
expression of the nuclear umbrella. Also, the Europeans were interested in
having the new cruise missile technology themselves.

But European leaders had not thought through popular reaction to introducing new
nuclear-tipped long-range missiles and to Moscow's strong propaganda campaign
against the new ''theatre nuclear weapons.'' When the full political
implications dawned, the leaders backtracked, insisting that deployment be
accompanied by an arms control proposal limiting all such medium-range nuclear
weapons in Europe.

Thus, the arms control negotiations that were supposed to smooth the way for an
early demise of the cruise missile became their salvation. Thus, the Europeans
who screamed most loudly for the deployment have become cautious and hesitant.
And, reversal of reversals, the American military services recognized the
virtues of necessity and have been transformed into major proponents.

These acrobatics were actually occuring over a mythical missile.  Various models
were being tested, to be sure, but not very extensively. It was not until 1980
that the Boeing Company ALCM was pitted against the General Dynamics ALCM in a
''fly-off.'' Boeing won and became the prime contractor for 3,400 ALCM's valued
at $5.9 billion. Modifications to the B-52's for racks to carry the ALCM,s adds
approximately another $2 billion.

General Dynamics won too. The Pentagon awarded it a contract to produce a
shorter-range ALCM, even though no tests had been done and despite the
presumption that a scaled-down version of the Boeing ALCM might be better. The
strong suspicion in Washington was that election year politics had a lot to do
with this. The Pentagon said at the time that it did not want to throw away all
of that good expertise.  (Actually General Dynamics expertise was already
protected. It had previously been named the prime contractor for 600 SLCMs
valued at $3 billion and 560 GLCMs at $3.2 billion.)
A Cheap $15 Billion

In all, the bill comes to $15 billion, a far cry from the permissile price
talked of initially but still a defense bargain. If, that is, it were clear
whether the missile should substitute for or supplement existing systems. As of
now, planners in and out of the Government agree that the cruise missile is a
potentially superb weapon - small, mobile, survivable against a Soviet attack,
good chance of penetrating through to target, and not swift enough to cause
alarms about a first strike. But most would also agree that certain basic
questions about missions and strategy have not been answered well.

With President Reagan thinking on reinstituting the B-1, does both a full
penetrating bomber program and a full ALCM program make sense? Another question
is: Do cruise missiles with conventional warheads make sense? After all, close
enough with a nuclear weapon is good enough for most targets. But for a cruise
missile with a conventional warhead to work, it must have great accuracy, and
many experts doubt the necessary accuracy is attainable. Yet land-attack SLCM's
and short-range ALCM's are being planned with just these missions in mind.
Finally, how would the controversal GLCM intended for deployment in Europe
affect current strategic planning? Are they still intended to fulfill the
traditional NATO strategy of being a tripwire toward global nuclear war or will
their deployment lead inexorably to a strategy of fighting a nuclear war in
Europe?

Many of the very features that make the cruise missile so attractive as a means
of bolstering security make it potentially devastating to prospects for arms
control. Treaties so far have limited only systems that could be verified with
high confidence - bombers, land-based intercontinental missiles and
submarine-launched missiles that can be clearly counted by spy satellites. The
cruise missiles may well be too small and movable for that, and so may defy
control.

Ultimately, the story of the cruise missile, like that of other weapons systems,
is that of matters of money, politics and technology.

Since World War II, weapons systems costs have often increased by 50 percent.
Inflation is part of the answer, but far from the whole explanation. The
Pentagon has been known to understate inflation to make the programs look
cheaper. Research and development firms often understate the costs of developing
a new weapon, because higher cost estimates might scare the services away. Until
this year, the services could only sign contracts on a yearly basis, thus
leaving the manufacturer uncertain of the total program, and thus driving up the
costs per unit each year. Also, the Pentagon often seeks to protect its
suppliers, with the result being the subsidizing of inefficient companies.

Politics is also critical. Neither the President nor Congress wants to alienate
voters and campaign contributors by closing down plants and military bases. Take
Congressional authorization of the A-7 attack aircraft despite Pentagon wishes.
The A-7 is produced in Texas; many poweful Texas lawmen are on the armed
services committees.

The political games played by the uniformed military services are often a
determining factor too. There is often great resistance to any weapons system
that could undermine a service's doing its missions the way it has always done
them. An example is the M-16 rifle, a bastardized version of the AR-15. The
AR-15 was generally considered to be a first-class rifle, but it did not fit the
Army Materiel Command's prescription for the classic rifle. So, the Command
continuously modified the rifle until it became the more cumbersome M-16, often
found unreliable in the Vietnam war but still in use.

Technology also adds to cost. The armed services and their defense suppliers are
working on the frontiers of technology, and it is hard to guage costs. The
services also have a tendency to push deployed technology to its furthest
limits. To deploy only the latest and the best often leads to unreliable
systems. The Air Force's frontline fighter, the F-15, frequently can be found in
the repair shop - some say as many as 40 percent of the F-15's in a given week.
The answer, to most defense experts, is not to foresake technology. That remains
the United States area of greatest advantage over the Soviet Union.  Their
answer is: Don't push for that final 5 or 10 percent. That's where, they feel,
the real problems lie.

The force of technology also asserts itself long before Pentagon planners figure
out how to use it. Only after a weapons system's development do political and
military leaders begin to address its effects on missions, diplomacy and basic
security. It is in basic security that some key issues remain about the cruise
missile.

At the end of the 1960's, Washington had to decide whether to deploy the new
MIRV technology, or warheads that could be released from a single missile and
proceed independently and with great accuracy to target.

A number of Pentagon experts argued at the time that given the greater number of
warheads and accuracy, the deployment of the new technology by Russia and
America would be a tricky line to cross and could lead to the vulnerability of
land-based missiles and thus to a more dangerous world. They suggested banning
the new technology in arms control talks. But the United States had a
considerable lead over Moscow in MIRV technology. Arms control was not tried.
Today, the question of the vulnerability of the land-based missiles has led to
the debate over the multibillion MX mobile basing system.

To most defense experts, it is already probably too late to limit, let alone
ban, cruise missiles. The United States is still well ahead of Moscow in cruise
missile technology, and there is little desire to seek joint limits. For the
moment at least, the cruise missile is a highly promising addition to the
American arsenal. If history is any guide, it also promises to become more
complicated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a cruise missile under construction diagram of
Boeing's air-lauched cruise missile

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE VARIED CHARMS OF THE KUNMING AREA OF CHINA

SECTION: Section 10; Page 3, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2579 words


-------------------------------------------------------------------- RICHARD F.
SHEPARD is a reporter for The Times.

By RICHARD F. SHEPARD

Our 17-day tour of six cities in China left me with an incredible jumble of
luggage in impressions of what I saw and sensed. Indeed, I have come to only one
firm conclusion: Our most satisfying stopover was in the remote city of Kunming,
a gracious metropolis 6,200 feet above sea level with such a temperate climate
that it is known as ''the city of spring.''

Kunming? Kunming the favorite place in a trip that included the imperial
splendors of Peking, the fantastic antique treasures of Xian, the rejuvenating
urban tempo of Shanghai, the resort loveliness of Hangzhou and the peculiar
loveliness of Canton? Absolutely.

Although the name Kunming meant little to many on our trip, it was familiar to
my generation, the one whose war was the Big One of the early 1940's. Kunming is
in southwest China, 1,900 miles by plane from Peking, several hundred miles
south of Chongqing, which, under the spelling Chungking, was China's wartime
capital.

Kunming was the terminus of the Burma Road over which American aid was sent for
China's fight against the Japanese. It was there that Gen. Claire L. Chennault's
Flying Tigers (later the American 14th Air Force) had their base, and it was
there that Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell, the peppery and knowledgeable Vinegar Joe
who was commander of the Chinese Army until his disagreements with Chiang
Kai-shek led to his ouster, established the liaison headquarters between
Americans and Chinese. The Japanese menaced Kunming but never captured it, and
thousands of American G.I.'s passed through this city, then bulging with troops
and refugees from Japanese occupation.

By the account of some of those who remember Kunming in those fighting days of
their youth, Kunming was a city in a beautiful setting, but a place of crowded,
poor hovels and narrow streets. The Burma Road still terminates at Kunming, but
almost everything else, except the eternal countryside, has changed.

We landed at the airport, which the guide who met us there said was built in
1943 by the Americans, and went by bus into the city.  Kunming today offers a
delightful prospect to the newcomer, particularly after the flat and dry plains
of Peking. Surrounded by gently rising mountains and pleasant hills, with a
large lake on its southwestern quarter at the foot of the beautiful, wooded
Western Hills, it has the flavor of a French provincial or colonial city, with
broad avenues lined by low-lying buildings and trees and flowers.

In contrast with formal Peking, it immediately strikes one as being somehow more
relaxed, although the bicycles and tooting buses and trucks are certainly not
leisurely. The Gallic flavor is subtle, perhaps enhanced by the knowledge that
until World War II there was a French influence in Kunming, which was linked to
Indochina, only 500 miles away, by a railroad built by the French in 1910.

Kunming is not a city steeped in ancient Chinese history; although the past
there is traceable for 2,000 years, the city grew as a late bloomer in the 19th
century and particularly since 1948. It is nothing like San Francisco, yet,
whether because of its equable climate or its great local pride in its very
difference from other Chinese cities, a comparison with the city by the Golden
Gate springs to mind. Kunming, the capital of Yunnan province, is home to more
than a million people and is a commercial and manufacturing hub, but its aura is
that of a provincial center, making its own way in the world.

We stayed in the Green Lake Hotel, a modern and efficient establishment in the
city's northwestern area. Across the street was Green Lake Park, its charming
lake lined with drooping willow trees and dappled in the bright spring tints of
peach and plum trees. Early in the morning Green Lake Park is alive with people
doing exercises, playing badminton, jogging and bicycling to work. As is the
case with many Chinese parks, there is an entrance fee of a few cents that seems
to keep no one out.

Just behind the hotel, across the street from the park, a quick turn from the
main roads plunges the sightseer from Kunming's modern, spacious face into a
tangle of streets lined with cramped and old houses teeming with residents who
use public toilets and spend their leisure outdoors. In the morning, sidewalk
stands sell dumplings and porridges from steaming pots. One wonders how such a
cheerful, wellmannered, well-scrubbed, healthy-looking and neatly dressed
population can issue from such homes, but it does.

The strains of ''Old MacDonald Had a Farm'' emanate from a temple building that
is now a school. The words, in Chinese, drift over the dilapidated area from the
lusty throats of youngsters, the same ones who greet you in English after
school, giggling, with ''Hello, how are you, goodbye.'' English, in schools and
in the thronged sections of bookstores where grammars are sold, is a popular
language these days in Kunming, as it is in all of China.

Kunming is a stroller's city rather than one in which historic markers are found
at each step. We visited Kunming University, where students of English in the
Foreign Language Institute each took a tourist in tow and, with remarkable
fluency, quizzed us about life in America and fielded the most touchy questions
about China, such as evaluating Mao Zedong (early Mao was good, later Mao not so
good, said one student), and speaking of their ignorance about what their future
would be after graduation, since assignments to jobs in China are made by
committees with which little bargaining may be done. They queried us about our
ages, our incomes, the Central Intelligence Agency, American attitudes toward
China and our abysmally scant knowledge of Chinese history. It was one of the
most intellectually stimulating afternoons we enjoyed in China.

At night we went to the massive and older Kunming Hotel in the center of town
for a lamb banquet. The hotel is built in the heavyset style called ''Socialist
realism'' in which the idea is to present a profile of no-nonsense solidity
rather than elegant grace.  Every dish of the 40 or so served at the banquet was
made of lamb, from the eyes rearward. There were hors d'oeuvres, soup, entrails,
tail, tongue, all steamed, roasted or otherwise cooked. The lamb itself was not
particularly succulent, but the flavor of a dish depended strongly on the sauce
that accompanied it, prepared from such ingredients as ginger, garlic and other
spices. The reaction of most of the diners was ''very interesting.''

Through friends in New York we visited two elderly members of the medical
college's faculty, relatives of the New Yorkers, who cooked us a banquet-size
dinner with such Yunnan specialties as potato-chiplike chips made with goat's
milk, cucumbers stuffed with beef and duck eggs.

Our tour visited Kunming's center of traditional Chinese medicine and saw
patients receiving acupuncture in rooms adorned with spittoons (spitting is an
officially deplored but common Chinese habit), at the hands of doctors, most of
them women. The surroundings were less than inspired, but the treatment seemed
to please the patients. Another room found patients being treated by a
''breathing machine'' that involved an electric wire that barely touched the arm
and has been in use since last August. It was difficult to get a translation of
the details about its operation, but it seems to be designed to treat high blood
pressure. A woman told us that since undergoing these treatments she has
regained her health and no longer needs pills.

Kunming is merely the centerpiece of the treats for the eye and ear that
surround it. Yunnan is the home of more than 20 of China's minority peoples,
whose presence antedates the appearance of the ethnic Chinese. in this region.
The minority peoples, among them the Hui, Yi, Bai, Hani and Miao, speak their
own languages and wear colorful jackets and headdresses that bloom flower-like
in the drab standard dress of the city's strollers. A museum in Kunming displays
the costumes, farming implements, carriages, urns and bowls that illustrate the
ancient ways of life of these minority nationalities.

The minority peoples were very much in evidence at Shi Lin, the Stone Forest,
which lies 60 miles southeast of Kunming, in the general direction of Vietnam.
The three-hour bus ride there immerses the visitor in a panorama of rare
magnificent beauty, past brilliantly green rice paddies that contrast with the
bright red of the clay hills under a sky that was sparkling blue, a spectacle
that even the most deft Impressionist painter would be hard put to capture on
canvas. The journey goes past the railroad, over which a steam engine chugged
pulling a train of old coaches toward Vietnam, and through endless fields and
paddies where the labor is all by hand and water buffalo and through several
lively marketplaces in small towns.

The peasants represent China Immemorial: They are gnarled and workworn but not
badly dressed, and their children look hearty and healthy in contrast to what
old China hands recall of pockmarked, disease-ridden children of years ago.
Their brick houses in this region seem to have been only half built, with the
tile roofs rising from the entrance in a graceful curve but then ending suddenly
at the back wall, which drops vertically to ground level.

The Stone Forest is one of the great natural wonders of the world, 12,000 acres
of towering rock formations, thousands of craggy pillars formed millions of
years ago by rain water that eroded the thick limestone by dissolving and
splitting it. This veritable forest of stone resembles nothing so much as an
abstract nightmare of downtown Manhattan, with pinnacles that tower as high as
99 feet. The rock assumes strange silhouettes to which the imaginative Chinese
have attached names, such as Lotus Peak, Pavilion Commanding the Entire Scene of
Stone Forest and Sword Peak. A path, about a mile long, wends through the
forest, whose stony grayness is relieved by growths of trees and bushes and
streams and ponds, and the visitor may take a long route or be satisfied with a
shorter one.

We stayed at the Stone Forest Guesthouse, which caters mostly to foreign
visitors, 20,000 of whom arrive annually (the largest contingents these days, in
order, are Japanese, Americans, Australians and Overseas Chinese from Hong Kong,
which is more than 500 miles to the east). The guesthouse is a rural affair, two
or three two-story buildings with entrances from an outdoor walkway. It has only
97 rooms, each fitted with mosquito netting that must be unfurled at bedtime and
can pose a minor problem to a stranger who had the feeling he would never be
able to fight his way free of the skein should emergency arise. The rooms are
moderately spacious and have private bathrooms with high-sided tubs but no
showers. The travel season reaches its peak between March and October, and
lodging, with meals, costs about $20 a day.

At night visitors can go to Shi Lin Village, a commune hamlet of rice and
tobacco farmers who are members of the Hani minority people. The Hani, well
aware that visitors mean income, sell shoulder handbags, vests, belts and
embroidered items that they have made themselves. At night a company of 30
handsome young Hani men and women from the Five Trees Production Team visited
the guesthouse, and staged a thrilling performance of folk dance and song for
us, far better than the ponderous, overstuffed, over-refined folk-art
performance we had seen in Peking. The oldest member of the troupe was 36 and
the youngest 14, and they danced to the music of native instruments, strings
with long handles and drum-like bottoms, flutes, cymbals and mouth organs,
nothing that resembled anything we have in Western music.

The music was surprisingly sweet - one half-expected a cacophony of unpleasant
squawking - and the short, dark and pretty dancers were smiling and loose-limbed
as they did a rattlesnake dance, a weaving song and a harvest dance. The men did
a tiger-hunting dance, ferocious yet humorous, with two of them confronting the
audience under a tiger-like skin. At evening's end, each group of visitors was
asked, almost commanded, by the home team of performers to retaliate with some
song of their native lands. The French visitors rousingly launched into ''Frere
Jacques'' and more recent and more romantic melodies. A band of Italians lustily
sang of amore. Our small but staid group of Americans, taken by surprise,
managed to croak a few verses of ''Old MacDonald Had a Farm,'' but with none of
the style of the Kunming school children. Then everyone had tea or went to bed.

Closer to hand, only a half hour from Kunming, are the Western Hills, a
picturesque range that stretches along the western bank of Dian Chi, or
Shimmering Lake, a large (more than 100 square miles) body of water southwest of
the city. The Western Hills are four hills, and as seen from the lake their
contour resembles, to the vivid imagination that is a Chinese staple, a
langorous sleeping beauty whose hair trails down to the water. Actually, the
hills are increasingly high as one walks up them on steps and paths that stop at
various temples along the way. The climb can take three hours, but our bus went
farther up than most and left us at the foot of the last 300 steps.

As we walked, we passed small shrines, such as one with a large figure of
Guanyin. Many Chinese still believe they are insured of fertility if a coin
affixed to the wall of the shrine does not fall down. This is somewhat strange
in light of the official policy that demands tight family control: one child per
family. There are turtles that one touches for longevity and figures that will
bring good health - longevity and good health are not necessarily in the same
package. At the Dragon Gate, on the summit, there is an unparalleled view of the
big lake and of Kunming in the distance.

There is much else to see at Kunming, from the Yuantong Mountain Park in the
city with its zoo and gardens to the impressive Qiongzhusi temple built 600
years ago with its collection of 400 clay figures of disciples of Buddha made
over a seven-year period by a Sichuan sculptor during the Manchu period (China's
last dynasty). You can see the Burma Road, a prosaic thoroughfare that today
does not give evidence of the times when it was a lifeline for China. But in
Kunming and its environs, the sightseeing is not in works made by man, not in
temples or museums or institutions. The sight to see is China itself, a China in
which man makes his way between heaven and earth, bending to both in such
awesomely attractive surroundings that one wonders how he can intrude his own
affairs into it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of the Stone Forest map of China showing the site
of Kunming

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REBIRTH OF A BATTLESHIP IS RAISING WAVES OF NOSTALGIA

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 30


This summer, Russell W. Brown tried to steam back 35 years in time and rejoin
the Navy and his beloved old battleship, the New Jersey, journeying with her
from mothballs to resurrection in the modern Navy.

There are no longer any active battleships defending the United States, and Mr.
Brown, who dwells lovingly on the polish and soulstirring noise of his memories
as a battleship machinist's mate, offered to tutor the new crew as the Navy
turns back to dreadnought tactics.

At the recruiting station in Champaign, Ill., where he has lived most his life,
landlocked but for four exciting years aboard the New Jersey during and after
World War II, Mr. Brown was politely rejected as too old at the age of 57.

''There's something about that battleship; I had to try and get back aboard,''
he explained, summarizing the Navy's odd and romantic experience with the New
Jersey.

Abundance of Volunteers

A month after quiet notice went out seeking 1,500 volunteers to serve aboard the
battleship for her 1983 rebirth, the Navy has received 4,000 applications. These
came in an unexpected wave from active sailors, reservists and dozens of senior
or disgruntled seamen who previously submitted retirement papers, but changed
their minds at the notion of battleship duty.

The New Jersey was instantly oversubscribed at a time when the Navy was having
trouble manning ships already in service and retaining career people who had
grown weary of the routines of modern naval duty.

''Battleship fever,'' says Secretary of the Navy John F. Lehman Jr. ''They think
something exciting's happening.'' While some critics contend the $330 million
plan to refit the New Jersey is a wasteful indulgence of antiquity, Mr. Lehman
insists it is the ''the quickest and most cost effective way to get more naval
muscle to sea in the mid-1980's.''

The 16-inch guns that still thunder through the memories of former Machinist's
Mate Brown are to be retained and supplemented by batteries of Tomahawk and
Harpoon rocket missiles. This will be a fourth life for the 45,000-ton
dreadnought. The New Jersey was commissioned in May 1943 and after service in
the Pacific was put in mothballs with her sister ships, the Iowa, the Wisconsin
and the Missouri.

Korea and Vietnam Action

Service in the Korean War was followed by a second retirement, and the process
was repeated for the Vietnam War. At her last retirement, in 1969, Capt. Robert
C. Peniston, the commanding officer, evoked the romance of battleship service in
his farewell to the ship: ''Rest well, rest well, yet sleep lightly; and hear
the call, if again sounded, to provide firepower for freedom.''

''I remember the first time I heard the big boom,'' Mr. Brown said, referring to
the bristling ''naval rifles,'' the long guns that can fire projectiles 16
inches in diameter and weighing 2,600 pounds up to 23 miles. ''I was topside,
feeding clips at a 40-millimeter turret and some officer ordered me to tuck my
pants inside my socks, like I was going bike-riding. Then came the biggest noise
ever; and I shook, and my pants were back out of my socks.''

It may seem hard to grasp the nostalgic attraction of such an experience, but
the Navy says the applications from former hands have been numerous, with many
of the senior crew members having served in the Vietnam tour.

The attraction of a classic battleship became clear to the Navy recently when
the New Jersey was moved from storage at Puget Sound, Wash., to the refitting
shipyard in Long Beach, Calif. An open house drew 15,000 people and 20,000 more
were turned away, including many former crew members.

Someone in the Navy recalled the burning interest of Mr. Brown, the former
machinist's mate, and so now he is in charge of organizing a reunion of old
hands to take place at the recommissioning in January 1983. He will get back
aboard, for a day, before the New Jersey moves out to sea and a new career.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Prejudice and Agent Orange

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 308 words


Should a controversial statement by a scientist disqualify him from designing a
sensitive study of the effects of Agent Orange on American troops in Vietnam?

Some veterans' groups, fearful that exposure to the powerful defoliant ruined
the health of American servicemen, are demanding the ouster of Dr. Gary H.
Spivey because of his testimony to a California Assembly committee. He said that
to date, there is ''little evidence'' that Agent Orange is a threat to human
health, an assessment with which most scientists would agree. Then he added:
''The fear which is generated by the current publicity is very likely to be the
most serious consequence of the use of Agent Orange.''

The veterans' groups take the comment as evidence that Dr. Spivey has prejudged
the issue. Dr. Spivey retorts that he was simply trying to provide reassurance
to veterans who have prematurely con-cluded that they are in serious danger
because of Agent Orange.

In any case, Dr. Spivey and a colleague at the University of California at Los
Angeles are simply designing a study to compare troops likely to have been
exposed to Agent Orange with other troops and with civilians. Their preliminary
design, just completed, will be reviewed by independent scientific panels,
including the National Academy of Sciences and the Congressional Office of
Technology Assessment. If there is any bias in the design, surely such reviews
will disclose it.

In fact, the flap is ironic, because V.A. officials had sought to avoid charges
of bias by contracting with Dr. Spivey, an independent researcher, rather than
having their own people design the study.  Surely they still deserve the benefit
of the doubt. For now, the veterans' objections only confirm Dr. Spivey's point.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ORWELLIAN REAGAN POLICY ON JOB BIAS

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 340 words


To the Editor:

The appearance of Vice President Bush and other top Administration officials at
the recent N.A.A.C.P. convention would appear to have been an exercise in
futility in view of the saying, ''What you do speaks so loudly I cannot hear
what you say.''

he proposed relaxation of antidiscrimination rules (for Federal contractors) to
relieve the ''burden'' of companies having to cope with affirmative-action
paperwork (news story Aug. 25) does not seem to take into consideration that
being unable to secure employment might constitute even more of a burden for
those affected.

Labor Secretary Donovan assures us that affirmative-action protection will be
retained for nearly 77 percent of workers who are women or members of minority
groups. That means a mere 23-plus percent of such workers will lose the
protection now granted them (we are left uninformed as to how many human beings
those comforting statistics conceal). The Administration, however, should be
more respectful of percentages in that range since, after all, it was just 27
percent of this country's eligible voters who gave Mr. Reagan what he interprets
as an overwhelming mandate.

George Orwell could not have dreamed up a better example of doublespeak than the
statement of the Labor Department's Ellen M.  Shong that the proposed
regulations were designed to encourage voluntary compliance, because ''employers
will be more willing to work with us and the end result will be significantly
more job opportunities for members of the protected groups.'' That's the most
persuasive argument I've heard since the notorious explanation made during the
Vietnam war that a village had been destroyed in order to save it.  HELEN M.
FRANC New York, Aug. 25, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 1, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

YOUNG PIANIST REMINDS THE WORLD VIETNAM IS A COUNTRY OF MUSIC, TOO

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


When Dang Thai Son found himself, against his own and everyone else's
expectation, in the final round of last year's Chopin Piano Competition in
Warsaw, his suit, which he had bought in the Children's World department store
in Moscow, would no longer do.  Formal dress was required, not easy to find on
short notice in consumer societies, more difficult yet in Poland's Communist
austerity, and impossible when it must fit a Vietnamese of boyish stature who
had found his only Western suit on the children's rack.

The Polish Government intervened, ordering a tailor to run up a formal suit in
two days. The pianist, who has just turned 23 years old, considers it only one
of the many miracles that have marked his life since then. The first was that he
won the contest, a feat that has made stars overnight. From the life of
international isolation and physical deprivation that is the lot of the
Vietnamese, Mr. Son has burst into instant celebrity, a whirl of wide-ranging
travel, public adulation and luxury hotels.

His tour of Japan - 20 concerts in a month - was a sellout everywhere, some
recitals were televised live, his records and photos are on display in music
shops and his face has become familiar through television interviews. Even his
mother, who was also his first teacher, is being asked for her autograph. The
Japanese tour followed acclaimed appearances in France and West Germany, where
he recorded for Deutsche Grammophon.

'Gives Much Hope to Others'

''It opened my way to the outside world,'' the pianist said softly over
breakfast at his hotel here. ''I can travel, and this gives much hope to others
in Vietnam that they will be able to do the same.''

Despite his long shock of hair and blue jeans that did not come from Moscow, Mr.
Son relates his newfound fame more to his national identity than would musicians
from other countries, Western or Communist.

''Most importantly, my sudden success will help to change the thinking of those
who know Vietnam only as a country of war,'' he said. ''We were understimated.
Now Vietnam also speaks to the world in the language of music.''

Mr. Son, who has learned some English in his travels but speaks mainly through
his mother - whose French is that of the Saigon upper classes although she has
lived in Hanoi for nearly 30 years and apologizes for not having used it for a
long time - sees great relevance in having won the contest in Poland and feels a
particular affinity for Chopin.

Joy Follows Career of Sadness

''His country, too, was occupied, broken up and divided,'' he said. ''And Chopin
remained very patriotic even while he lived in France.  To play Chopin, you must
know not only joy but also sadness.''

Mr. Son's present joys follow a career of sadness, in whose narration son and
mother shared volubly, the more so because they had never had an occasion to
relate it to an American. Their account disclosed an aspect of North Vietnam
during its war against the United States that has never come to outside
attention.

The pianist's mother, Thai Thi Lien, who studied at the Paris Conservatory and
completed her education in Prague, began teaching her son in earnest when he was
5. At 8, he passed the entrance examination at the School of Music of Vietnam. A
year later, the school, its faculty and 700 students and its 60 pianos were
evacuated and dispersed into the countryside between Hanoi and the Chinese
border, and continued functioning even under the most intense bombing.

Huts Built for the Pianos

''The peasants with whom we were quartered did not like the pianos in their
houses because when we played - and each piano was played all day because there
were so few - they could not hear the planes approaching,'' said Mrs. Lien. She
and her son laughed, to keep an American from feeling that they spoke in
accusation.

''We built grass huts just for the pianos, and trenches next to them, into which
we jumped when the planes came,'' Mrs. Lien, who was head of the school's piano
department, said. ''Still we played all day, and in the evening we had very
intimate lecture-concerts by candlelight.''

Mr. Son finished his secondary studies in 1976, emerging first in his class, and
was sent to the Tchaikovsky Conservatory in Moscow to study under Vladimir
Natanson, whom he reveres.

''Professor Natanson told me that rarely had a student made so much progress as
I did in my first year,'' Mr. Son said. ''It is not so surprising - it was the
first time that I played on pianos that worked well. When I first saw the
conservatory, I stood in front of it and admired it and was afraid to enter.
They had to come out to bring me in.''

Unlike other winners of major competitions, Mr. Son took only a year's leave
from the Tchaikovsky Conservatory to fulfill some of the engagements that are
the reward for the winner in Warsaw's Chopin Competition. He will return this
month to resume his normal studies. ''I have so much to learn,'' he said. His
mother added, ''He must enlarge his cultural and intellectual baggage.''

'Memories That Remain'

Mr. Son said he would like to play in the United States but, hinting at possible
political considerations, he said, ''There must be more preparations, from all
points of view.''

''There are memories that remain, but I want to play in America'' he continued.
''Music is universal, and I would like to show that Vietnamese are part of it.''

Asked whether he had had any pleasant contacts with America, he replied quickly,
''Above all with Steinway pianos.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Vietnamese pianist Dang Thai Son and his mother

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 2, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

INDIA BARS SENIOR U.S. DIPLOMAT, STIRRING A DISPUTE

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 1


India has refused to accept a senior American diplomat in New Delhi, touching
off a dispute with the Reagan Administration.

The dispute, over the assignment of George G.B. Griffin as political counselor,
the third-ranking post in the United States Embassy, has aggravated the strain
in relations between the two countries, American officials said. The United
States has retaliated by barring a senior Indian diplomat.

It is unusual for a government to block a foreign diplomat from taking up an
assignment. Ambassadors are subject to scrutiny, but lower-ranking diplomats
generally take up their posts without prior agreement. As a result, the Indians'
refusal to accept Mr. Griffin is being described by State Department officials
as ''unprecedented.''

The matter has attracted attention because of the conviction of senior American
officials that Mr. Griffin, whose last post was as the second-ranking officer in
the embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan, has been singled out by Moscow for attack,
and that India has yielded to a ''Soviet disinformation campaign.''

On Dec. 4, 1980, The Patriot, an Indian Communist newspaper, accused Mr. Griffin
of spreading falsehoods about the situation in Afghanistan. Tass, the Soviet
press agency, picked up the report, and it was broadcast back to India by the
Moscow radio.

State Department officials said Mr. Griffin had been traveling from his post in
Kabul to see his wife in New Delhi. While there, he occasionally briefed
reporters on the situation in Afghanistan.

Attack in Communist Weekly

Last May 4, Blitz, an Indian Communist w eekly, attacked the Central Intel
ligence Agency and called Mr. Griffin a leader of C.I.A.operations ag ainst the
Afghan Government. The report was also picked up by Tass. T he Soviet press
agency, erring on Mr. Griffin's first name and his last assignment, said:

''The not unknown John Griffin, a major specialist of the C.I.A., who, from
Pakistani territory, guided secret operations of the American spy department
against Afghanistan, is being transferred from Pakistan to New Delhi.

''Griffin's duties, which were concealed under the roof of the United States
Embassy in Islamabad, included the supply of weapons to the bands of Afghan
mercenaries who had found refuge in Pakistan.

''Now his bosses are sending him to a new sector of work, which will signify a
broadening of diversionary and spy activities of the C.I.A. in India.''

Bhupesh Gupta, a Communist deputy, denounced Mr. Griffin in the Indian
Parliament and asked the Foreign Ministry to stop him from giving press
briefings. Mr. Gupta charged that, on an earlier assignment to Calcutta in 1969,
Mr. Griffin worked against the independence of Bangladesh from Pakistan.

U.S. Protests to Soviet

The reprinting of the allegations by the Soviet press prompted the United States
in early May to protest to the Soviet Foreign Ministry. The department took the
unusual step of denying that Mr.  Griffin worked for the C.I.A.

''The story is, of course, false,'' the department said. ''George Griffin is a
career Foreign Service officer, who is currently the acting deputy chief of
mission in our embassy in Kabul. In view of the obvious falsehood, we can only
conclude that it was designed to complicate Indian-American relations.''

In addition, officials said, the United States told India that Mr.  Griffin, who
is 46 years old, was not a C.I.A. agent, but a career officer with long
experience in countries of the Indian subcontinent.

Yet, a few weeks before Mr. Griffin was due to leave for his new post, India
advised the United States on July 28 that he would not be accepted.

Indian sources in New Delhi said they did not dispute the facts about Mr.
Griffin, but thought it in the interest of better relations that he not come.

The State Department told India that, if he was not accepted, a senior Indian
diplomat would also be barred. The Indians did not change their position.

State Dept. Responds to Inquiry

Word of Mr. Griffin's case spread through the State Department in recent days.
In answer to an inquiry, the department said today: ''We believe the Indian
decision on George Griffin was unwarranted. Griffin is an experienced,
responsible Foreign Service Officer. He has had an outstanding career which has
included many difficult assignments. He has acted at all times in accordance
with instructions and the norms of proper diplomatic behavior. That this action
was taken at a time when Griffin has been a target of a Soviet disinformation
campaign makes it particularly regrettable. He is being reassigned to a position
of appropriately senior responsibility.''

Relations between the United States and India have been strained for a number of
reasons. The Indians have reacted strongly to the Reagan Administration's
decisions to help Pakistan modernize its armed forces through the sale of F-16
jets. The Administration believes that Prime Minister Indira Gandhi is too
closely aligned to Soviet policies, citing, in particular, India's diplomatic
recognition of the Vietnam-backed Cambodian Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 2, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A SHIFT IN MOOD IN EUROPE;
A dangerous polarization threatens the Western alliance: the United States is
steadily rearming and reasserting its power everywhere, while among its European
allies a new fear of American toughness and of an arms race spreads. The more we
emphasize military force, the more the voices of dissent rise, and the more
American leaders are tempted to think that we are alone in our struggle to save
the world, that only we understand the overwhelming danger of Soviet Communism
and that in that mortal combat who is not for us is against us.

BYLINE: By Fritz Stern

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words


By that reckoning we may discover that the number who are for us is diminishing.
Chancellor Bruno Kreisky of Austria, who has impeccable anti-Communist
credentials, recently spoke of ''a wave of pacifism sweeping over Europe.'' He
is wrong in detail: there is very little principled pacifism of the pre-1939
variety in Europe today.  There is, however, a shift of mood, especially in
Northern Europe, a mounting apprehension about an arms race that seems out of
control and about an American impetuosity that could provoke what it most wishes
to avert.

There is an American presumption that our critics are crypto-Communists or at
least unwitting tools of the Soviet Union.  President Reagan said, for example,
that some of the opponents of the neutron bomb were ''really carrying the
propaganda ball for the Soviet Union.'' No doubt the Soviet Union sees in this
new mood one of the few bright spots in what is otherwise for them a bleak
political landscape. They will do all they can to support it, but we would put
unnecessary blinders on ourselves if we lumped all our critics together.

The new mood in Europe comes from widely heterogeneous groups of people and is
made up of heterodox ideas. This opposition embraces churchmen, apolitical youth
groups, an anti-Communist left and, above all, citizens of all classes, ages and
persuasions. Some of these groups are organized, such as the group led by the
well-known historian E.P. Thompson, and campaign for a nuclear-free zone in
Europe. Within the parties of the present coalition in Bonn, there are groups
who oppose the modernization of nuclear weapons, indeed, who oppose all nuclear
weapons, and who have unreasonable expectations about the prospects of
negotiations with the Soviet Union. Allied governments must maintain their
military efforts in the face of this reluctance and of grave economic
difficulties; they must retain what in Western Europe is still the norm, a
citizen army, while its absence in the United States troubles many Europeans. It
is in our interest to facilitate, not complicate, their task. We must
understand, moreover, that to decry an ever-intensifying arms race is not in
itself a symptom of pacificism, as witness the dramatic pleas in May of our own
elder statesman, George F. Kennan.

There are echoes here of earlier European apprehensions. At the height of the
Korean War, the British quipped: ''No annihilation without representation.'' But
the unease about American domination and assertiveness seems greater than
before, as does European reluctance to accommodate the ever-increasing nuclear
arsenal in Europe. Most Europeans understand the threat from the unprecedented
Soviet buildup, but they worry that the United States is embarked on regaining
strategic superiority over the Soviets. They fear, as many Americans have in the
past, that the United States is placing too much faith in materiel and military
power while not grappling effectively with the political and spiritual sources
of allied strength.

On recent trips to Europe I have noted how widespread this apprehension about
American policy has become, even among our best and oldest friends. Recentlya
leading German editor and a staunch friend of the United States for more than 30
years, said to me, ''There is something Wilhelmian about the United States
today.'' Wilhelmian is shorthand for tha t disastrous period of increasing
German streng th and political ineptitude that helped precipitate the World War
I a nd Germany's first downfall.

To understand the depth of divergence between American policy and European
opinion, we must remember that the Europeans cherish a different historic memory
from ours. To Europeans the increase in overkill capacity is an irrational act,
an absurdity: they know that we have enough to kill and be killed a hundred
times over again.  Their historic experience in this century - unlike America's
until Vietnam - has not been the triumphant use of power but the experience of
brute and futile power, blindly spent and blindly worshiped. Even an
unhistorical generation in Europe remembers World War I as the epitome of the
mindless worship of force; they remember the guardians of morality sanctifying
violence. For the Europeans, this century has been the experience of the absurd,
first as an intuition of artists, then as drama produced by history. Having lost
their preeminence in repeated wars, the Europeans today seek alternatives to
force.

Since the second Thirty Years' War from 1914 to 1945, the Europeans have come to
relish some kind of comfortable insularity. What some of them would call
reasonableness, some of us would call appeasement. We need not accept European
criticism, but we must understand its depth and try to cope with it. America
emerging from the Vietnam syndrome is of a different mood from the European s
who seek peace in prudence.American policy can probably help to contain this
present drift toward separatism within the alliance; by ina dvertence it could
almost certainly strengthen it.

It was the manner in which we announced our decision to build the neutron bomb
rather than the decision itself that incited our critics in Europe. The
Economist recently suggested that the announcement could have identified the
neutron bomb as an interim weapon to cope with Soviet superiority in tanks, to
be replaced at a later date by conventional antitank weapons. The explanations
of Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger were read as a disguised avowal of
the renewed search for overall American superiority. The President has shown
himself startlingly adept at persuading his American constituency on domestic
issues; the wider constituency on foreign and strategic issues has so far eluded
him.

We must learn again that the alliance ultimately rests on a moral consensus.
Power is not enough and toughness is not enough.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Fritz Stern is provost and a professor of history at Columbia University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIANS TRYING TO FORGE UNITED FRONT AGAINST HANOI

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Sept. 2


The leaders of anti-Vietnamese Cambodian groups arrived here today to search for
a a common front against Hanoi's occupation of their country.

The first to reach here, from a Thai-Cambodian border enclave, was Khieu
Samphan, Prime Minister of the government that represents the Communist forces
headed by former Prime Minister Pol Pot. His regime, although it controls only
jungle enclaves and no significant numbers of civilians since its ouster by
Vietnam in 1979, is still recognized by much of the international community and
holds Cambodia's seat in the United Nations.

Next to arrive was Son Sann, who was Prime Minister until he broke with Prince
Norodom Sihanouk in 1967 and went into exile in France.  He came from Bangkok,
Thailand, where he lives in Spartan fashion with his associates in the so-called
Khmer People's National Liberation Front when he is not in one of the border
enclaves that his guerrillas occupy.

The last to arrive was Prince Sihanouk, the former King and chief of state. The
Prince arrived from Mougins, on the French Riviera, where he lives when he is
not in Peking or Pyongyang, North Korea.

Prince Was Ebullient

The 59-year-old Prince, who was ebullient at midnight after his long flight,
warned the participants not to be too optimistic about their deliberations. He
pointed out that Hanoi contends that the Cambodian situation is ir reversible
and that no nation is willing to oppose Vietnam militarily for the sake of Cam
bodian liberty, particularly in view of the risk that the Pol Pot regime might
return.

Asked whether he preferred the continuation of the Viet namese occupation or the
risk of the restoration of the Pol Pot forces, Prince Sihano uk said that the
Cambodian people would prefer the status quo ov er a return to a Pol Pot regime.
But he said the Vietnamese co uld not be defeated militarily, and in any
negotiation Hanoi would m ake sure that the regime they ousted would not return.

''Paradoxically, the Vietnamese are a guarantee, and they are a solid
guarantee,'' the Prince said. ''The situation is very Shakespearean.''

The three anti-Vietnamese groups will bring different motivations to their
meeting tomorrow. The Pol Pot delegation came because Peking, to which it owes
almost all of its military, economic and diplomatic support, wanted it to.

Removed From Official Posts

Peking is aware that Mr. Pol Pot's record of devastation of Cambodia's society
and mass killings of its people has given misgivings to countries that condemn
Vietnam's occupation but do not wish to be associated with the regime that
Vietnam overthrew. As a result, China has been at pains to associate
non-Communist forces with the Khieu Samphan regime and de-emphasize the Pol Pot
record and objectives.

Mr. Pol Pot has been removed from official posts although he remains the group's
principal leader. The regime has formally forsworn Communism and pledged itself
to accept the result of a free, United Nations-supervised election after a
Vietnamese withdrawal.

China, supported by the non-Communist Association of Southeast Asian Nations,
has tried for nearly two years to associate Prince Sihanouk, who has no armies
fighting under his banner, and Mr. Son Sann with the Pol Pot movement. The
conference represents the first success in bringing the three to the same city,
but both the Prince and Mr. Son Sann have openly declared their misgivings.

Deep Antagonism Remains

A series of meetings between each of the three leaders has done little to dispel
the antogonism of Prince Sihanouk and Mr. Son Sann to the Communists, who in
their nearly four years of absolute power murdered hundreds of thousands,
perhaps millions, of Cambodians.  Prince Sihanouk lost three sons and many other
relatives and was kept isolated under house arrest. Mr. Son Sann and all of his
leadership associates lost wives and husbands, parents and children under the
Pol Pot regime.

Nonetheless, the Prince and his former Prime Minister came tonight because their
political survival depends on those nations that are demanding the coalition.

Prince Sihanouk owes much to China, which has sheltered him for many of the
years since he was overthrown in 1970. He has no political future if, in
addition to losing his country to Vietnam, he also falls from Peking's grace.

Mr. Son Sann, who is strongly anti-Communist, receives no significant support
from any government and depends on Thailand's good will to keep his small
guerrilla forces in the field. He has received token shipments of Chinese arms
via Thailand to encourage him to put aside make common cause with the Pol Pot
group. He insists that he will not enter into a coalition unless he heads the
government and controls all key ministries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 3, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words


Sadat poised to deal with religious militants A2
China's labor experiment: the threat of dismissal A3
Testimony on Madrid coup raises some might-have-beens A3
West German terrorists say they bombed U.S. air base A4
Around the World A5
Soviet paper implies U.S. fi- nanced Teheran bombing A7
Cambodians try to form common front against Vietnam A8
India denies Soviet influenced re- jection of U.S. diplomat A9

Government/Politics
Black Mississippi lawmakers see redistricting plan as a setback A15
Democratic organization assails Reagan in fund-raising effort A17
City hopes to improve priority bus lanes in Manhattan B3
Bank attacks Goldin move to put city funds in minority banks B6
Mrs. O'Connor reports assets at more than $1.1 million B12

General
Board rules longshoremen's boy- cott of Soviet broke law A13
Around the Nation A14
Hundreds of aspiring cousins lay claim on Hughes estates A14
The Region B4
Widow, 86, slain in her home on City Island in the Bronx B5
The City B10

Health/Science
Expedition to Andrea Doria re- turns to port with safe A14
Medical care costs are rising faster than inflation rate A16
Rorschach Society casts business- like silhouette in capital B26

Obituaries
Funeral service for Lowell Thomas attended by 800 B16

The Home Section
Home Old-house decision: Restore, renovate or remodel?  C1

Home parties, where the selling is easy C1

Restoring the furniture when it's sun-faded C6

Finding an unusual coffee table C8

Homes still available, new coast data show C9
Hers C2
Helpful Hardware C2
Home Beat C3
Child care: Elderly in Berlin fill a void C3
Home Improvement C4
In love with a vintage range C5
Calendar of Events C7
Design Notebook C10
Drug may be effective treating breast cancer C11
Gardening C12

Arts/Entertainment
Actors who take command, whether veteran or newcomer C15
Maria Tucci is signed for Broad- way-bound ''Kingdoms'' C17
A Broadway rehearsal goes from gloom to boom C17
L. Dawidowicz's ''The Holocaust and the Historians'' reviewed C17
''CBS Reports'' examines vio- lence among teen-agers C20

Features/Notes
Notes on People B26
Going Out Guide C16

Sports
Grudge fight looms at Rahway between Scott and Braxton D20
Yanks lose, 4-3 to Twins; Dent out indefinitely D21
Borg and Chris Evert Lloyd win easily at Open D21
Cosmos beat Rowdies, 6-3, in playoff ser ies opener D21
Ivie of Padres faces emotional problems D21
N.C.A.A. may allow schools more television control D22
Dave Anderson at the U.S. Open D24
Mets lose fourth in row as Astros romp, 8-0 D24
A new spirit detected in Michaels and his Jets D26

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18

Indulging South Africa To pick a Borough President Speer, Hess and punishment
Topics: death and milk Letters A18
William Safire: the archeological dispute in Israel A19
Fred Wertheimer: fixing election law A19
L. James Binder: the draft took a beating and so may we A19
Even Kemp Jr.: no pity, please, in aiding the disabled A19

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
3 Cambodian Factions A gree on Coalition Pact

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 173 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Sept. 3


The Communist forces of the former Cambodian Prime Minister, Pol Pot, and
representatives of two other Cambodian factions agreed today on a joint
statement of intention to form a coalition government to oppose the Vietnamese
occupation of their country.

The statement is to be signed tomorrow by Khieu Samphan, the present Prime
Minister of the Pol Pot movement; Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who abdicated as King
to become chief of state and was deposed in 1970, and Son Sann, a Prime Minister
under the Prince who now commands an anti-Communist guerrilla movement.

The question of how to bridge their profound differences will be left to be
resolved by a committee to which each group will name representatives.

Speaking at a news conference, Mr. Son Sann said that he accepted the coalition
plan only under the conditions he had set forth earlier, including a demand that
his movement hold the prime ministership and all important ministries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Rules Revoked on Suits Over Published Secrets

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 159 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 3


Attorney General William French Smith revoked Carter Administration rules today
on suing Government employees for publishing official secrets without approval.

The Attorney General's action will affect all Federal agencies, including
intelligence agencies, that have agreements with employees requiring clearance
for publication of official secrets.

Mr. Smith said the regulations, instituted Dec. 9, 1980, suggested that the
Justice Department would sue only some current or former employees for violating
clearance agreements and would ignore other violations. He said that would have
encouraged employees to avoid the important review process.

The guidelines were issued after the Supreme Court ruled that Frank Snepp, a
former Central Intelligence Agency employee, had to turn over the profits from a
book he wrote on the American withdrawal from Vietnam because he had not
submitted it for agency review.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TERRORISM: OUR CHILD;
CAMBRIDGE, Mass. - I had hoped in college and graduate school to learn to read
literature for its political meaning. But I found, in the years I was there -
the late 1960's and early 70's - that the business got turned around. It was
literature, the poetic imagination, that became the best guide to reading and
understanding the often terrifying political events of those years.  Terror, I
saw, was theater, and we all collaborated in its productions.

BYLINE: By Jay Cantor

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 906 words


Those years, many thought, were a time of breakdowns - of imperial power, of
social roles, of ''law and order.'' One epoch was ending but another far better
one would be born. The long unexpressed desires of working people, women, blacks
and the third world, of those who had too long been silent, would find
expression. This season of change meant that it was a time of great anxiety for
those who felt instability in their worlds. And this anxiety was felt in all
classes and groups in America, even those that hoped to see their desires
realized.

An individual who feels the very basis of the self dissolving, who feels great
anxiety, represses the unruly parts of his personality.  Society, too, creates
events and figures with which to frighten itself to freeze the world in place.
As society feels anxiety it will require, even want, episodes of terror. Society
terrifies itself so that it may feel the cohension that fear brings to a group.
So a country, when its unexpressed desires grow too strong, when it is made
anxious by the possibility of change, terrifies itself with imagined external
threats, outside agitators, pollutants (the Jews!  the blacks!) that it must be
cleansed of, subversive demons waiting beyond the gates. And when those
self-made threats are not strong enough, society may collaborate with other
nations and conjure up a war. The war provides it with the necessary enemy, the
necessary fear. The mobilization for war puts everything and everyone in their
places, provides the rigidity that society prefers instead of change.

Our country at war dealt in terror in Vietnam. There was no surprise when its
pale form appeared at home. Bombs were placed in university computer centers.
Students were killed at Kent State and Jackson State. By 1974, as our imperial
power was defeated in Vietnam, as the lines at the gas pumps grew and an
everything shortage seemed to loom, one read in newspapers almost daily,
''Hostages have been taken.''

Terror is theater. Its productions require only a few actors and an audience to
watch the play. One among the audience is chosen and killed before the others.
The terrified audience is turned to stone, rigid in the seats. Rulers and,
surprisingly, the terrorists wanted to take control, to stop change. What the
authorities did in an organized if haphazard manner, shooting students here and
there, the terrorist opposition and the avid publicity we provided did in a
free-enterprise way with its Off-Broadway productions. Terrorists provided a
sharply focused, grotesque image of the change that was all around us, as if
society's long silent desires walked about only as horrible demented acts that
all would shrink back from - back to their rooms to watch the world on
televison. (Snipers hid in the building across the street!) The terrorist helped
society, as he helped himself, to turn vague anxieties about change into more
tangible fears. Of course, the American terrorist of the early 70's spoke as if
he meant to hasten change. But he suffered, perhaps more acutely than most, the
anxiety of that time, the horrifying sense of the world shaking apart. The
terrorist, although he called his acts revolutionary, was really trying to stop
the dissolution of his world, to halt his anxiety.

Most of all, the American terrorist was, like the rest of us, part of the
audience of his own frightening actions. The political meaning of his actions
consisted of being seen by others, later, on television. The terrorist imagined
himself part of the audience watching, one of the terrified survivors, for he,
too, want ed to be terrified, to freeze things in place.

The Symbionese Liberation Army, the mad kidnappers of Patty Hearst, were the
extreme demonstration of this illusory sense of terrified survival.

Trapped by the police in a house in Los Angeles, they watched the house burn on
television as they physically burned. Did they feel that they had survived the
fire even as it consumed them because they, too, were part of the terrified
audience, watching?

The American terrorist was our joint creation, offering horrifying sacrifices,
performing grotesque parodies so that we might be frozen in place. He helped
society, as he helped himself, to overcome anxiety by terror.  By 1974 it seemed
that the country had come to crave the thrill of terror. The movies were s
pectacles of disaster, bombs placed by terrorists on ocean liners, f ires in
skyscrapers, maddened sharks. Patty Hearst falling in love with her kidnappers -
or the public's decision that she had, for th at was the story we delighted to
imagine - was one figure of our pleasure in terror. The Symbionese Liberation
Army stalked the headli nes, our collective dream. Love and dread became for a
time, in o ur public theater, to seem nearly indistinguishable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Jay Cantor, who teaches English at Tufts University in Medford, Mass., is author
of the forthcoming book, ''The Space Between: Literature and Politics.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Books

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 407 words


Evil Among the Preppies By Randolph Hogan PEACE BREAKS OUT. By John Knowles.
193 pages. Holt, Rinehart & Winston.  $10.95.

AT first it's hard to say just why ''Peace Breaks Out'' makes you feel uneasy.
After all, there's really nothing wrong with it: in sentence after graceful
sentence and page after seamless page, John Knowles builds a story as solid as
the mahogany paneling of Devon, the prep school in his famous first novel, ''A
Separate Peace,'' to which he has returned after 22 years.

Here, for instance, is the narrator, Pete Hallam, a World War II combat veteran
returned to his alma mater as a teacher, describing a semester break: ''There
was a special charm to this little New England town without hordes of teen-age
boys in it. The imposing array of school buildings unveiled their quiet dignity,
the view of campus swept unobstructed to river, forest and horizon. The raucous
back wing of Pembroke House fell silent, the silence of a battlefield, he
thought with a kind of rueful amusement, when the shooting has stopped and even
the corpses have been carted away.''
Incipient Monster

And one can't fault Mr. Knowles's intention or his theme.  Devon's postwar idyll
is shattered when the tension created by the opposing political vie ws of two
students escalates into a conflict that ends in murder. Mr . Knowles means to
use his campus to show us how and where the roo t of evil grows. Wexford, editor
of the school newspaper, is responsible for the events leading to the murder,
but by novel's en d he is untouched, his scheming arrogance intact: ''He'san
incipient monster, thought Pete, and I can't prove it and I can't stop him. For
the last dozen years we've seen in the world how monsters can come to the top
and just what horrors they can achieve. And those mon sters were once
adolescents.''

What is disturbing, finally, is that while the theme and characters are
immediate and the tragedy is palpable, everything seems so remote. Why does it
all take place in 1946? If we're to read Mr.  Knowles's story as a parable, and
surely that is what's intended, why must the stage be World War II? Even
Vietnam, our more recent unpleasantness, no longer seems so recent.

''A Separate Peace'' endures because, like ''Peace Breaks Out,'' it is
beautifully written and a deft study of character. But what sets it apart is a
paradoxical quality of immediacy and timelessness that eludes the grasp of the
new novel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Knowles

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 4, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV Weekend;
AN IRISH PATRIOT SPEAKS AND THE WASTE OF WAR

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 929 words


CAPPING the summer drought of new programming, this holiday weekend generally
continues to mark time until the new season begins to dribble in over the next
several weeks. Back on the schedule, perhaps bringing a measure of solace to the
multitudes who are less than impressed with the truncated baseball season, is -
are you ready? - football.

Colleg e foo tball is in the electronic limelight tomorrow at 9 P.M. on ABC-TV
whe n Alabama's Crimson Tide goes to Baton Rouge, La., to face Louisian a State
University's Fighting Tigers. Professional football retu rns Sunday with two
National Football League games on the televisio n tap. At 1 o'clock on CBS-TV,
the Philadelphia Eagles will play the New York Giants in East Rutherford, N.J.
And at 4 P.M.,the New York Jets confront the Buffalo Bills at Orchard Park, N.Y.

In addition, this weekend CBS will be carrying some of the earlyround play from
the United States Open tennis matches at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens.
Players in the live coverage will include the defending singles champions, John
McEnroe and Chris Evert Lloyd.

One of the few pockets of original prime-time programming can be found on
Channel 13 on Sunday. At 10 P.M., there is Steve Allen's ''Meeting of Minds,''
produced for KCET-TV in Los Angeles. And at 11, WNET's ''VideoFilm Review'' is
offering ''Smothering Dreams,'' an independent film by Dan Reeves.

While we have long had a pronounced aversion to ''Meeting of Minds,'' the
program has won some well-regarded awards and has developed a fiercely loyal
audience. It has the veneer of scholarship and knowledgeability that seems to
fit the loftier pretensions of public television. Too often, though, it ends up
awkwardly somewhere between an earnest adult-education lecture and an outrageous
serving of kitsch.

The format features Mr. Allen in a drawing-room setting. Each week, wearing a
tuxedo, he welcomes prominent figures from history to join him in a discussion
about themselves and their times. The guests are dressed in period costumes.
Almost invariably, the women characters are played by Jayne Meadows, Mr. Allen's
wife. His loyalty is admirable, but this casting quirk inevitably leads to some
unevenness, not to mention monotony.

In any case, some sessions of ''Meeting of Minds'' are distinctly better than
others. This week's falls on the positive side. In fact, it is the second part
of a discussion that began last Sunday. The historical participants are
England's Oliver Cromwell (1599-1658), Russia's Catherine the Great (1729-96)
and Ireland's Daniel O'Connell (1775-1847). All three figured to some extent in
revolutions, which are discussed in passing, but the real subject of the two
programs is the tragedy of Ireland.

Cromwell, impersonated by George Innes, emerges as a narrow-minded religious
fanatic. Catherine, filtered through Miss Meadows, of course, is mostly played
for comic relief, her lusting for young me n in military uniforms described in a
thick Rus sian accent. As O'Connell, Michael McGuire has the juiciest a s well
as the most sympathetic role, punctuated with bits of nob le oratory about
freedomand the plight of his country. Frequent studi o applause creates the
impression that the audience must have been r ecruited from the rolls of the
Ireland Fund.

Perhaps because the bulk of the programs is focused on the single subject of
Ireland, these sessions tend to be a bit more informative than most others in
the series. It is explained how English law contrived to destroy the power of
Roman Catholic landowners in Ireland and how Roman Catholics were excluded from
political office.  On the other hand, O'Connell stresses how his cause owed more
to Thomas Paine and the rationalists than to the support of the Roman Catholic
Church. ''The church,'' he says, ''has a very short record of enlarging human
freedom.'' This show is, in brief, ''Meeting of Minds'' at its very best.

On ''VideoFilm Review,'' ''Smothering Dreams'' looks at war and violence, and
finds both wasteful. Made by Dan Reeves with Jon L.  Hilton supervising the
sound editing and music, the short film - about 25 minutes - is dedicated to
American soldiers who died in a Vietnam ambush on Jan 20, 1969. It begins with a
shot of a wounded soldier dying in a tropical swamp. Then image is piled on
image as soldiers on patrol are alternated with children playing with toy guns.

Much of the narration is supplied by an unseen man, evidently a war veteran,
commenting on aspects of violence. ''I don't think the average person has any
idea what combat is like,'' he observes. Mr.  Reeves, though, manages to create
an extraordinary facsimile of what the experience is probably like. Manipulating
his images skillfully, he evokes a terrible sense of dread, exploding in the
shock that can only plead, ''Oh, God, help me.'' He captures the peculiar
American quest of ''running from one movie dream to another,'' the devouring of
''hand-me-down stories written by blind men.'' He confronts us with the reality
of the wounded veteran described as ''your Memorial Day on wheels.'' Where
''Apocalypse Now'' was bloated and pretentious, ''Smothering Dreams'' is lean
and harrowingly to the point.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Michael McGuire and Jayne Meadows

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 5, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THREE CAMBODIAN EX-LEADERS SIGN PACT ON ANTI-HANOI FRONT

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 617 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Sept. 4


Three former Cambodian leaders signed a joint statement today pledging their
three groups to strive for a coalition to continue the struggle against the
Vietnamese occupation of their country.

The document was signed by Prime Minister Khieu Samphan of the deposed regime of
Pol Pot, former chief of state Prince Norodom Sihanouk and one of his former
prime ministers, Son Sann. This alliance unites the pro-Peking Communist forces,
a former King who described himself after the signing as ''a blue, not a red
Cambodian,'' and a conservative politician who is deeply anti-Communist and
broke with Prince Sihanouk and stepped down as Prime Minister 14 years ago.

Speaking at a private lunch party that he gave after the signing ceremony in a
luxury hotel, Prince Sihanouk said that the coalition came into existence after
a long period of Chinese pressure. China, which supports the Pol Pot forces, has
been urging the Prince and Mr. Son Sann to throw in their lot with the Pol Pot
movement since the Vietnamese conquest of Cambodia.

The Prince, who is known for his candor, said China wanted such ''bourgeois'' as
himself and Mr. Son Sann to unite with the Pol Pot Communists so that the
deposed regime would be more readily accepted by non-Communist nations and to
insure its continued recognition in the United Nations as Cambodia's legitimate
Government. Since it came into being in 1979, the Vietnamese-installed regime of
President Heng Samrin has failed to take the place in the world body of the
Government it ousted from Phnom Penh.

Differences to Be Studied

The joint declaration limits itself to expressing the desirability of forming a
joint government. The difficult political questions of how to unite such
divergent forces are left to a committee for study.

Rather than unite the three factions' military forces in the resistance against
the 200,000 Vietnamese occupation troops and the Cambodian Army that the
pro-Hanoi regime has formed, the declaration expressed only an agreement ''that
all anti-Vietnamese forces avoid any clashes among themselves.'' Prince Sihanouk
said at a news conference that no joint military command under a single
commander was envisaged.

The Pol Pot forces, in order to attract non-Communist partners, have offered the
post of prime minister in a coalition to Mr. Son Sann and a high post,
presumably the presidency, to the Prince.  However, Prince Sihanouk said today
that he believed the agreement would help the Pol Pot forces to maintain their
dominant position in the coalition.

He explained that the Communists would give up their advantage only if this was
necessary to attract enough votes to retain the United Nations credentials.
Today's agreement, he said, would insure that result without further gestures.
Conversation With Dulles

Referring, perhaps, to his new alignment with the regime that killed three of
his sons and kept him and his wife under house arrest until the Vietnamese
invasion liberated them, Prince Sihanouk reminisced over lunch about a meeting
he had in 1958 with John Foster Dulles, then the American Secretary of State.

''Prince Sihanouk, you are very young,'' the Prince recalled Mr.  Dulles's
lecture. ''You must choose between the free world and the Commun ist wor ld.''
As chief of state, Prince Sihanouk endeavored to keep Cambodia on a neutralist
course.

''Today I pay homage to his grave,'' the Prince said. ''John Foster Dulles was
right. There is no nonalignment.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 5, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

IDAHO WOMAN IS SOUGHT AS SUSPECT IN HARBORING OF FUGITIVE SOVIET SPY

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1134 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 4


Federal marshals are looking for a 40-yearold Idaho woman who they believe
harbored Christopher John Boyce, the convicted Soviet spy, for much of the 19
months that he was a fugitive.

Today, agents carrying a warrant for the arrest of Gloria White searched her
three-story log home in a mountainous area near Bonners Ferry, Idaho, but they
were unable to find he r. The warrant charged Mrs. White with ''providing a
haven for Boyce and others.''

Sources in the United States Marshals Service said they had been in contact with
Mrs. White's attorney and he had said she would surrender to the Federal
authorities in Oregon within 24 hours.

The sources said that in searching Mrs. White's home they had found letters,
telephone bills and other materials that linked her to Mr. Boyce.
Arrest in 1979

Neighbors said that Mrs. White vanished the day after Mr. Boyce was arrested
Aug. 21 by United States marshals at a drive-in restaurant in Port Angeles,
Wash., according to the authorities. In 1979 Mrs. White was arrested on charges
of aiding and abetting in a bank robbery in Oregon, but the charges were
dismissed, officials said.

Investigators say that they have not ruled out the possibility that Mr. Boyce
was briefly abroad in his 19-month odyssey as a fugitive after escaping from the
Lompoc, Calif., Federal Correctional Institution on Jan. 21, 1980.

But they say evidence is mounting that, after a few weeks in which he subsisted
mostly on insects and wild berries in rural areas near Lompoc, he made his way
to the Pacific Northwest and stayed there.

Investigators suspect that he spent most of the 19 months living by his skills
as an outdoorsman, continuing a long interest in the sport of falconry,
gravitating eventually into bank robbery as a means of supporting himself, and
then dabbling briefly in commercial salmon fishing.

Residents Describe Stranger

According to residents of Bonners Ferry who have seen photographs of Mr. Boyce
since his arrest, the fugitive appeared there a few months after his escape;
they say that initially he camped out alone in a tent in the wilderness and
acquired a mule to transport supplies up to the remote campsite; he used the
name ''Jim Namchek'' and after he began to make regular forays down from his
mountain hiding place, he began to be known as ''Jim the Mule Man.''

''Jim Namchek'' was to be one of at least five identities the 28-year-old
fugitive assumed in his life on the run.  Officials of the United States
Marshals Service, which found Mr.  Boyce after conducting a worldwide search for
him, have acknowledged that they are investigating a number of people in
California, Washington, Idaho and elsewhere to determine if they had harbored or
otherwise helped him unlawfully.

According to local police officials in Idaho, Mrs. White is suspected of
operating what one official called a ''safe house,'' or hideout, for fugitives
in her rustic home, which is a few miles south of the Canadian border.

They assert that Mrs. White harbored a number of people who left her home
periodically to rob banks in the Pacific Northwest and then returned and shared
their loot with her.

Bank Robberies in Northwest

Investigators have hypothesized that Mr. Boyce may have been indoctrinated as a
bank robber while living in the area. Using a false beard and other disguises,
he is suspected of robbing as many as 16 banks in the Northwest of a total of
about $33,000 in the last year.

After a while, Mr. Boyce apparently got enough courage to come out of the
mountains and he began living a second life, away from Bonners Ferry, on
Washington state's scenic Olympic Peninsula, investigators say.

In fishing and logging towns such as Port Angeles, Beaver, and Bear Creek, he
was known as ''Tony Lester'' and ''Sean Hennessey'' and made many friends, most
of whom said after his arr est that they couldnot believe t hat he was a
convicted spy and suspected bank robber. Onthe Olympic P eninsula, Mr. Boyce was
able to watch the peregrine falcon, a rar e bird that thrives in only a handful
of places in the country. This spring, he purchased a 60-year-old salmon fishing
boat that helped h im approach some of the falcons' nesting grounds on the
Peninsula and dabbled briefly in commercial fishing.

Boyce Is Tracked Down

Ultimately, reliable sources say, Mr. Boyce was betrayed by one of the people
who had befriended him at Bonners Ferry, and marshals and other Federal agents,
in a variety of undercover disguises, tracked him down to Port Angeles and
arrest him while he was eating a hamburger.

Sources outside the Government have said that Mr. Boyce is being investigated
for selling classified documents to Soviet agents after his escape, but
Government investigators refuse to confirm the assertion.

Mr. Boyce, a one-time Roman Catholic altar boy and honor student, has sai d that
he became politically disillusi oned with the United States in the Vietnam War
and that he became a spy to make a political statement against the international
arms race, as well as for the ''adventure.'' Before his escape, Mr.  Boyce told
another convict that he planned to retrieve documents that he had buried in
Arizona before his arrest, according to the c onvict, who has asked not to be
identified.

He said he had obtained the documents while he was employed as a code room clerk
for the TRW Systems Group, a manufacturer of surveillance satellites for the
Central Intelligence Agency in nearby Redondo Beach.

Mr. Boyce was arrested in January 1977 and convicted of eight counts of
espionage for selling other C.I.A. documents to the Soviet Union. He was
sentenced to 40 years in prison. A childhood friend, Andrew Daulton Lee, now 29,
who served as his courier to deliver classified documents to Soviet agents in
Mexico and Austria, is serving a life sentence on the same charges.

Today Mr. Boyce was in the 15th day of a hunger strike that his lawyers have
characterized as an attempt to commit suicide because he does not want to return
to prison.

He was moved this week from a prison in Everett, Wash., to a Federal Bureau of
Prisons medical facility at Springfield, Mo., where, officials say, he will be
fed forcibly if necessary.

Later, officials say, he will be transferred to Los Angeles to face prison
escape charges and, later, to Seattle, where Federal officials expect him to be
charged with bank robbery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Christopher J. Boyce map of the state of
Washington

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 497 words


Around the World 4
Dengue fever epidemic in Cuba sets off dispute with U.S.  5
Irish village cashes in on Rea- gan's roots 7
Beatings of South Korean politi- cal prisoners are reported 9
On Lake Titicaca in the Andes, an Indian society thrives 12
In Paris, the Metro's first-class service may be ended 13
Greece protests to U.S. school over report on excavation 14
Minoan highway is found in south- ern Crete 15

Government/Politics
Right wing seeks shift by Reagan 20
Computer changing the Library of Congress 28
Legislators hear voters' worries about Reagan's programs 30
Barbaro traces origins of his populist platform 34
Work program for ex-drug ad- dicts loses Federal financing 45

General
Virginia cracks down on large- scale marijuana farmers 24
Parents suing over athlete's death in California jail 27
Tugboat operators' strike cuts Hawaii's vital barge service 28
Around the Nation 28
Watergate echoes heard at Klein- dienst trial 31
Hadassah prospers despite rising costs of its projects 32
Suspect seized in strangling of girl, 16, in Brooklyn 39

Obituaries
Frank J. Becker, represented L.I.in Congress 36

Arts/Entertainment
Joseph Hirshhorn leaves collec- tion to museum named for him 23
Haydn's ''Armida'' transplanted to Vietnam 49
Rick James, funk-rock star, plays at Garden 49
F raternity in itiation horror film ''Hell Nigh t'' opens 51
Second cast in ''Song of Norway'' 51

Health/Science
Survival rates for cancer patients found to be rising, study says<

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POL POT'S GROUP QUITS UNITY TALKS IN A HURRY

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Par t 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 554 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Sept. 5


The Pol Pot delegation headed by Prime Minister Khieu Samphan left for its
encampment along the Thai-Cambodian border today without naming its
representative to the committee that is to prepare for a coalition government
against the Vietnamese-sponsored regime in Phnom Penh.

Mr. Khieu Samphan and his associates slipped q uietly out of their hotel this
morning and boarded a commercial f light to Bangkok, Thailand. As the delegation
departed, its par tners in an agreement concluded yesterday - Prince Norodom
Sihanouk and one of his former prime ministers, Son Sann - announced their r
epresentatives. Mr. Son Sann also declared his readiness to begin the
committee's work here and now.

Mr. Khieu Samphan did not say goodbye to his co-signers, and the hasty departure
raised fears in the other camps. Members of both groups said they were concerned
that the Chinese-backed Pol Pot movement had achieved what it desired from the
conference and was about to exploit it - without pursuing its announced
intention of surrendering control of the faction that holds Cambodia's United
Nations seat to a coalition government to be headed by Mr. Son Sann.

Group's Purpose Questioned

In the Sihanouk and Son Sann camps, there is a strong belief that the Pol Pot
movement and its supporters in Peking pressed for the meeting and its
declaration of intent for two purposes. One purpose, the theory goes, is to
persuade members of the United Nations General Assembly next month that the Pol
Pot movement has the support of the two most potent non-Communist sectors of
Cambodian opinion. The other, according to the theory, is to be able to gain
popular support inside Cambodia by presenting itself as a group of reformed
Communists that has gained the approval of Prince Sihanouk, the former chief of
state, and Mr. Son Sann.

In both non-Communist camps it is openly said that the Pol Pot delegation has
emerged as the only winner. The Prince and Mr. Son Sann are openly worried that
the Vietnamese-controlled regime of President Heng Samrin will use the accord to
brand them as puppets of the hated Mr. Pol Pot.

Meeting Termed Discomforting

Prince Sihanouk and associates of Mr. Son Sann said privately that pressure from
China - and, in the case of the Son Sann Liberation Front, also from Thailand -
forced them to lend their prestige to a performance that discomforted them
deeply.

Prince Sihanouk and Mr. Son Sann used final press conferences and private
conversations today to reaffirm their repugnance for the Pol Pot group.

''Everybody in the world knows I criticize every day, every hour, the Khmer
Rouge,'' said the Prince. Khmer Rouge is the name used by the Pol Pot forces.

Asked whether he took seriously their announced intention to abandon Communism
if the Vietnamese Army gives up Cambodia, Prince Sihanouk replied with a bitter
laugh: ''If President Ronald Reagan abandons the free world side to adopt
Communism, can you believe it?  So vice versa, when the Khmer Rouge say they are
not rouge, they are not red, don't believe them.''

The Prince also did not hide his absence of enthusiasm for Mr. Son Sann, who
stepped down as his Prime Minister in 1967 after a policy disagreement. ''Yes, I
support Son Sann because certainly Son Sann is better than the Khmer Rouge - or
less bad,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BARBARO TRACES ORIGINS OF HIS POPULIST PLATFORM

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words


Frank J. Barbaro was asked the other evening where he tho ught his political ori
gins lay. He was leaning back wearily in a restaurant booth near Br oadway and
72d Street, where he had been offering his right hand an d a pitch for his
mayoral candidacy to those emerging from the IRT subway station.

The 53-year-old, five-term Democratic Assemblyman from the Bensonhurst section
of Brooklyn talked about what he thought had made him the liberal and populist
who is running against Mayor Koch in the Democratic primary next Thursday.

''I guess I'd die for what I believe,'' he said.  He was explaining why a
relative unknown would challenge a popular Mayor with a platform that strikes
some critics, even in his own party, as a blend of big-spending liberalism and
feckless moralizing.

Two periods have left their imprints on him: the Presidency of Franklin D.
Roosevelt and the Vietnam War.  ''The real development of me as a political
animal,'' he said, ''started during the Vietnam War.''

Legislative Mementos

The bills and resolutions he has introduced in Albany and framed include a
tribute to the late Associate Justice William O. Douglas, the ''warranty of
habitability'' legislation requiring landlords to keep their apartment buildings
u p to certain standards and a bill providing the protections of the Federal
Occu pational Safety and Health Administration to all public employees in the
state.

Another framed memento is a 1978 Assembly resolution urging Congress not to
weaken the War Powers Act, which limits a President's freedom to commit troops
to combat.

When he was 4 or 5, his family prospered. His father, an immigrant fisherman
from Italy, had become a master butcher. His mother came from Sicily. They lived
in what is now the Carroll Gardens area of Brooklyn, and Mr. Barbaro was the
only son. He had three sisters.

Then, in the late 1930's, their fortunes changed. They moved to a cold-water
flat in the Red Hook section. One night the elder Mr.  Barbaro came home to find
the gas turned off and his wife cooking dinner over a kerosene stove.

''He got a saw,'' Mr. Barbaro recalled. ''He went down to the basement. I
followed him. He sawed this lock off and he turned on the gas.''

Barbaro's Campaign Themes

Mr. Barbaro, whose father died when he was 12 and his mother, when he was 17,
links such experiences with his present political views.  He has said that as
Mayor he would reopen hospitals, hire more city workers (including 7,500 police
officers), strengthen rent control and aid and ''celebrate'' the city's black
and Hispanic poor.

For added revenues, he would end real-estate tax abatements in midtown
Manhattan, rapidly reassess commercial properties and levy a 20 percent
capital-gains tax on the sale of ''luxury property.''

He would also like to see the Power Authority of the State of New York take over
Consolidated Edison.  A prominent theme of Mr. Barbaro's campaign has been that
black and Hispanic New Yorkers lack the influence their growing numbers deserve,
that Mr. Koch has worked against their interests and that they should join Mr.
Barbaro in an old-fashioned Democratic coalition.

Views like these, Mr. Barbaro thinks, stem partly from the positive youthful
experiences he had with groups other than Italian Catholics.  His father ''was
probably an atheist,'' he said, and he and his sisters once attended a
Protestant school. The family later moved to half-Jewish, half-Italian
Bensonhurst, and Mr. Barbaro's second wife, Irene, is Jewish. He met blacks, he
recalls, at Boys High School in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section, and later he
worked with Puerto Ricans on the docks.

His Plan Goes Awry

In 1952, after spending two years in the Navy and then getting a Bachelor of
Arts degree in psychology at New York University, Mr.  Barbaro went to work as a
longshoreman. His plan was to finance a master's degree in psychiatric social
work.

''But it spread out on the piers to 15 years,'' said Mr. Barbaro, who was
married and had two children.  He ended up spending six years in the hold, four
years on the dock and the rest of the time ''running winches'' on deck. He also
ran for union office, but lost.

After 10 years as a longshoreman, he revived an ambition he had toyed with since
reading a biography of Clarence Darrow, and he enrolled in evening classes at
Brooklyn Law School. In 1966, he graduated as president of his class.

Mr. Barbaro became a a labor lawyer and soon jumped into the antiwar politics of
the 1960's. He ra n unsuccessfully for the Assembly in 1 968 and lost again in
1970. Gradually, he shifted his emphasis from the war to leading rent strikes,
and was elected to theAssembly in 1 972.

Mr. Barbaro is widely considered friendly and plainspoken. In college, he said,
he liked Howard Fast's novels and was stirred by Emerson, Thoreau, Jefferson and
the Wisconsin Progressive, Robert M.  La Follette, and studies of Roosevelt's
New Deal, a period that had shaped his life.
'Sensed' Early as Leader

But he thinks an even bigger influence was an old man he knew on the piers.
''His name was Giovanni,'' Mr. Barbaro said. ''He told me about the old days,
about the mobsters and oppression and about the dignity that was possible. I
think he framed my conscious values.''

Mr. Barbaro conveys hints of of a belief in foreordained destiny.  ''From an
early age, I was sensed as the leader,'' he said.  He was plainly recalling
certain interpersonal relationships - and not, for example, his last electoral
defeat, to Howard Golden in the 1977 Democratic primary for Borough President of
Brooklyn.

He and his wife live in a four-room apartment, and he estimates his worth at
$15,000. His legal practice is negligible, he said, since he spends most of his
time with his constituents.

''My dream is to build myself a log cabin a nd feel the perspirationrunning off
me,'' he said. ''Thoreau impresse d me. His tranquillity. That gentleness.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Frank Barbaro

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OPERA: HAYDN MOVED TO VIETNAM

BYLINE: By PETER G. DAVIS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 49, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: KEENE, N.H., Sept. 5


A Haydn opera written in 1783 that deals with the recent American military
involvement in Vietnam? Obviously strange things were afoot on the campus of Ke
ene State College in New Hampshire on Thursday night when Haydn's ''Armida''
received its United States premiere as the final offering of his summer's
Monadnock Music Festival.

Of course, Vietnam was the farthest thing from Haydn's mind when he composed
''Armida.'' The opera is actually a late example of the opera seria tradition,
and its subject is taken from Tasso's epic poem about the crusaders, a theme
that attracted dozens of opera composers, including Lully, Vivaldi, Handel,
Gluck and Rossini. The plot will be familiar to all opera historians, and it
recounts how the Christian knight Rinaldo falls in love with an enchantress sent
by the Prince of Darkness to aid the Saracen infidels in their fight against
Western intruders.

To Peter Sellars, director of the Manadnock production, the Crusades and the
Vietnam conflict have startling parallels. Both were ''holy wars,'' he says,
motivated by a feeling of moral superiority; both were classic East-meets-West
encounters, and both ended badly for all concerned. Mr. Sellars has taken this
premise and followed it through with typical thoroughness - anyone who saw the
24-yearold director's highly unconventional treatment of ''Don Giovanni'' at
last year's Monadnock Festival could be sure of that.

So Rinaldo becomes an American soldier and Armida an agent of the Asian army.
Her uncle, Idreno, is captain of the Asian forces; Zelmira, the daughter of the
Sultan of Egypt, is hired by Armida to seduce American soldiers to their deaths;
the crusaders' chief, Ubaldo, is now a commanding officer of the American
troops, while Clotarco is a paratrooper who falls fatally in love with Zelmira.

Whether this elaborate transference of locale enhanced Haydn's opera remains a
moot point. When an opera is updated, it generally means that the director
mistrusts the original vision of the composer, the perceptions of his audience
or both. On this occasion, it perhaps encouraged the singers to act and
interrelate in a more natural fashion than they might have had they been
pretending to be 13th-century Saracens and knights. In any case, his
questionable basic conception apart, Mr. Sellars once again demonstrated that he
is a precociously talented director and a master of dazzlingly inventive
stagecraft.

All the characters in the drama were given very specific identities, and their
actions were worked out to the smallest detail. Some of the business - such as
Zelmira's foxtrot with Clotarco during her seduction aria - had a gratuitous
wise-guy flavor, but more often than not Mr. Sellars had his singers building
intense relationships through gestures and stage compositions that were almost
always theatrically effective and dramatically relevant.

Rarely, too, did the action get in the way of the music, for Mr.  Sellars seems
to know instinctively when to stop and let the composer make a point without
assistance. Unlike so many of today's innovative opera directors, Mr. Sellars
draws his ideas from the emotional climate and musical proceedings of the piece
itself rather than forcing the material willy-nilly into his preconceived mold.
If his ''Armida'' was ultimately less satisfying than his ''Don Giovanni,'' that
is probably because Haydn's opera itself is flawed and full of dead wood, de
spite many deeply moving musical moments for Rinaldo andArmida. Opera was the
one form that Haydn, like Schubert, never quitemastered.

On a purely musical level, the performance was a model of its kind, presenting
the opera absolutely complete and undoctored in any way.  James Bolle conducted
an excellent chamber orchestra of period instruments with vigor, stylish
authority and precision, while the cast could hardly be bettered. Sarah Reese
was outstanding in the title role, a young soprano who has it all - a luscious
voice with dramatic bite and astonishing coloratura agility, disarmingly natural
musical instincts and a compelling stage presence.

No less fine was Gene Tucker as Rinaldo, sustaining his long role with untiring
technical assurance and displaying a highly attractive lyrical tenor. Kim Scown
as the slightly seedy Ubaldo, Susan Larson as the dizzy vamp Zelmira, James
Maddalena as Idreno and Frank Hoffmeister as Clotarco also sang and acted with
distinction. They, and Mr. Sellars, may not have entirely convinced us that
Haydn belongs in Vietnam or even that ''Armida'' is a neglected masterpiece. But
together they presented an operatic evening that was always absorbing and
invariably stimulating.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE C.I.A.'S UNCLASSIFIED LOOSE CANNONS

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 996 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Can the United States prevent former C.I.A. agents from selling skills and
knowledge acquired on the job to foreign governments or organizations? Does the
Central Intelligence Agency inform other American Government branches when
ex-agents, engaged in private business, falsely claim a continuing C.I.A.
association?  William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, has been
asking these and related questions in the wake of disclosures that two former
agents, Edwin P. Wilson and Frank E. Terpil, have been selling their expertise
in intelligence, arms and explosives to the Libyan Government to train
terrorists.

Federal investigators said Mr. Wilson and Mr. Terpil had recruited former Army
ordnance experts and veterans of the Special Forces, or Green Berets, by
suggesting that the Libyan operation was sanctioned by the C.I.A. When Luke F.
Thompson, a Green Beret master sergeant, asked permission to travel to Libya
while on active duty, military officials said they were told by intelligence
officials that the Libyan enterprise was legitimate. The Central Intelligence
Agency, however, has strenuously denied any involvement or approval.

As Justice Department investigators and others have tried to reconstruct the
events, it has become clear 1) that the C.I.A. has no mechanism to prevent
former agents from selling expertise abroad, provided they do not sell
classified information, and 2) that lines of communication between the agency's
clandestine services and other Government agencies are often murky.

Intelligence officials acknowledged the need for reform on both points, but said
the issues were complex and intractable. In July, Mr. Casey ordered a review of
policies governing the transfer of information and technology by former agents.
His aides said the review was progressing slowly, largely because solutions, to
be effective, are likely to require new Congressional action.

Mr. Casey's agency now has three forms of leverage over former agents. The most
important, the Espionage Act, provides that active or former agents who supply
foreigners with classified information may be subject to prosecution for
treason. But in the Libyan case, espionage laws do not apply, intelligence
officials said, because Mr. Wilson and Mr. Terpil apparently have not provided
classified information. Training terrorists to build bombs and assassinate
enemies isn't a classified matter, they said.

What Will Congress Say?

There is also a confict of interest prohibition. Based on Federal law, the
regulation forbids former employees from profiting by business with the
Government. While this might prevent a former agent from working for a company
that does C.I.A. contract work, it is unlikely to deter him from selling
services to a foreign government.

Finally, every C.I.A. employee must sign a secrecy oath that, among other
things, requires prepublication review by the agency of writing that deals with
intelligence or intelligence sources. The Supreme Court upheld the secrecy oath
last year, ruling that a former agent, Frank W. Snepp 3d, who published an
account of the fall of Saigon without agency approval, had ''deliberately and
surreptitiously violated'' his obligations. But this sanction, too, has little
bearing on the Wilson-Terpil type of activity.

''It's pretty obvious,'' a senior intelligence official said, ''that we have
very limited authority to prevent or deal with men like Wilson and Terpil. All
we can do is to tell the Justice Department what we know and hope they can make
a case.'' But policing the activities of former Government employees raises
civil liberties issues. ''You can't have it both ways,'' an intelligence
official contended. ''First we were told to lay off spying on Americans.  Now
people want t o know how come we can't keep track of people like Wilson.''

Indeed, there would likely be opposition in Congress to authorizing the Central
Intelligence Agency to keep former agents under surveillance. Yet, the agency's
critics say, there seems to be an imbalance when the agency can ask the
Government to sue former agents for writing unauthorized books, but is powerless
to act against former agents training foreign terrorists.

Agency officials insisted that they did not need new rules or laws to control
the flow of information about covert operations. They said they did not
understand how military intelligence officials got the impression, in 1977, that
the agency was sponsoring or even condoning actions by current and former Green
Berets to train terrorists in Libya. The Army is not sure either. Efforts to
track the flow of information were inconclusive. Military and intelligence
officials familiar with covert operations noted, however, that to conceal
clandestine activities, the C.I.A. sometimes employs outsiders.

This world of shadows and mirrors provides a fertile environment for someone
purporting to be an agent, officials said. Mr. Wilson, for example, long after
his association with the C.I.A. had ended, casually dropped the names of active
agency officials in conversations, leaving the impression he was still operating
under deep cover. Despite that pretense, intelligence officials said, the Army
and Green Beret command should have been able to determine from the C.I.A.
whether Mr. Wilson's Libyan operation was officially sanctioned. ''There is
communication between agency operations people and the Defense Department,
especially the Green Berets, and it's open enough to have covered a matter like
this,'' a former intelligence official said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CENSUS TOTALS SHOW NATION IS DIVERSE AS NEVER BEFORE

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1026 words


WASHINGTON DURING much of its history, the United States has had an official
policy of admitting immigrants of white European stock while barring those from
Asian, African and Latin nations. In recent years, however, all that has
changed. The inscription on the Statue of Liberty, unveiled in 1886, shortly
after passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act and inviting ''your huddled masses
yearning to breathe free,'' no longer has a hollow ring to people whose skin is
black, brown or yellow.

Not that the lamp has always been lifted in hospitality. There has been strong
opposition to many of the recent immigrants. But new statistics provided by the
1980 census and the Immigration and Naturalization Service show that they have
come in great numbers and have spread throughout the nation, although not
evenly. Many have been assimilated into the economy and society.

As a percentage of the population, the white majority has been diminished
somewhat by the tide of Mexicans, Cubans, Puerto Ricans, Asians, South
Americans, Africans and others. How much so since 1970 is unknown because 1980
census figures on race and national origin are not wholly comparable to 1970
figures. That in itself testifies to the strength of new immigrants who were
able to bring political pressure to force the Census Bureau to add more racial
groups to its forms and to stop counting some non-Negro groups with black or
brown skin as whites.

Provisional 1980 census figures show breakdowns by rough numbers and as a
percentage of the population: Whites, 188.3 million, 83.2 percent; Blacks, 26.5
million, 11.7 percent; American Indians, Eskimos and Aleutians, 1.5 million, .6
percent; Chinese, Filipinos, Japanese,

Asian India ns, Koreans, Vietnamese, Hawaiians, Samoans and Guamanians, 3 .5
million, 1.5 percent. Others, including other Asians,Mexicans, Pue rto Ricans,
Cubans, Africans and many other categories not listed on the census form
accounted for 6.7 million or 3 percent.

In a separate question, residents were asked if they were of Spanish origin.
Those who answered affirmatively totaled 14.6 million, 6.4 percent. Hispanic
people, of course, can be black or white. The vast majority in this country have
been shown by surveys to be Mexican, Puerto Rican and Cuban.

Illegal aliens, who did not respond to the census, make up an additional layer
of population. Nobody knows how many there were, but not many are believed to be
white Europeans. Furthermore, the Census Bureau concedes it could not count all
residents; its undercount was presumably greatest among blacks and browns.

Diversity Helpful to Miami

But immigration statistics for those who entered legally underscore dramatic
gains by people of non-European origin. During the 1960's, 1.3 million people
emigrated from Europe. For the decade ending last Sept. 30, European immigration
totaled only 842,000. But during the same periods, Asian immigration jumped from
362,000 to 1.5 million, African from 33,000 to 87,000, South American from
219,000 to 266,000. While Canadian immigration dropped from 304,000 to 115,000,
that from Mexico increased from 432,000 to 624,000.

Changes in the immigration laws became fully effective in 1968, lifting strict
quotas that had been in effect for decades against Asians and others of
different color and tradition than the majority of white Americans. Enacted in
1965, at the height of the civil rights movement, the new law reflected changing
racial attitudes. In addition, countries that had furnished millions of
immigrants earlier in the century became more prosperous and stable, while
people from the third world became the ''huddled masses'' knocking at the
American door. United States involvement in the Vietnam War later made it
imperative to open the door wider to refugees from Indochina. In two years
ending Sept. 30, 111,000 Vietnamese arrived, adding to a total now above one
quarter million. In Los Angeles a few weeks ago, nearly 10,000 aliens, most of
them Indochinese, were sworn in en masse as American citizens.

There are signs that the new immigrants cannot be as easily assimilated as the
Germans, Italians, Irish, Poles and other Europeans who came by the millions for
many d ecades. Struggles continue over where to place the Cuban and Ha itian
boat people who landed in Florida in 1979 and 1980. Illegal e ntry - difficult
to control in an era of international trade and travel - has thrown the
Immigration and Naturalization Service into d isarray. California officials have
been complaining about Asian r efugees overloading state welfare rolls.
Controversies rage over the proposed reimposition of restrictive quotas.

But the United States always has thrived on diversity and the new immigrants in
many respects are adding new dimensions to American life. Many who have come are
entrepreneurs and professionals who in Miami, for example, have prospered and
added to the city's wealth. In New York, scores of newly arrived ethnic groups
are restoring deteriorated neighborhoods and otherwise contributing to the
city's economy.

Asian Indians, Chinese, Filipinos and Japanese now total more than 3 million.
While they live mostly in the West and in the big Eastern and Northern cities,
they are sufficiently spread out to bring cultural diversity to many communities
that had little in the past.  Immigrants from Mexico, long a part of the
Southwest, are settling in small Middle Western towns that had been almost
totally whites of European extraction.

This kind of diversity has been increasing in every region.  Officials say there
is every indication it will continue to grow and America's experience as a
melting pot may lie more in the future than in the past.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table of 1980 census data on racial groups

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

* To the Editor:$


SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 379 words


Lane Kirkland, head of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., recently compared President Reagan's
actions in the air traffic controllers' strike to those of Hitler and Stalin. He
would have been more accurate if he had mentioned Harry Truman. {resident}
Truman, as Commander in Chief of the armed forces, broke the railroad strike of
1946 by threatening to draft the strikers into the Army. He said in a radio
speech (May 24, 1946):

''The crisis of Pearl Harbor was the result of action by a foreign enemy. The cr
isis tonight is caused by ... men within our own countrywho place the ir private
interests above the welfare of the nation.'' (Clark Cliffo rd, for decades a
member of the inner circle of America's mos t powerful liberals, had a hand in
drafting it and Truman's subs equent speech to Congress.)

About four years later, Truman busted the steelworkers' strike by nationalizing
the steel industry, an action that was finally overturned by the Supreme Court.
He also committed American troops to Korea without even bothering to send a
letter to Congress.

Organized labor is fond of invoking the name of Truman in support of its
policies. In reality, the opposite is true.  The person who was most vocal in
condemning Truman's actions was Robert Taft. Taft said in 1946 that Truman's
proposal to draft the strikers ''offends not only the Constitution, but every
basic principle for which the American Republic was established.'' ''Strikes,''
he added, ''cannot be prohibited without interfering with the basic freedom
essential to our form of government.'' Taft also opposed Truman's actions in
Korea because they bypassed Congress.

The President has taken an oath to defend the Constitution. On the other hand,
Mr. Kirkland, a staunch supporter of the Vietnam War who denounced those who
exercised their constitutional rights by demonstrating against it, now looks for
pop-ular support for a union which has clearly broken the law. He cannot have it
both ways.  RICHARD CUMMINGS Bridgehampton, N.Y. Sept. 2, 1981

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PHILANTHROPY FROM FRIENDLY PERSUADERS

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words


Chinese authorities have long been reluctant to accept foreign assistance from
private American agencies. Yet, a few months ago, they welcomed a gift of $7.6
million worth of pacemakers. In part, the Chinese were swayed by need: There is
a waiting list for the devices. ''Send as many as possible; even thousands could
be put to good use,'' a leading surgeon cabled from Shanghai when told that
3,220 pacemakers were available.

It seems likely, however, that the Chinese eagerly accepted the donation in part
because it came from the American Friends S ervice Committee, th e philanthropic
arm of the Religious Society of Friends - the Quakers . At a time of a
threatened decline in donations to private phila nthropies, as nonprofit
organizations are trying to weed out inef fectual programs and direct their
resources to more practicable p rojects, the Quakers quietly continue operating
one of the oldest an d most effective philanthropies around.

That a few pacemakers were also sent to Vietnam, a nation at odds with China,
underscores the Quaker tradition of offering assistance regardless of politics.
The philanthropy has often played benefactor to both sides of a war, operating
not only as relief agency but often as mediator where others have been reluctant
or unable to act. In 1965, its representatives worked toward an India-Pakistan
ceasefire in the war over Kashmir. In 1970, they tried reconciling Nigeria and
the breakaway province of Biafra. A year ago, Quaker officials went to
Pyongyang, North Korea, the first American aid agency admitted, to open a
political channel between the quarreling North and South.

Since it has always labored with limited resources, the Service Committee has
devoted itself to projects less popular with other philanthropies, says Margaret
H. Bacon, a historian of the Quaker movement. ''The Quakers believe as a matter
of religious faith that if people will but talk to each other, some good will
come of it,'' she observed. Indeed, Governments often accept their assistance
because they view Quakers as a neutral, ''nonmeddling'' force.

In its 64 years, the organization's ''less popular'' projects have often found
it at the forefront of disputatious causes, to the occasional discomfort of
Government officials in the United States.  During a recent typical week, a
Service Committee spokesman told a Congressional panel that the country's World
War II internment of Japanese Americans was ''disgraceful'' and urged
recompense. Another committee member was advising Congressmen to normalize
relations with Vietnam. From its Philadelphia headquarters, the committee was
firing off letters calling for an embargo on radioactive material for nuclear
reactors in the Middle East; copies went to Ronald Reagan, Leonid I. Brezhnev,
Francois Mitterrand and Menachem Begin. The committee helped organize a ''Freeze
the Arms Race Fast'' last month commemorating the bombings of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. It has led efforts to permit Haitian refugees to become American
citizens.

Among a number of foreign governments disquieted by the Quakers, Israel often
complains about their efforts to promote dialogues with the Palestine Liberation
Organization. The committee says it is engaging in nonpolitical searches for
peaceful settlements. ''We're often attacked as being naive,'' said Asia A.
Bennett, the committee's executive secretary. ''There's nothing wrong with being
naive if it means being open to new perceptions and new experiences.  We take it
as a given that not everybody shares our principles.''

As in its early days, the philanthropy's activities are dictated by the
religion's pacifist belief. The American Friends Service Committee was founded
in 1917 as an independent organization allowing conscientious objectors to aid
civilian victims of World War I. More than 500 young people joined, working
overseas in hospitals and aiding the beleaguered in France and Belgium. Today,
the organization is helping Laotians and Cambodians increase food supplies,
training African women in various skills, counseling Arabs as to their legal
rights under Israeli law, and trying to improve the lot of Salvadoran refugees
and residents in Chile's shantytowns.  In the United States, volunteers are
working with low-income families raising gard en vegetables, aiding the sick an
d elderly in Detroit's inner city and organizing consumer projects i n New York
and elsewhere.

With regard to the pacemakers for China, Mrs. Bennett conceded that Quaker
involvement was ''serendipitous.'' The equipment became available when a company
in Illinois terminated production and turned over its stock to Medical
Assistance Programs, which supplies medical goods without charge to mission
hospitals in third world countries.

Learning of the cache, David Elder, co-director of the committee's Asia
programs, realized that the Chinese needed such equipment and had the
sophisticated technology to use it, and that his organization could get the
devices to China, having maintained communications with that country for more
than 30 years. In the 1940's, it had sent medical personnel to help victims of
the war with Japan. They stayed to help victims of China's civil war. When
foreigners had to leave, one Quaker nurse, Margaret Stanley, continued
corresponding with Chinese friends. Miss Stanley later helped initiate a reunion
in China of the medical group. This led to a visit by committee representatives
in 1978 and a reciprocal visit by Chinese experts in organ transplants, headed
by Dr. Fong-Chung Tung. Mr. Elder cabled Dr. Tung. Willing Patterson, director
of purchasing, arranged for the Chinese Government airline to transport the
7,965-pound shipment (shipping costs might otherwise have totaled $20,000). The
pacemakers are now being used in hospitals in Shanghai and Peking.

Dr. Tung cabled the committee: ''We are very much pleased with the results.''
Miss Stanley, who teaches nursing in Marshall, Mi nn., happily remar ked, ''Can
you imagine, 3,220 Chinese walking around with their he artbeats regulated by
American pacemakers? It boggles the mind.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Quaker loading medical supplies to North
Vietnam

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ECLIPSE OF THE OLIGARCHS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4893 words


Paul Heath Hoeffel writes frequently about Latin America.  By Paul Heath Hoeffel
he overland trip between San Salvador and Guatemala City has become a weekly
routine for Francisco Schmidt Enriquez. Unlike many other members of his wartorn
country's landed elite who have chosen exile, Francisco is tenaciously holding
on to a way of life that is being challenged by the major sectors of society in
El Salvador.

On Friday mornings, Francisco, (which is not his real name), a wiry man of 38,
straps a Colt .45 to his thigh and hurries to his black Wagoneer Jeep waiting in
the driveway with a chauffeur and an armed bodyguard. Except for a housekeeper,
his seven-bedroom house is left empty. Francisco's family, including his wife,
children and parents, moved to Guatemala City more than a year ago, taking with
them most of the family's heirlooms and valuables. Francisco would like to sell
the house now, but walled mansions in the exclusive neighborhood of San Benito
have become a glut on the market.

His four-wheel-drive vehicle, specially armored with 1,600 pounds of bulletproof
steel, lumbers westward on the Pan-American Highway toward the mountainous
coffee country of Santa Ana, where he will spend the day inspecting his family's
coffee fincas and mills. On the outskirts of the capital, he passes the housing
project where his family's construction company is building some 450 low-income
houses ordered by the Government.

Francisco's brothers manage the family's business interests, such as the
construction company, while he, a trained agronomist, oversees their coffee
plantations, the original source of the family fortune and still the backbone of
El Salvador's economy.

When Francisco visits his coffee mill, he feels more secure carrying his pistol,
as he no longer commands the unquestioned authority he once enjoyed. His workers
earn about $4 a day, a high wage in El Salvador, but on one recent visit,
Francisco was informed by his manager that the work schedule had been thrown off
that week because of a takeover by guerrillas who forced the workers to listen
to speeches and revolutionary songs with guitar accompaniment. After they left,
the manager wrote the incident into the records as if it were part of business,
Francisco recalls. And he, too, finds himself adjusting to it as a fact of life.

Francisco usually arrives at the Guatemalan border by late afternoon. He leaves
his pistol with the men in the Wagoneer, spends 10 minutes at the border
checkpoints and climbs into a chauffeured Subaru waiting on the other side of
the river. Now safe, he savors the short drive to Guatemala City where he can go
out for dinner or to a movie without looking over his shoulder for assassins.

Francisco's armored commute through the Salvadoran countryside reflects the
insecurities of a class of Salvadorans who, until two years ago, never had to
worry about much more than the international price of coffee. Francisco is a
member of a tightly knit group of families with names like de Sola, Llach, Hill,
Duenas, Dalton, Regalado, Quinones and Salaverria: the few thousand people who,
in a country of nearly 5 million, make up El Salvador's oligarchy.

Nearly all of El Salvador's oligarchs have fled into exile to safe places like
Guatamala City and Miami, which have welcomed them and their fortunes with open
arms. Many acknowledge they have no plans to return to their coffee plantations
and banks in El Salvador - regardless of the outcome of the revolutionary war
that is destroying their world. Others, heartened by the Reagan Administration's
hardline policy, believe they still have a future in El Salvador.  From gilded
exile they watch the killing and the collapsing economy, still hoping to reclaim
their former positions, to return to their shuttered mans ions.

Like las catorce familias (the 14 families), oligarchy is a term not favored by
El Salvador's ruling elite -although they use it along with everyone else. The
word captures the archaic, slightly feudal nature of social relations in
countries like El Salvador and Guatemala. ''It's different from an aristocracy,
which we also have,'' explains Jorge Sol Castellanos, a 66-year-old oligarch and
former minister of the economy. ''It's an oligarchy because these families own
and run almost everything that makes mone y in El Salvador. Coffee gave birth to
the oligarchy in the late 19th century, and economic growth has revolved aro und
them ever since.''

According to Sol, former executive director of the International Monetary Fund
who is living in Washington as an economic consultant, there are some 20
families or, more accurately, clans, which, until recently, controlled more than
70 percent of El Salvador's private banks, sugar mills, coffee production and
exports, as well as television and newspapers.

Despite El Salvador's tiny size and its enormous poverty, some of these families
rank among the richest in the world. From the Salaverrias - whose holdings could
be worth some $70 million - to the Duenas-Regalado clan -whose fortune
approaches $300 million - they are in positions of enormous in-fluence, even
from afar.

After a century of unchallenged, highly profitable rule, however, El Salvador's
tightly knit oligarchy has hit hard times. The antique fabric of social
relations that supported its power for so long is disintegrating, destroyed by
revolutionary struggle. With much bitterness, the oligarchs blame their
traditional allies - the army, the Roman Catholic Church and the United States -
for their fall from grace as much as they blame the revolutionary opposition to
El Salvador's military-civilian junta. n a recent business trip, Francisco
joined relatives for dinner at his brother-in-la w's house in Pine Bay, an
elegant enclave south of Miami. In El Salvador, the family members lived in
sumptuous surroundings. Aside from their city mansions, there were summer houses
on the Pacific coast and elaborate haciendas in the countryside that were
maintained on the scale of, and in the spirit of, antebellum plantations in the
United States.

The Salvadoran oligarchs have left that life behind. In Miami, there are two
styles of oligarch exile: some, like the family of Francisco's brother-in-law,
have set up permanent residences, and live much the way they did before; others,
like Francisco, have relocated temporarily and, to justify their tourist and
business visas, must keep low profiles. In the case of many Salvadorans, that
means limiting themselves to condominiums and inconspicuous Volvos, which they
drive themselves in good North American style.

The luxurious Miami house of Francisco's brother-in-law hints at what was left
behind. Salvadoran maidservants usher visitors into the elegantly furnished,
spacious ranch house; others serve dinner on the Spanish-tiled patio around the
enormous indoor swimming pool.  Those present are members of Francisco's clan.
His cousin is an influential leader in the Productive Alliance, the most
important business organization in El Salvador still under oligarch control.
There are also former Government ministers, prominent businessmen dressed in
leisure suits, and the wives, tanned and elegantly coiffured, who emerge in
conversation as even more conservative than their husbands. While all of them
speak English, they prefer Spanish.

Their relationship to the United States is a curious one. As one oligarch later
reflected, ''We admire your business sense, but we've never liked your political
ideals.'' Francisco is typical of his peers, who have all gone to the United
States for their education. He attended a Roman Catholic boarding school in New
England, went on to study agronomy at Texas A & M, and finished at the Wharton
School at the University of Pennsylvania - a total of 11 years in the United
States. Like the upper classes in most Central American countries, El Salvador's
elite has never developed a real culture of its own. The oligarchs are
fascinated by things American, yet none of them is happy about living
permanently in the United States.

Dinner conversation begins with family news, then turns to political gossip -
the constant preoccupation of these exiles. The debate revolves around how to
get rid of Christian Democratic President Jose Napoleon Duarte - who most
oligarchs feel is steadfastly unresponsive to business interests - without
opening the way for a takeover by the the broad left opposition of the
Democratic Revolutionary Front (the F.D.R.) and its five guerrilla groups under
the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (the F.M.L.N.). Given the
stalemated struggle between the F.D.R., F.M.L.N. and the junta nominally headed
by Duarte, some of the oligarchs see an opportunity to reassert themselves
politically.

''Duarte is a communitarian. His reforms are socialist,'' says Francisco's
younger brother, a business leader. ''We have to convince the Americans and the
army that he is ruining the economy, that we can't negotiate with the Government
until he resigns or changes his attitude toward the private sector. We're not
plotting a coup, but there's no wa y we can join this Government with Duarte
there.''

The group is in some ways so Americanized that instant coffee is served with
dessert, despite the fact that the collective fortunes of those present grew
from the coffee lands planted by their grandfather at the turn of the century.
Those coffee lands and the oligarchy's penchant for intermarriage have generated
an elaborate network of family and business relations. In addition to land,
Francisco's family interests are bound up in real estate, insurance,
warehousing, import concessions, construction and, until recently, a savings and
loan company. The state took over controlling interest in all private banks last
year in an effort t o control capital flight (estimated at $5 billion since
1978) a nd to provide credit forits three-phase agrarian reform. Many of the
family's businesses are booming, however, despite the reforms and the violence.
''Over the years we have reoriented our activities to th e middle-class
consumerswho have been doing pretty well economically, '' Francisco explains.
''Before, imports were just luxury items for the wealthy, a very small market.''
The business community, of co urse, would like to see this market expand.

Critics of the oligarchy say it was its hold on the economy, particularly in the
densely populated countryside, that made last year's abrupt attempt at re-forms
necessary to stave off more radical revolution.

Although they have been able to block every move toward political and social
reform until recently, the oligarchs see themselves as the architects of El
Salvador, those who have inculcated the nation with an industriousness that
makes its meager lands among the most productive (along with Peru and Israel) in
the Western world, and they pride themselves on being the most cosmopolitan
elite in the region. ''Our entrepreneurial spirit is the country's only natural
resource,'' as one wealthy matron put it in a later conversation.  ''Without us
the country will sink into the grave.'' wo conditions are primarily responsible
for the oligarchs' flight into exile: The kidnappings that have plagued them for
a decade, and the Governmentdecreed agrarian and business reforms announced last
March. The kidnappings began in 1972 with the million-dollar ransom demand for
Ernesto Regalado Duenas, who was killed by his captors before the ransom was
paid. Since then, at least $50 million has been surrendered to kidnappers.

One oligarch, who wished to remain anonymous, helped raise the ransom for his
kidnapped younger brother. ''After months of negotiations, we handed over $4
million in cash,'' he said.  ''Luckily we didn't have to mortgage any farms to
raise it. Now we don't expect any more trouble. We've paid our 'taxes.' '' But
as often happens in El Salvador, it was never really clear to whom those
''taxes'' were paid -whether the kidnappers were guerrillas, common criminals or
moonlighting military officers, who also extract their ''war tax'' from the
oligarchs.

The reforms, decreed under intense pressure from Washington, were designed to
break the oligarchs' hold on the economy. The junta, which came into power after
overthrowing the Government of Gen.  Carlos Humberto Romero in October 1979,
announced a three-phase land reform, took controlling interest of private banks
and nationalized the export of coffee, sugar and cotton. Of the three-part
agrarian reform, however, only phase one, the expropriation of farms larger than
1,250 acres, has been carried out. Phase two, which would have expropriated the
more valuable middle-sized farms where the coffee growing is concentrated, has
been virtually abandoned by the Government, and so the real wealth-producing
land remains in the hands of the original owners. Phase three, the ''land to the
tiller'' program devised in Washington, involves the transfer of property to
landless sharecroppers. More than a year after its implementation, only a
fraction of the promised title transfers has taken place, and it is unlikely the
Reagan Administration will insist on much more.

The primary concern of the oligarchs has been how to circumvent these reforms
and get their wealth out of the country intact. Even those relatively few
landowners who were affected by phase one were frequently able to take the sting
out of expropriation. Given months of advance notice of the agrarian reform,
landowners who also controlled banks often took out inflated mortgages on their
own land and transferred the capital to Miami banks, leaving the Government to
take over banks with empty vaults and heavily mortgaged land that its Institute
for Agrarian Transformation (I.S.T.A.) would have expropriated anyway. Three
years ago, sensing agrarian reform in the air, Francisco's family divided their
considerable lands into smaller parcels among the five brothers and sisters,
thus entirely circumventing expropriation (the oligarchs call it
''confiscation'').

The oligarchy has for the most part been able to find its way around the reforms
it so bitterly opposes. But El Salvador's elite is still deeply troubled.
Although it has been governing for 50 years, the army has always been regarded
as the oligarchy's servant, deriving its modest wealth from bureaucratic
corruption. Now, say the oligarchs, the army listens to Washington, and, through
the reforms, has greatly increased its access to export and tax revenues.
Corruption has increased proportionately.

The Roman Catholic Church, once the staunchest defender of the oligarchs, now
has a generation of younger priests who denounce the oligarchs from their
pulpits as exploiters and murderers. Many oligarchs, according to Francisco,
have joined Protestant churches despite their Roman Catholic upbringing.

When asked about the killing of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero last year,
Francisco shrugged and asked, ''How could the army tolerate a man in his
position telling the soldiers not to obey orders; lay down their guns, rather
than shoot ?''

Ask wealthy Salvadorans how things began to go wrong and they're likely to point
an accusing finger at Washington. Some look back four years to President Carter
and the first formulation of his human rights policy, what they see as his
betrayal of Gen. Anastasio Somoza Debayle in Nicaragua and his tolerance of the
Sandinistas, revolutionaries who provided an inspiration for insurrection
throughout Central America.

The more ideologically inclined go back to 1961, the year of the Alliance for
Progress, Washington's response to the Cuban revolution. In the name of
progress, capital was made available for industrialization in Latin America, the
kind that soon made El Salvador a prime spot for fast-food chains as well as a
haven for foreign businesses seeking cheap labor and tax shelters and. The
oligarchs' traditional distaste for crass business ventures was overcome as they
increasingly began to work with the multinationals.  There were strings
attached, however: They were forced to accept reforms - such as a minimum wage
and a six-day work week for their workers - reforms they regarded as creeping
socialism.

The historically minded go all the way back to 1932, a Depression year which saw
a lot of coffee plantations go under. It was also the year of a traumatic and
infamous suppression of a peasant uprising inspired by hard times and homegrown
Communists like Augustin Farabundo Marti, namesake of today's guerrilla front.
That peasant revolt ended in a weeklong slaughter of tens of thousands of
campesinos, as the field workers are called, marking the first year of ongoing
military dictatorship in El Salvador and the eradication of its Indian culture.
Jorge Sol, who was a university student at the time of the 1932 peasant
massacre, offered this perspective on today's ''death squads'': ''The oligarchs
were so thrilled that the army was suppressing the revolt so effectively that
young oligarchs formed a paramilitary group called the Civic Guard to help out.
Together they slaughtered thousands of people. Today the same policy of
extermination is in effect. They use the same expression: 'Muerto el perro, se
acabo la rabia' (Kill the dog, and the rabies is gone).''

In 1898, Herbert de Sola, a descendant of a Sephardic Jew who emigrated from
Holland to the Caribbean island of Cura,cao in the 1750's, arrived in San
Salvador and soon set himself up as an exporter of balsam resin and indigo dye,
then El Salvador's main exports. In the early 1940's, he bought up coffee and
sugar plantations and became a full-fledged member of the country's oligarchy,
the reverse process of Francisco's family, who started in land and expanded to
commerce.

Today, Herbert de Sola's grandson Orlando, 36, a 1968 graduate of Columbia
University, is one of the hundreds of wealthy Salvadorans who have fled to Miami
and would be risking their lives if they returned to El Salvador. Orlando de
Sola is an extremely conservative member of a family considered liberal by the
oligarchs' standards. He is here on a tourist visa, but de Sola finds it
difficult to keep a low profile. He is one of the most politically active of El
Salvador's oligarchs, and one of the spokesmen for the El Salvador Freedom
Foundation, the lobbying group of exiled oligarchs, many of whose members are
well known to conservative circles on Capitol Hill and frequently referred to in
Congressional subcommittee testimony as a financial source for right-wing
extremist activity in El Salvador.

De Sola remembers his maternal grandfather, John T. Wright (who came from San
Francisco in 1917), with the nostalgia of those oligarchs who lament the passing
of the grand old patriarchal generation that died out during the 1950's. Far
from that tough old colonial spirit, de Sola finds himself on permanent vacation
in Miami, riding around in a speedboat on Biscayne Bay from the private dock of
his condominium, or snorkling with friends in the waters around Key Biscayne.

Over a roast-beef dinner with his wife, Claudia, and baby daughter, Camila, in
their $500,000 condominium in Miami, de Sola recounts a childhood incident that
remains vivid and illustrates his contention that life is cheap in his country.
One night, driving home with his mother from his maternal grandfather's cotton
plantation in the jungle along the Pacific coast, their car's headlights flashed
on two peasants struggling with each other in the road. ''I remember seeing the
machete slicing down into the man's head,'' de Sola recalls, ''and hearing the
sickening 'clop.' He did it as naturally as he would have opened a coconut.''

In 1976, de Sola's mother divided up her inherited lands into 10 parcels for her
children, but because the parcels all bordered on each other, they were
completely expropriated under phase one of the agrarian reform. His family also
lost its coffee lands and its coffeeexport business. De Sola, not surprisingly,
is bitterly opposed to the reforms.  He has not lived in El Salvador for more
than a year, but he talks about his country and its politics constantly.

''It's not a matter of left and right,'' he says, referring to the present power
struggle in El Salvador. ''It's a matter of right and wrong.'' In his judgment,
the land reform has done more to undermine the economy than even the guerrillas.
He believes that the American Institu te of Free Labor Development - an arm of
the A.F.L.-C.I.O.  financed by the Agency for International Deve lopment
(A.I.D.), which directs the agrarian reform in El Salvador -i s obsessed with
the ideathat everyone must own land. ''The campesinos just want security and a
job, not land,'' he declares. ''What we nee d is to industrialize, to set up
massive free-trade zones the way Si ngapore and the Philippines have done it.
We've got to have i ndustrial jobs to relieve our unemployment.''

The oligarchs disagree about political tactics. The Freedom Foundation, based in
the United States, is critical of the more broadly based Productive Alliance,
which has a strong presence in El Salvador. De Sola condemns the Productive
Alliance for wanting to join the Government and to participate in possible
elections next year. ''They are just a group of oligarchs who want to set up a
cozy little club, scratching each other's backs like in the old days,'' he
complains. ''What we want is a real free-market economy, a country that can
stand on its own, not waiting around for handouts.'' In turn, Manuel Enrique
Hinds, spokesman for the Productive Alliance and its lobbyist in Washington,
dismisses the Freedom Foundation as a narrowly based sector of oligarchs who
have lost touch with the political reality in their country.

Both groups, however, agree that President Jose Napoleon Duarte is an obstacle
to their political vision. ''Duarte is just a Communist who happens to believe
in God,'' de Sola says. ''He's a professional demagogue whom the army maintains
only because of his international connections. His fall is inevitable.'' And a
political solution to the crisis in his country, especially one involving
elections, is unacceptable to de Sola. ''Elections have been repeatedly
discredited in my country. It is necessary that the army take full control of
the Government. If the United States can support total military rule in
Guatemala, why not El Salvador? Then everyone will be forced to deal with
reality.''

Like many of the El Salvadoran oligarchs, Orlando de Sola has been accused of
encouraging and financing right-wing terrorists. It is an easy charge to make -
his hard-line position certainly finds echoes within El Salvador's security
forces, which he sees as the only national institution to have survived the
constant crisis of the past two years without disintegrating - and de Sola does
not deny a strong desire to restore his country to its precoup status quo or a
willingness to work with men who have been repeatedly linked to violence in El
Salvador.

One former army officer who commands his respect and support is Maj. Roberto
D'Aubuisson, who was forced to resign with other hardline officers after the
progressive coup against General Romero in October 1979 and today lives in
Guatemala City.

In 1977, when political violence escalated dramatically, D'Aubuisson, 37, a
former intelligence officer in the National Guard, organized the White Warriors
Union, a network of death squads drawn from personnel in the National Guard and
other security forces.  According to documents made public by former Ambassador
Robert E.  White, the major was implicated in several key political
assassinations, including the sniper shooting of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero
while he celebrated mass in March 1980 and shortly after he had denounced
D'Aubuisson as a ''liar, torturer, murderer.''

Shortly after that killing, D'Aubuisson made a speech on video cassette
indicating his pleasure at Archbishop Romero's death and inciting his fellow
officers to join him in taking over the Government.

It was a close associate of de Sola's, Alfonso Salaverria, now his neighbor in
Miami, who provided the Betamax that was carried secretly from barracks to
barracks to replay the speech. Salaverria, a member of the Freedom Foundation
whose family lost extensive coffee lands, shares de Sola's hard-line analysis of
his country's dilemma: ''The real centers of power are now the armed forces and
the death squads versus the opposition and its leftist guerrillas,'' he says.
''The political situation has to define itself one way or the other, as in
Vietnam or Chile.'' Like de Sola, Salaverria has supported D'Aubuisson.

''D'Aubuisson stood up and protested the army's acceptance of the
unconstitutional reforms dictated from Washington,'' says de Sola.  ''I admired
his courage and so did a lot of younger officers.''

In May last year, de Sola invited D'Aubuisson to Miami and personally escorted
him to meet with friendly Senators and Congressmen in Washington. De Sola has
visited D'Aubuisson in Guatemala City and has also taken advantage of visits
there to make contact with former officers of Somoza's National Guard who are
struggling to build a mercenary army to resist the Sandinista Government in
Nicaragua and, it is alleged, to help train death squads in El Salvador. ''They
were in pretty bad shape and requested $40,000 to ke ep them going a while
longer,'' de Sola recalls from a meeting last year. ''I told them that I'd like
to help out but didn'thave that kin d of money.''

Ambassaador White concedes that hard evidence of oligarchs providing terrorists
with money is almost impossible to obtain.  ''Nothing is concrete in a country
like El Sa lvador,'' he explains.  ''You have to take bits and pieces of news,
intelligence and gossip and put it together yourself.'' But given that a close
relationship between landowners and the National Guard goes back many decades
(by law, local National Guard garrisons are subject to landlord orders), it is
highly likely that certain members of the oligarchy maintain influence within
the Guard with small payoffs to younger officers. As the monthly wage of a
guardsman is about $160 , it clearly wouldn't require exceptional resources to
hire a squad of guardsmen to get rid of subversives, real or imagined. But asked
directly if D'Aubuisson is a paymaster for the death squa ds through Miami
exiles, de Sola simply disclaimed any knowledge of the major's ''extra-legal
activities.''

It is possible that hard-line oligarchs will leave the counterinsurgency effort
more and more to the increasingly efficient regular security forces and spend
their considerable energies in national and international political maneuvers
instead. For Orlando de Sola, securing the support of the military Governments
of Argentina and Chile has been crucial in offsetting the international
influence of Venezuela and Mexico in the region. (State Department officials
have indicated their concern that overtures by the Salvadoran Army to Argentina
and Chile could become a significant factor in political negotiations in the
future.)

Domestically, there has been a breakdown of the traditional alliance between El
Salvador's oligarchy and the army, but it is nowhere as devastating as the
landowners complain it is, or as irreversible as the State Department would have
Americans believe.  Oligarchs like Francisco Schmidt Enriquez and Orlando de
Sola remain confident that however much political power is accrued by the army,
the need for their expertise, their money and their international contacts will
persist. And at the moment the oligarchs seem to be regaining ground. As former
Ambassador White observed in a recent interview: ''The success the oligarchy has
had in stalling reform in El Salvador means that the time for a
D'Aubuisson-style coup has probably passed.'' Most oligarchs recognize that a
right-wing military dictatorship without even a pretense of civilian support
would be unacceptable internationally as well as at home. The common enemy is
forcing the oligarchs and the army to mend the rift between them. A new pact is
being forged, with each side insisting on mutual involvement in the dirty work
of staying in power.

But virtually no one believes events can turn back the clock entirely. The army,
traditionally the junior partner in the relationship, has now emerged as the
senior partner, its monopoly on power so bolstered by economic and military aid
from the United States that some observers feel the 500-man officer corps of the
Salvadoran security forces is now in a position to sow the seeds of a new
oligarchy. And El Salvador's oligarchs continue to contemplate permanent exile.
Most, like Francisco Schmidt Enriquez, would prefer to set themselves up in
Miami. Orlando de Sola, on the other hand, would exploit his growing ties with
the military dictatorships of Latin America's Southern Cone. ''If all else
fails,'' he says, ''I'll take my family and move to Chile.''

It is possible that El Salvador's military will be able to eradicate the
opposition as thoroughly as it did in 1932, making El Salvador safe for
oligarchy. Until that happens, the once envied names of de Sola, Llach, Duenas,
Quinonez and Salaverria could be as assiduously shunned in El Salvador as they
have been sought out in the past.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Maj. Roberto D'Aubuisson photos of Orlando de
Sola, and Alfonso Slaverria photo of a slain farm worker

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTH AFRICAN DEFENSE CHIEF: ZEALOT OR PRAGMATIST?

BYLINE: By JOSEPH LELYVELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG, Sept. 6


When Gen. Magnus Malan exchanged the uniform he wore as chief of the South
African Defense Forces for a Cabinet minister's pinstripes a year ago, there was
an undercurrent of fashionable opinion that interpreted the entry of the first
professional military man into a South African Cabinet as an important omen.

The influence of the military in the white political arena was obviously rising.
And, it was sometimes even suggested, this vigorous new Defense Minister could
turn out to be an Afrikaner de Gaulle.
South Africa was led in the first half of the century by a generation of
soldier-politicians, but they had basically been citizen-soldiers who had ridden
off on horseback to the Boer War.  General Malan is a soldier from a different
mold, a modern military technocrat.

Theory of a 'Total Strategy'

Even before he took his first, tentative steps into politics, he was identified
in the public mind with stern warnings about a Soviet-inspired ''total
onslaught'' that was said to be seeking by all available means to spread Marxist
influence through the neighboring black countries until South Africa, with all
its strategic minerals, finally fell under Soviet dominance. The South African
response, he argued, had to be a ''total strategy'' that would meet the threat
in the political, economic and psychological spheres as well as the military.

The message could sound apocalyptic, so that the general occasionally came
across as a zealot. It was not merely the political and racial status quo that
was threatened, he warned on one occasion, but also ''our own mutual and
individual existence.'' But there was another side to the theory of a ''total
strategy,'' the implication that South Africa would have to change to meet the
political and economic challenge in its dealings with its nonwhite majority.

Put in that context, the general came across as a pragmatist. Thus, when Prime
Minister P.W. Botha started talking about the need for change a few years ago,
there were those who thought they discerned the influence of General Malan. It
was evident that there was a special trust between the two men. As Defense
Minister, Mr. Botha had made the general, in a series of quick promotions, the
youngest man ever to be army chief of staff, chief of the army and then chief of
the Defense Forces. He became Defense Minister at the age of 50.

Today, when they seek to figure out how much flexibility there is in the South
African position on the tangled issue of South-West Africa, Western diplomats
still debate the question of whether General Malan is a zealot or a pragmatist.

In an interview in his office in Cape Town shortly before South Africa's recent
incursion into southern Angola, he was at pains to portray himself and his
Government as ''very realistic'' in responding to the Reagan Administration's
efforts to find a diplomatic solution. But he was also at pains to explain why
the coming to power of the South-West Africa People's Organization, the
insurgent movement that South Africa is now battling on the Angolan border,
would be a severe setback not only for South Africa but also for ''the free
world.''

''Militarily we can win the war,'' General Malan said. ''We can win it tomorrow.
But this is the type of battle you never win on the military field. You win it
in the political field.'' Then quickly correcting himself, he said he meant that
the local population had to win it in the political field.

If the insurgents are permitted to win politically what they cannot win
militarily, he went on, ''it will be a question of moving the Russian influence,
and the Russians as such, down south.''

''Fifteen hundred miles,'' he added. ''Now you can decide for yourself whether
that's important or not.'' General Malan's penchant for equating resistance to
the South-West Africa People's Organization to resistance to the Soviet Union
was shown again last week when he announced that South African forces had
captured a Russian soldier in southern Angola. This proved, he said, that the
''terrorists'' were under Soviet ''control.''

''It is time that the West and Africa remove their blinkers and take note of
what is going on in the region,'' he said. Earlier, in the interview, he had
argued that such vulnerable black countries as Zambia and Botswana, which have
actively supported the insurgent cause in South-West Africa, would be undermined
if ''Marxism'' triumphed there.

A tall, rangy man, with an easy manner that becomes intense as he gets into his
argument, he spoke briskly in a kind of shorthand, seeming to as sume that any
objective observer would have to recognizethat this dom ino theory for southern
Africa was no theory. He said that a victor y for the insurgents in South-West
Africa, which is alsoknown as Nami bia, would leave a ''belt of Marxism''
running across the continent on South Africa's borders.

The general was then asked whether he would classify Zimbabwe, the former
Rhodesia, as menacingly Marxist. Last year he contended in his first speech in
Parliament that Zimbabwe was on its way to becoming a one-party state like
Angola and Mozambique. But now he preferred to duck the question. ''It's very
debatable at this stage,'' he said.  ''I don't want to get involved in it.''

Was he disappointed, he was asked, that the Reagan Administration seemed
reluctant in its early months to see Namibia in these stark ideological terms?

''Not at all,'' he said. The new American willingness to contem plate revisions
of the long-stalled Wes tern plan for a Namibia settlement is helping to create
a new situati on, he added.

Meaning Left Elusive

He seemed deliberately to leave his meaning elusive, but as far as the complex
negotiating issues on the Namibia question were concerned, he appeared to be
arguing for flexibility rather than confrontation.

General Malan had spoken of ''winning'' rather than a settlement, but the
impression that he is a man who can reassess his position coolly has apparently
come across to the Reagan Administration's top Africa specialist. ''He's Chester
Crocker's favorite South African Cabinet minister,'' a diplomat said. Mr.
Crocker is the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs.

When South Africa had to deal with the Carter Administration, the concept of a
''total onslaught'' was often taken to mean that the United States as well as
the Soviet Union was a direct threat. Now General Malan says that the concept
does not imply ''that you are totally being opposed by the whole world.''

It means only, he said, that South Africa must be prepared to respond on all the
levels on which it is challenged. ''This is nothing else than management, if I
can put it to you, management of a firm,'' he said. ''You consider all the
various factors and then you make a decision.''

If the idea of meeting a Marxist ''onslaught'' with a management technique
sounds vaguely reminiscent, it may be of the American military style in the
early phases of the Vietnam War, when Robert S. McNamara was bringing Harvard
Business School techniques to the Pentagon. It was then that Magnus Malan went
to the General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kan., the last South African
officer to be admitted there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gen. Magnus Malan photo of destroyed Angolan
T-34 tank

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Sihanouk Cites Problems In Uniting Opposition

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 195 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Sept. 6


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former chief of state, said today that he
was having problems forming a coalition with leftist and rightist guerrillas to
fight the Cambodian Government, which is backed by the Soviet Union and by
Vietnam.

''I am ready to join the proposed coalition without preconditions, for the
victory of the Cambodian people,'' the Prince said. But he said this was proving
difficult because the rightist National Liberation Front had refused to soften
its conditions for entry into a coalition and because the Pol Pot group, which
was ousted from Phnom Penh in 1979, ''has not changed its ideology and
policies.''

An agreement to form a coalition against the regime in Phnom Penh was concluded
Friday by Prince Sihanouk; Son Sann, the head of the National Liberation Front,
and Khieu Samphan, Prime Mini ster in the Pol Pot group . The Pol Pol delegation
left Singapore yesterday without namin g its representative to the committee
that is to preparefor the coali tion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 8, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Fewer 'Boat People' Afloat

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 42 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 7


The number of Vietnamese ''boat people'' arriving in East and Southeast Asian
countries in August was the lowest in 11 months, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees reported today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 9, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW ASSAILS UNION' AIMS

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 364 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Sept. 8


The Soviet Government's press agency Tass said today that Solidarity, the
independent labor union, had shown at its convention in Gdansk that it was out
to seize political power in Poland.

An agency dispatch from Warsaw said reports and speeches at the convention had
concentrated on attacking the Communist Party, the political system and Poland's
gains since World War II.

Tass said the union had offered no solutions to the nation's problems and was
instead formulating new demands that could not be fulfilled.

''Judging by everything, the creation of an impasse is exactly what suits the
organizers of the convention because they are aiming at seizing political power
in Poland and want to undermine the faith of the working people in the socialist
people's state,'' Tass said.

''The right-wing leaders of this trade union association, stubbornly pursuing a
course of disorganizing economic and political life in Poland, demagogically
declare that they are motivated by the interests of the working class.''
Most Delegates Union Employees

It said the convention had no right to speak on behalf of the working class
because 90 percent of the delegates were full-time union employees and not
workers at all.

Tass added that 190 seats had gone to KOR, the political dissident group, and to
the Confederation for an Independent Poland, described as a right-wing group.

In a related dispatch, Tass said that the defense ministers from the six Eastern
European member states of the Warsaw Pact and from Cuba and Vietnam had arrived
to watch the maneuvers in the Baltic region and in Byelorussia, near Poland's
borders.

Tass said most of the speeches at the Gdansk convention were aimed at ''smearing
the socialist mainstays of People's Poland.'' It accused the union of
deliberately of deliberately making irresponsible demands, including calls for
more money, even though it was clear to everyone that there were no resources
left to satisfy them. This is designed to create a political deadlock and
undermine the authority of the Government, Tass said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 9, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene

BYLINE: Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 820 words


Falling stock and bond prices, persistently high interest rates, a widening
budget gap and fears that worse inflation may lie ahead have forced President
Reagan to reconsider his planned buildup in military spending.

Thus far the White House is talking about relatively small trims, amounting at
most to $15 billion in each of the next three years. If fully carried out, those
trims would still permit the Pentagon's budget to rise by $15 billion in 1982,
$25 billion in 1983 and $42 billion in 1984. Beyond 1984, the costs of the
military buildup would climb a lot faster - by $81 billion in 1985 and by $117.7
billion in 1986. Total miltary outlays in the next five years are scheduled to
exceed $1.4 trillion.

But how is that huge outlay on the military to be financed within the context of
tax cuts totaling, on the Administration's own figures, $750 billion in the next
five years.  The danger is that, instead of real economic growth making the
miltary buildup and tax cuts compatible, the result will be worse inflation,
which, with money held tight, will drive up interest rates and choke off the
economy's real growth.

Vietnam kicked off the current inflation, and the Reagan miltary buildup in th e
midst of huge tax cuts could give inflation another cruel twist.  An analysis by
James R. Capra in the current Quarterly Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York finds that the Reagan miltary build up, concentrated in procurement,
''will apparently far exceed the Vi etnam procurement increase.''

Where the Vietnam buildup lifted procurement authority (measured in constant
1982 dollars) from $42 billion in 1965 to $63 billion in 1967, but then dropped
in each of the next three years, the Reagan military buildup would raise
procurement authority from $41 billion in 1980 to nearly $70 billion in 1982 and
on upward in the next three years to reach $100 billion in 1985.

The inflationary problem could now be somewhat easier than during Vietnam
because of greater spare industrial capacity. However, the economy now has a
much higher rate of inflation and greater inflationary expectations than during
the Vietnam War.

Wassily Leontief of New York University, who won the Nobel Memorial Prize in
Economic Science for his analysis of interindustry flows, has warned that
enormous new military outlays will concentrate scarce capital in the military
area and ''will starve the rest of the economy of the investment it desperately
requires to remain competitive in the tightening worldwide market.''

A nation's economic strength, balance and flexibility have become vital elements
in both its domestic well-being and its strength abroad. But military planners
seem to treat their goal as the maximizing of the level of miltary expenditures,
regarding economic considerations as an unfortunate if necessary constraint.

The nuclear age seemingly downgraded the significance of a nation's economic
capabilities to outlast and crush an economically weaker opponent, because what
would count in a nuclear war that might last only a few days (conceivably only a
few hours or minutes) were forces in being - nuclear bombs and missiles immune
from attack and ready for instantaneous response to any threat. That concept of
hair-trigger and short-lived war still dominates the military policy of both the
United States and the Soviet Union.

But Vietnam was no hair-trigger war and, both by its incredible length and the
failure of the United States to prevail, it signalized the importance, not only
for this country but all other advanced industrial countries as well, of
developing new strategies to protect or advance their interests.

Subsequent events, including the Petrodollar coup by the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries, the Iranian upheaval, and, on the Soviet side,
Moscow's failure to subdue Afghanistan or even Poland, reinforce the lessons of
Vietnam in demonstrating the constraints on a superpower; those constraints are
political, social and economic as well as conventionally military.

Nevertheless, increasing nuclear arsenals and delivery systems still gets top
priority in American and Soviet military planning. In his study, ''Defense in
the 1980's,'' William W. Kaufmann, a leading analyst at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, argues that expenditures on nuclear arms should get a
lower priority in the Reagan buildup than additional highly mobile, conventional
air, sea and land forces. He concludes that, with the nuclear forces already
programmed, the United States will continue to have a powerful second-strike
capability through the 1980's and that the probability of any use of nuclear
weapons remains low, although it could worsen if the arms race accelerates.

A rethinking of United States military strategy has become essential if the
nation is to avoid exacerbating both its military and its economic problems. end
[TEXT OMITTED FROM SOURCE]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PICASSO'S ANTIWAR 'GUERNICA' QUIETLY LEAVES U.S. FOR SPAIN

BYLINE: By GRACE GLUECK

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1636 words


In deep secrecy and with no opportunity for farewells, ''Guernica,'' Picasso's
monumental antiwar mural on loan to the Museum of Modern Art for 42 years, left
New York for a final home in Spain last evening.

Ending its refugee existence after years of dispute and agitation over its
status, the painting, rolled up and crated and carefully guarded by Spanish
officials, departed in the cargo hold of an Iberia airliner that took off at 7
P.M. on a regularly scheduled commercial flight.

In accordance with Picasso's wishes, the huge painting, more than 25 feet long
manent exhibition in a specially restored annex of the Prado museum in Madrid.

The secrecy of ''Guernica's'' going was dictated by ''overriding security
considerations,'' according to Richard Oldenburg, the museum's director, who
expressed ''regret'' that the precautions would not allow the museum to ''give
advance notice to its public that the departure of 'Guernica' was imminent.''

Over the years there have been sporadic protests against the transfer to Spain
of the painting, a political and esthetic symbol of great significance, and it
has been the subject of claims from various political, ethnic, artistic and
other factions who wanted a say over its final disposition. In 1974 it was
subjected to physical attack, when a young Iranian artist named Tony Shafrazi
vandalized it with spray paint as it hung in its third-floor gallery at the
Museum of Modern Art.

In a small private ceremony at the museum yesterday afternoon, Inigo Cavero,
Spanish Minister of Culture,

Minister's remarks, page C20.
signed the formal transfer agreement in the presence of the Spanish Ambassador
to the United States, Jose Llado, and other Spanish officials, as well as
Willliam S. Paley, chairman of the museum; Blanchette Rockefeller, its
president, and Mr. Oldenburg.

In a brief talk, Mr. Cavero said the painting would ''enrich the national
patrimony of Spain,'' and added that it ''poses a demand for reconciliation
obtained among all Spaniards within the democratic constitution whose first
guarantor is His Majesty, King Juan Carlos.''

He also thanked the museum ''for the conservation of this work for so many years
and for the attention and care with which they have shown it to millions of
visitors.''

The Spanish Government has indemnified the museum against claims from any
possible source that it might have acted imprudently in releasing the mural. It
has also agreed that it has no claim to any other works in the museum's
collection, and that it will pay all costs of crating and shipping for
''Guernica'' and the 62 preliminary studies and ''postscripts'' that accompany
it.

The painting, of incalculable value, was at one time unofficially valued for
insurance purposes at $40 million. It was originally commissioned by the Spanish
Republic very early in the Spanish Civil War for its building at the 1937 Paris
World's Fair. Picasso had not begun work on the project when news broke of the
savage bombing by Generalissimo Francisco Franco's forces on April 26, 1937, of
the Basque town for which the painting is named. Seizing on that as the theme of
his work, the artist made the first sketches on May 1. The mural was installed
in June, and on July 12 the Spanish Pavilion opened to the public. Sent to New
York in 1939 on a tour for the benefit of the Spanish Refugee Relief Committee,
''Guernica'' was later included in the exhibition ''Picasso: Forty Years of His
Art,'' organized by the late Alfred H. Barr Jr., then the director of the Museum
of Modern Art.
Officials Here Last April

When World War II broke out in Europe, Picasso suggested t hat ''Guernica'' and
a number of his other works be held at the Museum ofModern Art on extended loan.
Although the rest of the Picassos were eventually re turned, the artist
stipulated that ''Guernica'' and the numerous stud ies for it would ultimately
go to his native Spain, and asked that th e museum hold them until the death of
Franco and ''the re-establishm ent of public liberties'' there. He entrusted his
lawyer, Rolan d Dumas, with the decision as to when those conditions had been
met.

It was Mr. Dumas's assent, given in writing last month, that actually triggered
the painting's departure, although the museum had been hard-pressed recently by
Spanish Government officials, who wanted the painting in Spain for the
centennial celebration of Picasso's birth on Oct. 25. ''Last April, Spanish
officials visited us at the museum and asked that we expedite transfer of the
painting,'' Mr. Oldenburg said. ''It was their first formal request, although
we'd been having discussions before that. Following that, we hired Cyrus Vance
as legal counsel to re-examine the question of 'Guernica's' transfer and make
sure we were on proper ground.''

A possible stumbling block to the dispatching of ''Guernica'' was resolved last
June when four of the Picasso heirs, uncertain whether the time was ripe for the
painting to go to Spain, came to an agreement after a meeting in Paris with Mr.
Oldenburg and William Rubin, director of painting and sculpture a t the Museum
of Modern Art. The heirs did not claim ownership of the painting, but they
heldthat under French law, which gives ''moral ri ghts'' to an artist's
survivors, they had a say in determining its fate.

Although the Spanish Government demurrred, it had participated in discussions
with the heirs throughout last year. ''But the question of how far 'moral
rights' extended became academic after the heirs gave their assent,'' Mr.
Oldenburg said.

In Madrid, Prado officials have restored a 17th-century pavilion near the main
museum, called the Cason del Buen Retiro, where ''Guernica'' will hang. Thus,
although separated from the main museum, the painting will join the Prado's
matchless collection of works by Velazquez, Goya and other artists from earlier
centuries in whose tradition Picasso placed himself. Prado officials hope that
''Guernica'' and its studies will eventually be joined there by other Picasso
works.
Blacks, Whites and Grays

It is understood that the picture, once installed in Madrid, will never be lent
again, because the repeated rolling and unrolling of the canvas required for
several European loans -made at Picasso's request and against the advice of the
Museum of Modern Art - during the 50's have already caused serious damage to the
surface.

The painting's unceremonious departure gives little indication of the immense
influence it has exercised on artists here, and its strong appeal for the
museum's public. A tour de force of expressionistically distorted forms arranged
in a powerful composition of blacks, whites and grays, it presents a horrifying
scene of the brutalities of war. Yet Picasso did not mean it as a specific
depiction of the events in the Basque town, according to Mr. Rubin, who had
several discussions with the artist himself about ''Guernica'' and his
intentions for it.

''The painting obviously has political implications, but he resented the idea
that people would use it as a political football,'' Mr. Rubin said. ''He has
always resisted any specific political interpretation of it in terms of
particular events. He called it 'Guernica' and the original inspiration for the
picture was his rage at the bombing of the town. But although inspired by that
event, it was not a picture of it. Rather, it was a universalized image of
violence and destruction. It deals with experiences that transcend any one event
or nation.''

Picasso had often been petitioned, especially by leftists during the Vietnam
War, Mr. Rubin recalled, to take the painting away from the United States, but
he remained resolute. Also during the Vietnam War the museum had received
petitions asking for removal of a text by Mr. Barr that hung near the painting,
which said that Picasso denied any specific political meaning for the picture.
''I took a copy of the text to Picasso, but he said, 'Leave it up,' '' Mr. Rubin
added.
'Big Role in Changing Art'

Citing the ''direct and immediate effect'' that the painting had had on American
art, particularly that of the early Abstract Expressionists, Mr. Rubin said:
''Everyone was influenced by it. The early work of Jackson Pollock, for example,
was inconceivable without 'Guernica'; he was engaged in a kind of mano a mano
with Picasso. That aspect of it no longer functions, but it has the eternal
characteristic of any great masterpiece, in that it inspires artists indirectly.
It tells them something very important and profound about what it is to be an
artist, and what the nature of that enterprise is.''

The painting had had ''a big role in changing art and the life of art in
America,'' Mr. Rubin concluded, ''and I think it has a big role to play yet in
Spain. It could be a symbol of a kind of national reconciliation , since it
might be seen as the final act in the closing of th e Civil War. It's a
homecoming for Picasso also; it would mark a change in attitude toward modern
art. Spain is a country that, relative to other European nations, has felt less
the effect of mod ernism. It could symbolically annihilate the last vestiges of
p arochialism in matters of art in Spain.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Pablo Picasso (page C21) 3 photos of 'Guernica'
being removed from the Modern Museum (page C21)

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 10, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SKETCHES OF 3 JUDGES WHO PROHIBITED PRIMARY

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 831 words


Amalya L. Kearse
President Carter named Amalya L. Kearse, now 44 years old, to the United States
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in 1979. She was the first woman, and
the second black person after Thurgood Marshall, now Associate Justice of the
United States Supreme Court, to join that court.

She was one of eight possible candidates proposed by the National Women's
Political Caucus when speculation centered on the possible choice of a woman to
fill a Supreme Court vacancy.

She wrote the opinion barring the police from watching a suspect through a
telescope without a warrant, and joined a court majority in allowing television
networks to broadcast the Abscam tapes. She joined another majority upholding a
New York State ban on school prayers.

She helped overturn a lower court's ruling that Vietnam veterans could sue the
manufacturers of Agent Orange for alleged damage.  Recently, she dissented from
a decision upholding New York City's closing of Sydenham Hospital in Harlem.

Before her appointment to the court, Judge Kearse was a partner with the Wall
Street law firm of Hughes Hubbard & Reed, which she joined after graduating from
the University of Michigan Law School in 1962. Earlier, at Wellesley College,
she majored in philosophy.

She was born in Vauxhall, N.J. Her father was a postmaster and her mother a
doctor and later an antipoverty administrator. Judge Kearse is a top-rated
bridge player and has written several books about the game. She works long hours
and is considered reserved and exceptionally intelligent. She is unmarried and
lives in Manhattan.

Kevin T. Duffy
Kevin T. Duffy was named to Federal District Court for the Southern District by
President Nixon in 1972. He had been an assistant United States Attorney at the
end of the Eisenhower Administration and regional director of the Securities and
Exchange Commission during the Nixon Administration.

While the American hostages were held in Iran, Judge Duffy ruled on a series of
financial actions by the Administration regarding Iran's frozen assets, and by
various banks and companies attempting to attach those assets. He incurred the
wrath of the Carter Administration by issuing what it considered ''ambiguous''
rulings.

Earlier, he was involved in New York's City's efforts to comply with the Federal
Clean Air Act, and caused much consternation among city officials by his
attempts to impose such pollution-cutting measures as a ban on parking in
downtown Manhattan.

Judge Duffy was born Jan. 10, 1933, in New York City. He attended Fordham
College and its law school, from which he received a degree in 1958.

He worked in the United States Attorney's Office for the Southern District of
New York, becoming assistant chief of the criminal division, and later became an
associate with the New York law firm of Whitman, Hansom and Coolson. He was a a
partner in the firm of Gordon & Gordon from 1966 until his appointment to the
S.E.C. in 1969.

Judge Duffy and his wife, Judge Irene J. Duffy of New York State Family Court,
have four children and live in Pelham Manor, in Westchester County.

Edward R. Neaher
Edward R. Neaher, who was named to the Federal bench by President Richard M.
Nixon in 1971, was recommended for the Court of Appeals last spring by Senator
Alfonse M. D'Amato. But the Justice Department turned him down because he was 69
years old.

He sits in Federal District Court for the E astern District of New York, which
includes Long Island, Queens, Sta ten Island and Brooklyn,where he was born.

Mr. Neaher, who dropped out of school at 14, later worked his way through the
University of Notre Dame and graduated from Fordham Law School in 1943. After
three years as an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, he joined the
Manhattan law firm of Chadbourne, Parke, Whiteside & Wolff.

As a member of the Nassau County Republican Committee, Mr. Neaher was named
United States Attorney in Brooklyn in 1969. He served until 1971.

In 1974, Judge Neaher presided at the trial of United States Representative
Angelo D. Roncallo, Republican of Oyster Bay, L.I., who was accused of having
extorted money from a contractor when he was Nassau County's Comptroller. Mr.
Roncallo was acquitted in a trial that Judge Neaher later asserted had been
''terribly mishandled'' by the prosecution.

He recently turned down a plea by parents to keep open the mostly white annex in
Rosedale, Queens, of Intermediate School 231. He has also issued rulings
upholding the constitutional rights of correction officers to wear long hair.

His wife, Catherine K. Neaher, is a lawyer. They have four children and live in
Garden City, L.I.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Amalya L. Kearse photo of Kevin T. Duffy photo
of Edward R. Neaher

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ASIAN IMMIGRANTS CHANGING THE CHARACTER OF CALIFORNIA'S CITIES

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1444 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 10


Bright-eyed Nhan Dung is fascinated by the words com ing out of the earphones he
is wearing, even though he does not know what they mean.

''He hugged the bug,'' says the machine, and Dung repeats it, finding the whole
business very funny. He laughs and the whole room seems to light up. For reasons
of his own, perhaps to determine if there is a small man inside who is doing the
talking, he lays his head on the machine, listens closely, and laughs again.

Nhan Dung is 5 years old, a Vietnamese refugee who, along with thousands of
others, is being evaluated for bilingual classes in California's increasingly
polyglot educational system.

Engaging, penny-bright and quick as a squirrel, Dung is something of a symbol of
the ethnically changing character of San Francisco and of urban California as a
whole. It is a character that is increasingly Asian as, over the past decade,
California has become a magnet for a rising tide of immigrants from all over the
world, legal and illegal: the ''Ellis Island'' of the 1980's, as a Rand
Corporation researcher put it.

More Growth Since Census

According to the most recent census data, 1.5 million Asians were legally
admitted to the United States in the decade ended Sept. 30, 1980, almost
doubling their number in this country. Their impact has been felt to some degree
around the country, but nowhere so intensely as in California, where the Asian
population stood at 1,253,987 in the 1980 census and has grown rapidly since
then.

It is a palpable presence. In San Francisco, the population is now 21.7 percent
Asian, up sharply from the 13.3 percent in 1970. For example, in the city's
Sunset District, a middle-class community of 25-year-old tract homes, a quiet
pair of Buddhist monks, shavenheaded and gray-robed, stroll along streets where
15 years ago Mr. O'Malley might have tipped his hat to Mrs . Schwartz.

Along Irving Street, the district's major shopping area, what once was the
Russian Bakery is now Sheng Kee Chinese Bakery. The building of the Calvary
Methodist Church is also home for the Chinese Gospel Church, and there are two
pastors, the Rev. Wendy Pomery and Lan Nochi Huang. Services in Chinese are at
9:30 o'clock each Sunday morning, in English at 11 o'clock. Christ United
Presbyterian has a service in Japanese and Korean United Presbyterian has
services in Korean.

Along Noriega Street in the Sunset District, or along Clement in the Richmond
District north across Golden Gate Park, a venturesome diner can sample Korean
braised chicken, Filipino stuffed grape leaves, Thai lemon grass beef salad,
Vietnamese Imperial Roll, Japanese sashimi, Szechuan Chinese prawns and Indian
curried lamb.

Problems With Jobs and Housing

But along with the stir-fry of ethnic diversity, pungent as Asian spice, there
are problems. The sharp rise in the number of Asians, their often deep cultural
differences, their high visibility and their language difficulties have strained
social services and created tensions over jobs and housing.

Nhan Dung and his family are one example. Neither he nor any of his seven
brothers and sisters speak more than a word or two of English.  Neither do their
parents. In Saigon, which the family fled 15 months ago, the father ran a
clothing store. Here neither he nor anyone else in the family is employed.

At the beginning of April, when Federal support for the special welfare programs
for destitute Indochinese refugees was cut back, 96,000 people in California
were getting such assistance.

California's Secretary of Health, Marios Obledo, said the change meant that
refugees like the Nanhs were ''virtually dumped into'' the state's hands. The
state expects to have to spend $10 million more on welfare this year, $25
million more next year and $51 million the third year as a result of Federal
cutbacks.

Bilingual Education Programs

The state school system now operates bilingual programs in Chinese, Filipino,
Japanese, Korean, Spanish and Indochinese languages.  ''We have about 30,000
youngsters who speak another language at home,'' said Dr. Ana Horta, manager of
the bilingual program. ''Of those, 15,000 have limited English capacity, and of
that 15,000 about 30 percent are Chinese, 25 percent Hispanic, and now another
30 percent are Indochinese, the majority Vietnamese.'' Ten percent more are
Filipinos and a small number are Japanese.

The San Francisco Police Department is actively recruiting Chinesespeaking
officers, and there are about 30 on the 1,200-member force.  Nelson Lum, the
department's training officer in Chinese and English, said that bilingualism was
probably less important than giving the Chinese community ''a sense of
belonging.''

''When I was growing up cops were al ways white,'' he said.  Gloria Loui e, a
staff member of a citizens' group called Chinese for Affirmati ve Action, said
the Chinese community wanted more bilingual off icers.

She complained that the department had been ''very resistant'' to employing
Chinese-speaking officers and observed that 1979 litigation mandated the current
hiring program.

Although there have been some complaints about the influx of industrious,
property-oriented Chinese who seem ready to pay any price for real estate in
California's superheated market, the more apparent strains have emerged around
the Southeast Asian refugees, particularly those from the countryside, where
traditional ways of life stand in sharp relief to those of urban California.

In San Francisco, for example, there was consternation when the authorities
learned that the mysterious disappearance of ducks that had paddled the pond
waters in Golden Gate Park was traceable to the conviction of some hill-country
Asians that ducks were to eat, not to watch.

The health authorities are concerned about a rise in the tuberculosis rate in
California over the past decade, a period in which the disease was declining
elsewhere. Gloria Wall, chairman of the environmental health committee of the
American Lung Association of Santa Clara-Benito Counties, said the increase was
largely a result of the influx of legal and illegal immigrants from countries
where the disease was still common.

Lois Wax, refugee coordinator for Orange County, which has attracted many
Asians, said the refugees were a strain on the county's resources.

''We already have a shortage of low-income housing,'' she said.  ''We're
concerned about developing community tension. There haven't been any incidents
but the atmosphere is there.''

Fred Ko ch, deputy superintendent of Los Ang eles County Schools, said: ''The
Asian population is almost equal with the Hispanic population. How well they
assimilate depends on the age group -K-3 make a very good transition, junior
high, goo d, but by the time they get to high school, well, they never really m
ake the transition.''

Two Programs to Aid Assimilation

As a result, the state has set up two programs to aid assimilation, one in
Westminster, where 6,000 of the 71,000 residents are Vietnamese, and another in
Santa Ana, where there are tensions between Asian and Hispanic residents.

''It's like a keg of dynamite with a one-inch fuse,'' Mr. Koch said. ''And I'm
not just hollering fire.'' While there have been no major incidents, he said
tensions were building.

In Westminster, Asians slowly took over a failing shopping center on Bolsa
Avenue, and have since developed a mile-long stretch of commercial enterprise
dotted with Asian-owned retail and professional shops.

Clark Trainer of the Westminster Chamber of Commerce said, ''We have a joint
committee with the mayor's office with some of the prominent Vietnamese
businessmen who are bilingual and we're attempting to assimilate the Vietnamese
business community into the Westminster community.''

Nonetheless, 150 signatures have been gathered on a petition asking the city not
to grant any more business licenses to Asians.  ''We did admit the petition,''
said Mayor Kathy Buchoz, ''but in my own personal judgment, I determined that it
was unconstitutional, un-American, illegal and a lot of other things besides.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table on population of Asian ethnic groups in
California, 1970 and 1980 photo of 5-year-old Vietnamese refugee Nhan Dung

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 11, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARTHUR SMITHIES, ECONOMIST AND EXPERT ON BUDGET, DIES

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 520 words


Arthur Smithies, a Harvard economist who was an authority on the United States
budget and the fiscal policies of developing countries, died of a heart attack
Wednesday afternoon at the Cambridge Boat Club after rowing on the Charles
River. He was 73 years old.

Mr. Smithies, a tall, athletically built man with a breezy manner and an ability
to stimulate debate that delighted students, retired from Harvard three years
ago but continued to work as a consultant on economics in the Middle East.

He lived with his wife, the former Katharine Ripman, in Belmont, Mass., a suburb
of Boston.  Early in his career, Mr. Smithies, an advocate of Keynesian
economics, which urges continued government stimulation of spending and
investment, won acclaim as a theorist dealing with the economies in such
industrially advanced societies as the United States and Britain. One memorable
paper dealt with advanced economies during depressions.

A native of Hobart, Tasmania, the island state of Australia, Mr.  Smithies
developed his expertise in Federal spending in the United States as an economist
in the Bureau of the Budget in Washington from 1943 to 1948.

From 1948 to 1949 he served as director of the Fiscal and Trade Policy Division
of the Economic Cooperation A dministration, and the next year he joined the
faculty of Harvard.

Wrote Standard Work on Budget

In 1948 his book, ''The Federal Budget and Fiscal Policy,'' was published. It
was regarded as the standard source on the budget for the next two decades.

In the late 1960's and early 1970's, Mr. Smithies began to turn his attention to
the developing countries. In the early 1970's he spent his summers in South
Vietnam, as a consultant to the United States Agency for International
Development, trying to find an economic policy by which th e Saigon Government
could survive despite the budgetary str ains and the problems of production
resulting from the war.

Mr. Smithies headed the economics department at Harvard, from 1950 to 1955 and
from 1959 to 1961. In 1957 he was appointed Nathaniel Ropes Professor of
Political Economy.

In the early 1960's, Mr. Smithies was a founder of the Journal of Economics
Abstracts, later known as the Journal of Economic Literature. He edited that
publication and the Quarterly Journal of Economics for several years.

Mr. Smithies, who was born on Dec. 12, 1907, received a law degree from the
University of Tasmania in 1929. He studied at Oxford University as a Rhodes
Scholar and received a Bachelor of Arts degree there in 1932. Two years later he
received his doctorate from Harvard.

In addition to his wife, Mr. Smithies is survived by a son, Richard; two
daughters, Pamela Woodman and Julia Jentzhan, and eight grandchildren.

He is to be buried Monday afternoon in a private ceremony at the Belmont
Cemetery. A memorial is being planned at Harvard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Arthur Smithies in 1954

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POL POT GROUP UN YIELDING AT CAMBODIAN TALKS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 606 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Sept. 12


The Cambodian Communist movement led by the deposed Prime Minister, Pol Pot, was
intransigent and self-assured throughout the conference last week in which it
and two non-Communist factions agreed to work toward a coalition against
Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.

A senior Government official here who is in close contact with the three
delegations reported that former Prime Minister Khieu Samphan, who headed the
Communist delegation, went back on earlier public offers to give the prime
ministership in a coalition government to Son Sann, leader of the largest
non-Communist guerrilla force opposing the Vietnamese.

Urged by Mr. Son Sann, a pro-Western former Prime Minister, to make formal the
offer of the top coalition post, the Communist leader would not go beyond
stating that the prime ministership was a matter to be discussed in a committee
the three factions agreed to form.  Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the third
participant, repeatedly declared his support for Mr. Son Sann to head a
coalition group to replace the Communists as Cambodia's representative at the
United Nations.

Asean Members Worried

The new Communist stand threatens the efforts of the five-member Association of
Southeast Asian Nations to enhance the standing of Mr. Son Sann. The countries
of the non-Communist group - Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand and the
Philippines - refuse to accept Vietnam's military conquest of its neighbor but
find the Pol Pot movement, despite its recantation of its destructive record as
Cambodia's Government, an unpalatable alternative.

The association members fear that they cannot indefinitely sustain a United
Nations majority against the regime installed by Vietnam unless the Pol Pot
movement can be diluted with supp orters of Prince Sihanouk and Mr. Son Sann.

They urged the non-Communist groups to accept the risk of even a loose
association with the Pol Pot group on the supposition that China was ready to
persuade Mr. Pol Pot, who derives full support from Peking, to make concessions.

The official here, however, said that China appeared to have strengthened the
Pol Pot movement's belief that its situation in the field is strong and that the
initial danger of Vietnam wiping out the movement had passed. The movement is
estimated to have 30,000 troops occupying enclaves along the Thai border.

Reasons for Confidence

Southeast Asian officials believe that Peking has bolstered the movement's
confidence by affirming that Vietnam's military, economic and political
situation is so bad that Hanoi will have to soften its stand that its conquest
of Cambodia is irreversible. Moreover, a Government source said the flow of
Chinese supplies to the Pol Pot forces had been sufficient to enhance that
confidence.

The senior official also noted a remarkable stiffening of the Pol Pot group's
attitude toward demands from non-Communist nations. ''Two years ago they would
agree to anything that we suggested and looked on Asean as their savior,'' he
said.

Asean diplomats share a belief held in the Sihanouk and Son Sann camps that the
Communist faction was the sole beneficiary of the declaration of intent approved
at last week's meeting. They hope that Mr. Son Sann's readiness to weaken his
strong stand aginst the Pol Pot group for the sake of coalition will be rewarded
with political and material support from Western nations, particularly the
United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONVICT SEEKING FREEDOM BLAMES VIETN AM FOR SLAYING

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 84, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 554 words

DATELINE: SALEM, Ore., Sept. 12


Duane Samples majored in psychology at Stanford University, was voted president
of his fraternity, boxed as an amateur and skied on weekends. That was in 1964.

He now jogs on a prison track and studies psychology from a cell at the Oregon
State Penitentiary, where he is serving a life sentence for murder.

Between the campus and the prison lay the war in Vietnam.  Mr. Samples says the
trauma of a year in combat altered his life after he came home in April 1967.
The decorated veteran drifted through jobs and drugs. Then, in 1975, he acted
out what psychologists termed a lurid sexual fantasy by slashing two women, one
fatally, with a 10-inch knife.

''I know I wouldn't be here if not for Vietnam,'' Mr. Samples, 39 years old,
said in a prison interview. ''No one can claim Vietnam takes away their
responsibility for what they did, but there were some things in me not strong
enough. I reacted poorly to that experience.''

Mr. Samples is now the center of a moral and political tug of war involving
Oregon's Governor, the woman who survived the attack, his friends and family and
the local District Attorney.

His supporters contend that Mr. Samples is rehabilitated, They attribute the
killing to what is called post-Vietnam delayed-stress syndrome and say five
years of private therapy in prison cured him.

The other side discounts the Vietnam theory and says Mr. Samples's problems date
from adolescence. Diane Ross, the woman who survived, told Gov. Victor L. Atiyeh
she would fear for her life if Mr. Samples was released.

Governor Atiyeh refused a 1979 request for executive clemency, but last year he
commuted Mr. Samples's sentence to 20 years after learning about the impact of
Vietnam.

The decision provoked an outcry by District Attorney Chris Van Dyke of Marion
County and residents of Silverton, the small town near Salem where the murder
occurred.

On Sept. 3, Governor Atiyeh rescinded the commutation on the basis of recent
negative psychiatric opinions about Mr. Samples' rehabilitation and of
additional evidence, including a previously undisclosed report that Mr. Samples
beat up a woman in 1971.

The Governor restated his assessment that Mr. Samples ''was a scholar-athlete''
before Vietnam and had ''seemed destined for a successful life.''

Yet Mr. Van Dyke has termed Mr. Samples a sexual sadist whose problems predated
Vietnam. He notes that the veteran shot himself in the abdomen at 13.

Mr. Van Dyke has also produced a letter Mr. Samples wrote to a former girlfriend
in May 1970 but never mailed. In it, he outlined a fantasy about slashing
abdomens and disemboweling women, acts that resembled the murder.

The District Attorney contends that Mr. Samples is trying to capitalize on his
combat experience to win commutation. He notes that Mr. Samples never raised the
Vietnam defense until several years into his imprisonment.

But the veteran's attorney, Michael Bailey, said his client he did not use the
stress syndrome to gain sympathy and and became aware of it only after years of
therapy.

Mr. Bailey said he expected to challenge the reversal of the commutation in the
Oregon Supreme Court.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Duane Samples

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV View;
THESE PRODUCTIONS STRUGGLE TO BE PROVOCATIVE

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 45, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1255 words


Television, sometimes referred to as ''global village,'' has an irritating habit
of conveying images of the world that are either questionable or grossly
inadequate. Two notable examples are at hand this week. One takes the form of
documentary: ''Women of Russia,'' a syndicated package of three half-hour
programs that can be seen Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday on WPIX/Channel 11 at 8
P.M. The other is an ''entertainment'' in the form of a television movie: ''Fly
Away Home,'' on the ABC network this Friday evening at 9. Both are defeated by
inflated promises.

Produced by Sandy Carter and Sherry Grant, ''Women of Russia'' is said to have
taken ''several years to complete and many visits to overcome the problems of
dealing with the Russian bureaucracy.'' Exact times are left fuzzy, but one
sequence in the first program shows Alexander Godunov still dancing with the
Bolshoi Ballet.  Inasmuch as Mr. Godunov defected to the United States two years
ago, we can reasonably assume that the material is somewhat dated. This might be
of some concern if the content were aggressively insightful or provocative, but,
in fact, the filmmakers have pasted together the most innocuous kind of
travelogue, its banal observations exceeded only by the home-movie awkwardness
of the photography.

Guest hosts have been recruited for each episode. ''Entertainment'' is
introduced and narrated by Juliet Prowse; ''Marriage and Family'' by Shirley
Jones, and ''Sports'' by Peggy Fleming. The packaging is firmly on the upbeat
side of things. Miss Prowse, for instance, promises to take us backstage with
show-business superstars. ''We'll take you to the movies,'' she says,
''jam-packed with spectacle.'' She urges us to ''come with me and our
producers,'' even though it's obvious that her on ly connection with the project
was during postproductio n in a Hollywood studio. But on she prattles about
Moscow (''the very name is romantic, mysterious, yet foreboding'') insisting tha
t viewers will see ''what the Russians see but'' - and here she flas hes a
curious conspiratorial smile - ''more often what they don't se e.''

The program then proceeds to show us scenes from the Bolshoi Ballet, some
television programs, a circus act and a popular movie - hardly things that the
average Russian would be unlikely to see.  Along the way there are some
interviews. At the Bolshoi, the great Galina Ulanova, now a teacher after a
brilliant career as prima ballerina, makes a rare appearance before a camera,
but the occasion is largely wasted. ''What is it that makes charisma in a
ballerina?'' ask the filmmakers. Madame Ulanova says something about working
very hard and having enormous discipline. Not surprisingly, she looks a trifle
bored with the session. Later, a popular film actress is asked if hers is a
glamorous profession. No, she says, it is mostly hard work and discipline. And
so on, unto numbing repetition and minimal illumination as to the women of
Russia.

At the very end, it is mentioned that approved fare in the arts is becoming dull
and that the young are increasingly looking for rock music and blue jeans.
''They will affect the future,'' notes Miss Prowse, ''but how?'' That's about as
provocative as this series gets. The credits reveal that ''promotional
consideration'' was provided by Finnair. Travelogues have always been attractive
investments for airlines.

''Fly Away Home,'' the ABC Friday Night Movie, is awash with images clearly
designed to be provocative, but this drama about the Vietnam War is defeated by
a fatal structural problem. It has several beginnings, a couple of middles but
no end. The story, written and produced by Sterling Silliphant, a television
veteran of considerable accomplishment, simply fades into the final credits,
leaving the impression that the project ran out of money or interest - perhaps
both.

The opening scenes introduce a sizable batch of characters. The time is January
1968, just before the Tet offensive that will demolish popular American support
for the war in Vietnam. In Chicago, a young black man (Randy Frederick Brooks)
decides to enlist in the Air Force after learning that the brother he idolizes
has been killed in action. This gives his concerned mother (Olivia Cole) an
opportunity for a terribly moving scene. In San Diego, a veteran pilot (Michael
Beck) is trying to explain to his wife why he has reenlisted for another tour of
active duty. And in San Francisco, a television cameraman (Bruce Boxleitner)
learns that he is being sent to the organization's Saigon bureau. Arriving at
the Vietnam airport, he meets his new anti-war colleague (Brian Dennehy) and a
couple of curvaceous young women (Teri Copley and Lynn Moody) determined to make
their fortunes by entertaining the troops. Obviously, we already have more than
enough plotlines to wrap around a two-hour movie.

As it turns out, however, most of these characters are dumped rather quickly.
The young black man is never seen again. The veteran pilot gets two brief
scenes, the last one showing him being taken as a prisoner of war. The two
entertainers are allowed some suggestive wriggling in a long audition for an
Army sergeant, a drawn-out scene that doesn't quite jibe with the production's
loftier pretensions.

It seems that the key figure is meant to be Carl, the television cameraman,
whose ''pilgrimage'' is supposed t o echo ''the emotions, turmoil and suffering
of civilians and soldie rs, men and women, Americans and Vietnamese.'' At first,
Carl is passively supportive of the war effort. With the help of his new c
olleague Tim, though, hebegins to realize the waste and cynicism that are
involved. His boss announces: ''Forget the big picture. We're in to miniatures.
Combat footage is a cinch for the 6 o'clock news.'' Complicating matters, Carl
is hopelessly smitten with the beautiful Mai (Tiana Alexandra), a young
Vietnamese woman who is horrified to learn from her brother, now working for the
North Vietnamese, that th eir parents' wealth is rooted in official corruption.
Mai reprimands her Papa: ''You taught me that unless we are more moral than our
ene mies, we will be defeated.'' Furious, he leaves the room. Her mother,
sometimes referred to as the Dragon Lady, is less contr ite, pointedly asking
Mai where she thought the money was coming fr om for her luxurious education in
Paris. Mai goes off to become a nurse on the battlefield- not with the North but
with the South, whic h leaves her fighting her adored brother. This image of a
Vietnames e woman is just about ashelpful as the images being hawked in ''Women
of Russia.''

Suddenly, in the middle of these endless tensions, Carl discovers that Mai will
be on his plane as he prepares to fly to another battle zone. ''Do you believe
in fate?'' he asks Tim just before ''Fly Away Home'' segues into a swirl of
pointless flashbacks. The final image is of a tattered American flag flapping in
a strong breeze. The credits note that ''this film is dedicated to every human
being whose life was ended or changed by the war in Southeast Asia.'' That flag
is not nearly as tattered as this totally puzzling movie.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Tiana A lexandra

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN OMINOUS U.S. TILT IN AFRICA

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 367 words


To the Editor:

It is ironic that the foreign policy of the Reagan Administration, with its
emphasis on crusading anti-Communism , is matched most closely by the
Administration with which it d iffers the most on every other issue - the
Kennedy Administratio n.

And in a tragic repetition of the major foreign policy mistake of the Kennedy
Administration, it appears that the Reagan foreign policy toward South Africa is
using ideology in place of an accurate assessment of the long-range
probabilities in the region.

The lesson of Vietnam, if there is one, is not that American intervention in the
quest of foreign policy goals is wrong or even useless, but rather that the
utterly crucial decisions take place long before the actual act of intervention.

The American mistake in Vietnam did not take place in the mid-60's, when it was
decided that the stakes there were high enough to warrant escalation, but rather
in the late 50's and early 60's, when it was decided that Vietnam was a ''test
case'' in which the United States could demonstrate its ability to buck the
odds.

The beginnings of this same process are evident in the American policy toward
South Africa. But however much the Reagan Administration pursues what is called
a ''more balanced'' policy toward South Africa, the crucial facts remain:

First, the South African occupation of Namibia, which is the cause of the
current crisis, is by all standards of international law illegal. This is the
same international law that the Reagan Administration finds so useful when
condemning the Soviets or the Cubans.

And second, it is inevitable that over the next decades the black African
nations will grow in strength relative to South Africa, thus causing an
increasingly violent confrontation.

One can only hope that the Reagan Administration's desire to correct what are
perceived as the imbalances of the Carter foreign policy, as illustrated by
Carter's decidedly anti-South Africa policy, will not lead to further and more
dangerous imbalances whose only unique feature is a tilt in the opposite
direction.
STEVEN METZ, Towson, Md., Sept. 2, 1981

The writer is a political science instructor at Towson State University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

On Language

BYLINE: By William Safire
See You Later, Allegator

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1375 words


Kimble Mead

Part of the gruntwork of people in the language dodge is to keep track of
neologisms (accent on the ''ol''), or newly minted words.  Most are nonce words
- clever coinages that die aborning - but all the coins are worth biting:

In the media world, infotainment is being bruited about; the combination of
''information'' and ''entertainment'' was possibly coined by Ron Eisenberg in
the February 1980 Phone Call magazine.  This follows closely on docudrama, a
melding of ''documentary'' and ''melodrama,'' and faction; all three words
illustrate the trend toward the fuzzing of lines between fact and fiction, truth
and fantasy. (Watch out for factoids.) Mediamen also like narrowcasting, derived
from ''broadcasting,'' to mean rifleshot approaches to specific audiences, and
brandstanding, which Art Stevens coined in the May 1981 Harvard Business Review
to mean ''long-lived product promotion,'' a meld of ''brand name'' and
''grandstanding.''

In law, attorney Mark Lane was described in The New York Times as ''the
well-known conspiracy allegator.'' This word bids fair to replace ''alleger''
for ''one who alleges,'' and can be used by lawyers with symbols on their tennis
shirts. (See you later, alleger.)

In the death industry, cremains is the pasted-together version of ''cremated
remains'' to stuff into your portmanteau. Liturgy would have to be altered to
provide for ''cremains to cremains, dust to dust,'' but whether the new word
will catch on remains to be viewed.  (Meanwhile, what's a body to do?)

In sports, tennis players are now being called tennists, according to Horace
Sutton in The New York Post. The ''ist'' construction is evidently an upgrading,
as in ''piano player'' and ''pianist,'' ''publicity man'' and ''publicist,''
''raper'' and ''rapist.''

In making new anatomical references, keep your eye on your mouth.  Poor-mouthing
(pretending to be penniless) has been with us for some time, and spawned
bad-mouthing (to speak ill of someone). Reporter Curt Suplee used big-mouthing
in The Washington Post last month to mean ''to promote loudly.'' Other
possibilities include stretchmouthing (to smile); small-mouthing (to deprecate);
rich-mouthing'' (to ostentate); horse's-mouthing (to wr ite an insider's
newsletter), and mouth-mouthing (to coin words using the ''mouth'' combining
form).

My favorite recent coinages are laser-sharp, sent in by Philip Persinger, found
in The Syracuse Herald-American, which brings the dull old ''razor-sharp'' up to
a fine cutting edge. The other is from Angelo Gionis of Valley Stream, N.Y., who
writes: ''My friend made up a new word. It's called ziggly. Put it in the
dictionary. It means wiggly lines going like Z's.'' Generations hence,
lexicographers will say, ''Ziggly, adj. -angular lines, probably combined from
zigzag and wiggly.''

The word gruntwork was used at the beginning of this item without explanation to
show how a neologism can slip into the language with the greatest of ease.
''Grunt'' was a Vietnam-era noun for a soldier or servant who did menial tasks,
taken from the sound one makes from heavy lifting. It was a quick step from that
to ''gruntwork,'' on the analogy of ''paperwork,'' meaning the kind of job
nobody likes to do. There's a neologism I bet will make it.

Very Trying

''I'll try and do that.'' That means: ''I'll try to do that.'' So why not say,
''I'll try to do that''?  Ah, but ''try and'' has become an idiom, say the
roundheels of rhetoric. Never mind that ''try and do'' can be glossed, as David
Jenness of Palo Alto suggests, as in: ''I'll try, and by virtue of trying am
like ly to be able to do that.''

I think the ''try and'' construction is sloppy English and stands correction.
The trying is not usually a separate deed from the doing. If ''try to'' is what
you mean, say what you mean.

Whenever anyone uses the pressure of usage to force you to accept the
nonsensical and swallow the solecism, here's what to tell them: ''Try and make
me.'' (That is a time ''try and'' is acceptable, because it mocks tough-guy
slang.)

In re Flaunt v. Flout

Saving only the Supreme Court, the nine circuits of the United States Court of
Appeals are the highest courts in the land.  Ordinarily, the appellate judges
are deferential to each other - with mutual respect slopping all over each
other's decisions - but on one subject there is blood all over the floor.

The case at issue is Flaunt v. Flout. In defining ''willfulness'' in connection
with violating a law, Judge Joseph F. Weis Jr. of the Third Circuit wrote:
''Willfulness connotes defiance of such reckless disregard of consequences as to
be equivalent to a knowing, conscious and deliberate flaunting of the Act.''

Flaunt? Hardly. To flaunt is ''to display ostentatiously''; to flout means ''to
show contempt for,'' akin to the noun ''flute,'' from the whistle of derision.

The brethren noticed. In discussing and rejecting the Third Circuit's definition
of willfulness, the Fourth Circuit also zapped the Third's preference for
flaunt: It put quotation marks around ''flaunt'' and noted that willful
violations did not require ''an intentional flouting of the Act.''

In another case, the Ninth Circuit joined in the controversy, not only
disagreeing with the willfulness decision but the flaunting thereof: It quoted
the errant Third Circuit's flaunt and inserted after it in brackets the word
sic, Latin for ''thus,'' which means ''precisely reproduced even though wrong.''

The Third Circuit held its ground; in another case, Judge Weis wrote ''flaunting
the Act, or 'flouting it,' as some would say ...  .'' Obviously, he thought
those ''some'' who sic'd his ''flaunt'' were in error.

The Eighth Circuit weighed in next by quoting Weis on ''deliberate flaunting of
the Act'' and inserting the word ''flouting'' in brackets after ''flaunting,''
as if to say, ''This is what he meant to say.'' (For all these citations, I am
indebted to Charles Hadden of Arlington, Va.) The 10th Circuit then chimed in by
putting ''flaunt'' in quotes.

I petitioned Judge Weis in Pittsburgh, where the Third Circuit sits: Is he the
linguistic equivalent of ''Turn 'em loose, Bruce''?  Arguendo, is he flaunting
his use of ''flaunt'' to flout convention?  On what does he bottom his opinion?
Here is the judge's response:

DEAR MR. SAFIRE: Some years ago Judge Learned Hand wrote, ''(I)t is one of the
surest indexes of a mature and developed jurisprudence not to make a fortress
out of the dictionary ... .'' Nevertheless, when I am beleaguered by my
colleagues who (sic)'d and ''...'' my use of that perfectly good word
''flaunt,'' I must take my station behind Webster's Third.

Before I wrote my second opinion defending the use of the word and mildly
reproving my intolerant brethren, Babcock & Wilcox Co. v. OSHRC, 622 F. 2d 1160
(3d Cir. 1980), I sought support from the publishers of the dictionary. The
editorial d irector responded by citing reputable authors and said, ''(E)ven t
he writers who comment unfavorably on this use of flaunt indicate th at it is
widespread. Forthese reasons, the editors of the Third judge this use to be
established in the language and entered it wi thout stigma.''

Much less charitable, I must say, is Thomas H. Middleton's reference to a
possible etymological bond between the two words in the March 1981 issue of
Saturday Review: ''That would simply imply that flaunt has more than just a
bonehead relationship with flout. It might be flout's illegitimate child and the
flaunt-flout confusion becomes evermore understandable.''

For shame! Do the flout forces know no limit to their campaign of vilification?
Are you not aware that in a series of cases the Supreme Court has championed the
rights of illegitimates to share in the benefits of our society? See, e.g.,
Trimble v. Gordon, 430 U.S. 762 (1977).

Will I give up on flaunt? By no means. Even at the risk of being labeled a loose
constructionist, I shall stand my ground against what I consider to be a
formidable assault on judicial independence.  John Marshall withstood the
attacks of Thomas Jefferson, and I trust that I shall survive my battle with the
flout forces.Respectfully yours,
JOSEPH F. WEIS Jr.P.S. I reserve the right to use flout if I choose.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of alligator in tennis togs

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE U.N.'S MAN IN THE MIDDLE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 39, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6085 words


Jane Rosen is the United Nations correspondent for The Guardian of London. By
Jane Rosen lmost every weekday morning around 8:30, a plainclothes security
guard steps out of an East Side town house and scans the block. A few minutes
later, a tall, angular man in his early 60's emerges, formal in a dark suit,
head bent, face preoccupied, strung tight. United Nations Secretary General Kurt
Waldheim strides quickly downtown, full of energy, and the guard falls into step
beside him. There isn't much conversation. ''Occasionally,'' the guard says,
''he'll talk about the new plan for the U.N. garden or the weather or how he
wishes he could stay home some night.''

Amid others hurrying to work, somewhat to Mr. Waldheim's sorrow, no one
recognizes him. Which is curious, since the work he does affects virtually every
country in the world, and is not conducted in obscurity.

At United Nations headquarters, they take an elevator reserved exclusively for
the Secretary General to the 38th floor of the Secretariat building. Mr.
Waldheim says good morning to the receptionist, w ho is also an armed guard,
enters his own suite of offices and, with his usual courtliness, shakes hands
with each of his five secretaries (anyone still there when he leaves at 8 or 9
or 10 P.M. gets a good-night handshake as well).

Mr. Waldheim has been following more or less the same routine for the last 10
years, and he hopes to continue for another five.  Kurt Waldheim of Austria may
very well be the last European to run the United Nations, and the last Secretary
General who is committed to Western democracy. He is up for re-election before
the end of this year but whenever he leaves office, his successor is likely to
be a man of the third world (see box, page 68), and most probably a
representative of a one-party state.

As the United Nations prepares to decide whether to give Mr.  Waldheim an
unprecedented third term, he is surrounded by controversy. Conservative American
critics charge he is too responsive to pressure from the Soviet Union and the
third world.  Third-world critics maintain he accommodates too readily to
superpower demands. Almost everyone complains that he will not move without a
consensus, which often means he cannot move at all. United Nations employees
feel he doesn't pay enough attention to his administrative duties, and morale
among the staff is low. To critics of the United Nations itself, he symbolizes
that organization's shortcomings: its inability to resolve problems of war and
peace, its endless rheto ric, its failure to compel the 154 member nations to
submerge thei r parochial interests for the common good.

Despite all of this, Mr. Waldheim's supporters - and many of his critics
-believe he is the best available candidate. ''The problems here are so
complicated, and the points of view so divergent,'' says a Western ambassador,
''that no matter who was Secretary General, he couldn't do much more than
Waldheim.'' A third-world diplomat agrees, saying, ''He isn't an activist but
the big powers would never accept an activist. He has a talent for getting
people together and he has managed to keep the lid on this organization.''

Mr. Waldheim has not officially declared his candidacy because a would-be
Secretary General usually waits until member nations approach him. But during
his travels over the past year or so, he has been discreetly sounding out United
Nations members - at the 20th anniversary of the Nonaligned Group in New Delhi,
the Organization of African Unity summit in Nairobi and a summit of the Islamic
nations in Saudi Arabia. He also visited the capitals of the five permanent
members of the Security Council - the United States, the United Kingdom, France,
the Soviet Union and China.

Their support is decisive, since the Secretary General is appointed by the
General Assembly on the recommendation of the Security Council, which means any
of the five can veto a candidate. For the moment, none of the other candidates
now in the running seem able to command the backing of all five permanent
members. So, even though the great majority of the United Nations are
third-world countries and most would like one of their own to be Secretary
General, Mr.  Waldheim still seems to have the edge. nder the United Nations
Charter, the Secretary General is both the chief administrative officer and the
chief political executive. Each is a full-time job.  Mr. Waldheim's annual
salary is $158,340, or $91,556 after a United Nations assessment which is the
equivalent of taxes, and he gets a hospitality allowance of $22,500.

Mr. Waldheim's office suite includes a conference room large enough for meetings
with his two dozen or so top assistants, a private dining room in which he holds
working luncheons for ambassadors, visiting diplomats and other guests, a
bedroom he never uses and a bathroom. President John F. Kennedy once decided to
take a bath there - probably the first person who ever did - but when he ran the
tap water in the tub, it was brown with rust. Since then, somebody has been
assigned to run the water every day just in case another head of state decides
he wants a bath.

Almost as soon as Mr. Waldheim sits at his desk, he is on the telephone. His
voice - affable, solicitous, with its German accent and syntax - has become
familiar to practically every foreign minister and a good many heads of state.
''I rang up Al Haig,'' he says with obvious pleasure, ''and he assured me ...
.''

Mr. Waldheim enjoys being at the center, even though he may sometimes be
rebuffed. After a special Assembly session in which the United States and
Britain had resisted stiff economic demands from the poor countries, Mr.
Waldheim telephoned President Jimmy Carter, asking him to be more forthcoming.
The President was pleasant, but negative. Later, an American diplomat said
Washington felt the Secretary General had overstepped.

Mr. Waldheim is responsible for appointing and running the United Nations
Secretariat, the 15,000 men and women who work at New York headquarters and in
bureaus from Aden to Zimbabwe. The higher-ranking jobs in this international
civil service are supposed to be distributed equitably among United Nations
members, and one of Mr.Waldheim's biggest headaches is that all nations press
him for more and better posts. ''Every government wants its nationals in the
Secretariat,'' he says, ''and the ambassadors come to me all the time, often
with formal notes from their gove rnments, insisting on this job or that. I have
to spend hours and h ours figuring out how toimited number of good ones, I can't
satisfy everyone.''

''He shouldn't try,'' one of his aides says. ''He isn't nearly tough enough. He
ought to tell the governments, 'Go see my personnel director.' But he hates to
offend people.''

Mr. Waldheim also hates to dismiss people, and there are many incompetents in
the Secretariat. Still, he can only pick his staff from the candidates put
forth. Thus, if a government comes to him with a nominee unqualified to be a
nonpartisan international civil servant, Mr. Waldheim can reject him; but the
next one he is offered may not be an improvement.

Supervising the Secretariat is burdensome, and Mr. Waldheim is more interested
in the political side of his job, dealing with nations and trying to solve
conflicts. The Security Council and the General Assembly have fostered the myth
that the Secretary General is a kind of political Hercules, capable of doing
what sovereign governments cannot do. It is a very convenient myth beause it
allows governments to pass the b uck to him. In the last couple of years, the
Council and/ or the A ssembly have adopted resolutions asking Mr. Waldheim to
get Iran to fee the American hostages, get the Soviet troops out of Afghanistan,
get the Vietnamese out of Cambodia, get the Israelis out of the occupied
territories, get the South Africans out of Namibia, end apartheid , help the
Palestine Liberation Orgranization set up an independent s tate, end the war
between Iran and Iraq, bring the Greekand Turkish Cypriots together, and
facilitate world disarmanent and the transfer of resources from rich to poor
nations, among other things.

''When there is any possibility of solving a problem,'' Mr.  Waldheim tells an
interviewer, ''the governments involved do it themselves, either bilaterally or
through regional diplomacy. It is only when they can't figure out how to solve
it that they throw it to me. At least it shows they have confidence in my
readiness to tackle these problems and in my sincerity and nonpartisanship. But
I don't have the power to solve them. No Secretary General does.''

The Secretary General has no military forces (United Nations peacekeeping forces
are assigned to specific tasks by the Security Council), no capacity to take
economic measures, and very few political favors to give or withhold. Mr.
Waldheim cannot compel the Security Council or the General Assembly to act: They
are sovereign bodies made up of sovereign nations. When they do act, he cannot
compel member nations to obey.

And yet the Secretary General has a large capability for creating trouble. It
was the decison of U Thant of Burma, Mr. Waldheim's predecessor, to withdraw the
United Nations Emergency Force from the Sinai that touched off the 1967 war in
the Middle East. U Thant's predecessor, Dag Hammarskjold of Sweden, who was the
United Nations' most imaginative and forceful leader, created so much opposition
that he nearly paralyzed the United Nations. ''Everybody now thinks of
Hammarskjold as a huge success,'' says Brian Urquhart, United Nations Under
Secretary General for Special Political Affairs. ''The fact is that he became a
total lame duck. The Russians and the French wouldn't speak to him and a lot of
other people didn't want anything to do with him. By the end of his tenure he
was out.'' And Mr.  Hammarskjold's predecessor, Trygve Lie of Norway, who was
the first Secretary General, so enraged the Russians that they vetoed his
reelection.

Mr. Waldheim, aware of his predecessors' problems, is determined to touch base
with all the power blocs before he takes major initiatives.

And this is exactly what the power blocs want. While one hears talk at the
United Nations about the need for a strong Secretary General, most governments
would agree with the former American delegate, Donald F. McHenry, who said,
''Yes, the U.S. would like a strong Secretary General - so long as he agreed
with everything we wanted done.'' In explaining Mr. Waldheim's approach to his
job, his associates invariably go back to his Austrian background. Born in the
village of St. Andrae-Wordern in 1918, just after the armistice and the collapse
of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, he grew up during years of economic and
political travail. ''Our family was always hungry,'' he says now. ''Almost
everyone in Austria was always hungry.''

When he was in his teens, Marxist-conservative civil war broke out, which the
Austrian Nazis exploited to increase their power. Mr.  Waldheim says that his
father, a conservative Roman Catholic school official, spoke out publicly
against the Nazis and he himself joined the anti-Nazi Austrian Youth Movement.

When Mr. Waldheim was 19, Hitler annexed his country. H is father was detained
by the Gestapo; when released, h e was not permitted to work and the family was
almost penniless. ''W e lived in constant fear,'' Mr. Waldheim says. ''My father
had to present himself to the authorities regularly. We were always shadowe d by
the police.''

At the beginning of World War II, young Kurt was drafted into the German Army.
''Fortunately,'' Mr. Waldheim says, ''I didn't last long. My unit moved to the
Russian front in the win-ter of 1942. I was badly wounded in the ankle, I
couldn't walk, and they gave me a medical discharge.''

The fact that Mr. Waldheim served in the German Army has led to charges that he
supported the Nazis. ''What nonsense!'' he says. ''I was against the Nazis.''
His aides maintain that the charges were circulated by the Israeli Mission to
the United Nations, but Yehuda Z. Blum, the Israeli delegate, denies this
indignantly: ''We don't believe Waldheim ever supported the Nazis and we never
said he did.  We have many differences with him, but that isn't one of them.''

After Mr. Waldheim's discharge, he studied law - and he learned other lessons as
well. In Nazi Austria, caution and accommodation were the keys to survival. ''We
had always to be very discreet and wehad to appear to conform,'' Mr. Waldheim
recalls.

The one happy note of those years was meeting a fellow law student, Elisabeth
Ritschl in 1943. They were married a year later and, soon after Austria's
liberation in 1945, their first child, Liselotte, was born. ''I remember
thinking that her coming on the heels of a terrible war was a repetition of
myown beginning,'' Mr. Waldheim wrote in a memoir, ''and I prayed ... the world
might fashion an abiding peace. ...''

Postwar Austria was occupied by rival Western and Soviet forces, and young
Waldheim, who had a job in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, observed his
country's leaders cautiously and skillfully balancing the interests of both
sides. He would remember those lessons, too. When the occupation ended in 1955,
Austria was committed to democracy at home, and to neutrality in international
affairs.

And so was Mr. Waldheim. By then a rising Austrian diplomat, he avoided
partisanship even in domestic affairs. Although he was politically conservative,
he worked with the Socialists as well as the conservative People's Party. In
1964, a coalition government appointed Mr. Waldheim to be Austria's United
Nations delegate; in 1968, he was named Foreign Minister in a conservative
government; after the conservatives lost the 1970 election, the Socialist
Chancellor, Bruno Kreisky, a good friend of Mr. Waldheim's, asked him to become
United Nations delegate again. The following year, Mr.  Waldheim ran for
President of Austria as an independent, backed by the People's Party, and he
lost narrowly. Eight months later, he was elected Secretary General of the
United Nations.  Mr. Waldheim's performance as Secretary General over the years
gives observers the impression that he has developed certain patterns of
behavior, responses to the demands on him, which might fancifully be categorized
as the Waldheim Rules of Diplomacy - although he certainly would not put it that
way:

(1) The Secretary General must stay on good terms with everybody (despite
American wishes, the United Nations is not an extension of the State
Department). ''Since I am responsible to the whole U.N. membership,'' Mr.
Waldheim says, ''I can't take sides. Even when I myself believe one side is
right, I must take into account the positions of all the member nations. This
isn't a matter of expediency. If I antagonize one of the parties to a conflict,
how can I get it to cooperate with me in solving the conflict?''

Take the conflict over Afghanistan. The General Assembly twice called for the
withdrawal of Soviet troops, and expressed the ''hope'' that the Secretary
General would appoint a special representative to go to Afghanistan to promote a
political settlement.

The Americans immediately pressed Mr. Waldheim to name a prestigious
international mediator to keep the heat on the Russians.  But the Soviets told
Mr. Waldheim that, since they had opposed the Assembly resolution, they wouldn't
cooperate with a special representative - that is, let him into Kabul. They also
said, in effect, ''Look, Mr. Secretary General, since we won't give our consent,
there's no point in trying to send anybody to Afghanistan.  Anyway, you aren't
obliged to name a representative. The Assembly only said it hoped you would.''

''One side tells me, 'Implement the resolution,' '' Mr. Waldheim says. ''The
other side says, 'No, we don't want it.' Of course, I respect the General
Assembly's wishes, but I have to make sure my efforts to implement them will be
constructive. Do you remember the crisis over Hungary in 1957? The United Na-
tions sent Sir Leslie Munro there, but the Russians never let him in. Year after
year, he would report back to the General Assembly and say, 'I'm sorry, but I
couldn't go there, they wouldn't admit me.' Is that really what the Assembly
wants to happen with Afghanistan? Of course not.''

Last winter, after considerable discussion, Mr. Waldheim decided to name as his
representative to Afghanistan one of his closest aidesat the United Nations,
Javier Perez de Cuella r of Peru. The Soviets have allowed him to visit Kabul
twice, and la st month he got their client regime in Kabul to agree
conditionally to discuss a Soviet troop withdrawal along with international gua
rantees of Afghanistan's neutrality and the return of it s refugees.

Mr. Waldheim concedes this is not a major achievement, but he believes that the
Russians just might have ambivalent feelings about being bogged down in a
guerrilla war in Afghanistan and, if they have, his nonpartisan approach might
help them get out.

(2) Quiet diplomacy is the way to get things done.  ''Governments don't like to
be told publicly how they should behave any more than people do,'' Mr. Waldheim
says. ''So I always try first to appeal privately for what I want, using quiet
diplomacy. If this doesn't work, and if I believe a public statement wouldbe
helpful, then I make it. It isn't true what some of the media say, that I'm too
cautious.''

In human-rights cases, his ''quiet diplomacy'' has often been helpful, although
he is reluctant to disclose the concessions he has won for fear of jeopardizing
future efforts. One concession, disclosed by other sources, came from the
Pinochet Government in Chile. After the rightist coup, Mr. Waldheim sent Under
Secretary General Bradford Morse (now head of the United Nations Development
Program), to Santiago. Subsequently, the regime released a number of political
prisoners.

But many governments have ignored Mr. Waldheim's efforts. For example, Pakistan
rejected his appeals - first made privately, then publicly, - to spare the life
of former Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.

Quite often, Mr. Waldheim's quiet, nonjudgmental approach annoys Western
countries. Two years ago, he called an international conference to help the
Vietnamese boat people, those hundreds of thousands of refugees driven out of
Vietnam by the Hanoi Government, who took to sea in small boats. The Western
powers wanted to use the conference as a platform to publicize Vietnam's
brutality, but Hanoi made it plain that if there were any political speeches, it
would not participate. Mr. Waldheim therefore decided that the conference would
be exclusively ''humanitarian,'' and he effectively barred anti-Hanoi speeches.
Largely as a result, however, he was able to persuade Hanoi to stop the forced
migrations.

Mr. Waldheim's stance on Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia has also disturbed the
West. The General Assembly asked him to convene an international conference to
achieve a political settlement in Cambodia, including withdrawal of Vietnamese
troops. Mr. Waldheim delayed, telling associates he believed a public conference
would only stiffen Vietnam's resistance. But the West, and some Asian countries,
felt he was stalling so as not to antagonize Vietnam's patron, the Soviet Union.
Reluctantly, Mr. Waldheim called the conference in July. It got no place; Hanoi
is still refusing to budge.

(3) The Secretary General can be a good connection.  Early last May, Secretary
of State Haig telephoned Mr. Waldheim and asked if he could get a message to
Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. leader (the United States refuses to have direct
contact with the Palestine Liberation Organization). Ambassador Philip C. Habib
was in the Middle East, trying to effect an agreement between Syria and Israel
over the Syrian missiles in Lebanon. Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr.
was afraid an outbreak of P.L.O. violence would bring Israeli retaliation and
jeopardize the Habib mission. Therefore, could Mr. Waldheim persuade Mr. Arafat
to exercise restraint?

Mr. Waldheim's assistant, Under Secretary General Urquhart, called in the P.L.O.
representative at the United Nations, who telephoned Mr. Arafat in Beirut. Mr.
Arafat said to tell the Secretary General he would agree for two reasons:
because Mr. Waldheim had asked him to, and because he didn't want to give the
Israelis any pretext to blame the P.L.O. if the Habib mission failed.

Soon afterward, the Israelis attacked P.L.O. positions in south Lebanon and Mr.
Arafat sent a message to Mr. Waldheim asking what the United Nations expected
him to do. Mr. Waldheim called Mr. Haig; he learned that a message had been sent
to Prime Minister Menachem Begin asking him to avoid any further escalation.

Again in July, after serious fighting had erupted in south Lebanon, Mr. Waldheim
contacted the P.L.O., and Mr. Arafat said he would agree to a cease-fire,
provided Israel would, too. Shortly afterward, Ambassador Habib negotiated the
cease-fire agreement with Israel.

Although the Secretary General often acts as an international middleman, he is
rarely called on to risk his life, as Mr. Waldheim did during his efforts to
free the American hostages in Iran.

After Iran ignored several calls from the S ecurity Council, Mr.  Waldheim went
to Teheran. The Iranians asked him to visit a cemetery for the Shah's victims,
and there he was gree ted by several hundred demonstrators who rushed his car,
threatening to overturn it. Mr.  Waldheim tried to get out to lay a wreath on
the graves, but Iranian security guards pushed him back in and the ca r sped
off. ''I was gladto get out of there alive,'' Mr. Waldheim say s now. ''But I
wasn't somuch frightened as angry - that these people should be threatening
officials of the United Nations. That brought home to me the emotionalism of
that country - if I needed any reminders.'' Later that day, there was another
demonstra tion against him. That evening, he was told that Ayatollah Ruhollah
Khomeini would not see him, and that he would not be allowed to visi t the
hostages in the American Embassy. He left Iran the next day.

Subsequently, with Washington's approval, Mr. Waldheim set up a commission of
inquiry to go to Iran to investigate the Shah's misdeeds. In return, Foreign
Minister Sadegh Ghotzbadeh agreed the hostages would be released. ''I still have
a letter Ghotzbadeh wrote me confirming the main aspects of the plan,'' Mr.
Waldheim says. ''He and President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr wanted to solve the
problem, but they couldn't deliver the hostages because the militants refused to
give them up. ''

After the hostages were finally released, Mr. Waldheim was accused by Pierre
Salinger, the ABC correspondent and former White House press secretary, of
behaving less than heroically and hampering American negotiations with Iran. For
his part, Mr. Waldheim has letters from one of the French attorneys involved in
the negotiations and from Hamilton Jordan, President Carter's aide, saying the
Salinger charges were inaccurate. Former Secretary of State Cyrus R.  Vance
warmly praises Mr. Waldheim, saying: ''He went far out of his way to help us and
I'll be everlastingly grateful to him for the efforts he put out.''

(4) All United Nations members are equal, but some are less equal than others.
On issues involving South Africa and Israel, the pariahs of the United Nations,
Mr. Waldheim appears to have abandoned his nonpartisanship. He routinely
denounces racism and repression in South Africa, but he is much more guarded in
criticizing the humanrights violations of the United Nations' third-world and
Communist majority.

He often singles out Israel for blame, failing to note that many of Israel's
actions are retaliatory. When the Israeli commando unit staged its dramatic
rescue of the Israeli hostages at Entebbe airport in Uganda in 1976, Mr.
Waldheim called it ''a serious violation of the national sovereignty of a United
Nations member state,'' only later adding that humanitarian and moral issues had
also to be taken into account. At an Arab League dinner a year ago, he endorsed
Palestinian statehood without mentioning Israel's right to exist.  Israeli
violence in southern Lebanon has consistently drawn his rebukes; P.L.O. violence
is often played down or unidentified. He denounced Israel for attacking the
Iraqi nuclear reactor but he did not criticize Iraq for attacking Iran.

Most of Mr. Waldheim's official statements on the Middle East are drafted by
Under Secretary General Urquhart, who is known to be sympathetic to the
Palestinians. Although he stresses that neither he nor Mr. Waldheim is
anti-Israel, they both obviously reflect the views of the United Nations
majority, which is anti-Israel.

Mr. Waldheim supports Israel's right to exist within ''secure and recognized
boundaries,'' as Security Council Resolution 242 puts it, but because 242 treats
the Palestinians only as a refugee problem, he thinks that either it should be
amended or else the Council should adopt a complementary resolution to take
account of Palestinian rights.

He also believes Israel and the P.L.O. must recognize each other's right to
exist: ''The problem is who does it first. I told Arafat I think it would be
best if they did it simultaneously. Arafat replied that recognition was his last
card and, once he plays it, he won't have it anymore. Then there's also the fact
that the hard-liners in the P.L.O., just as in Israel, don't want recognition.
So Arafat probably could not survive politically if he were to accept Israel
without in turn getting Israel and the U.S. to accept the P.L.O. So I'm afraid
recognition is a matter for the future. I'd be very happy if for now we could
maintain the cease-fire in southern Lebanon and make some permanent arrangements
to stablilize the situation there.''

(5) The S.G. can move boldly - when nobody is opposed.  One of Mr. Waldheim's
proudest achievements was his swift dispatch of a peace-keeping force to the
Middle East during the 1973 war. He enjoys describing it:

''The day the fighting started, Henry Kissinger rang me up - Kissinger, who had
never had any use for the United Nations before. He said, 'Kurt, what are we g
oing to do? I hope you'll use your connections wit h the different parties in
the area and I'll use mine.'

''That was the beginning of my close relations with Kissinger, and also the
beginning of his appreciation of the United Nations' value.  After the initial
success of the Egyptians, the Israelis counter-attacked, crossing the Suez Canal
and encircling the Egyptian Third Army. Suddenly, there were reports that the
Soviets were sending troops to Egypt to save the Egyptian Army. The Americans
immediately put their forces on worldwide alert and people feared World War III
might be at hand. The Security Council asked me to send a peace-keeping force to
the area to head off the crisis. Normally, it would take weeks to organize such
a force. But I decided on my own to take the United Nations peace-keeping force
that was in Cyprus and fly it to Egypt immediately. Within 48 hours they took up
their positions... It sounds like a small thing now, but if we hadn't got there
fast, who knows? Certainly, the Americ ans felt the Russians were ready to go
in. But I was able to move swiftly and decisively only because the parties
involved in the conflict wanted me to.''

When Mr. Waldheim thinks the parties want his help, he can, indeed, move
effectively. Repeatedly, he has brought the Greek and Turkish Cypriots together
for peace talks; while he has not yet achieved a peace agreement, he has
prevented renewed fighting. He helped repair a diplomatic break between France
and Guinea. He helped India and Bangladesh resolve a dispute over the Ganges
River, and he helped Bangladesh and Burma solve a crisis over refugees. He is
working to help Malta and Libya solve their conflict over oil drilling in the
Mediterranean. He orgjanized massive United Nations relief operations in
Bangladesh and Cambodia, among other places, which saved millions of lives.  Mr.
Waldheim feels the United Nations, during his tenure, has made three major
contributions: It has helped to avoid an armed conflict between the superpowers
and to control local conflicts; it has served as a catalyst for
decolonialization in southern Af-rica (''and we will continue that struggle
until we have won it''); and it has begun to make the world aware of the need
for a new economic relationship between rich and poor countries. He believes the
United Nations must now become the principle instrument for global economic
reform:

''We have a moral obligation to end the appalling poverty in the developing
world and to give people a fairer share of the world's resources. But besides
that, there are the pragmatic aspects. The industrial countries are suffering
from inflation, unemployment, underproduction, ills that can be solved only
through global decisions. I speak to everyone I can about this, pressing for
action - Helmut Schmidt, (Francois) Mitterrand, Mrs. (Margaret) Thatcher,
President Reagan.''

Whatever Mr. Waldheim does about any issue before the United Nations strikes
some countries as too little, others as too much.  The Secretary General is also
a handy scapegoat for the many critics of the United Nations. ''You look around
and you ask why the United Nations isn't functioning better,'' says Baron
Rudiger von Wechmar, of West Germany, president of the last General Assembly,
''and then you answer that it's because of the Secretary General. But you're
really venting your anger at the United Nations on this poor fellow from little
Austria.''

In addition, however, many diplomats feel that Mr. Waldheim has not built up the
stature of the United Nations, and that his leadership has not been bold or
imaginative enough. The problem is that everybody has different ideas about what
he should do. ''We'd like him to knock heads together,'' a Western delegate
said, ''and insist that the majority stop passing the same resolutions year
after year, stop spending United Nations money on partisan causes and
controversial liberation movements.''

''He defers too much to the West,'' an African said. ''He should find a way to
force the U.S. to act against South Africa and Israel.''

''It's not enough for the S.G. to go to Iran and Iraq and tell them to stop
fighting.'' an Islamic delegate says. ''He should have creative ideas about how
to make them stop fighting.''

Obviously, there is only a small margin of flexibility any Secretary General
could use without violating the requirement of even-handedness. A bolder man who
tried to move the organization along the lines of his own convictions would
greatly aggravate the United Nations' problems. Neither of the superpowers could
tolerate a referee who acted like a partisan or who refused to take its national
interests into account.

Although Mr. Waldheim insists that he doesn't mind the criticism, he often
complains to associates that his efforts are not appreciated, misunderstood.
Looking at a painting in his office of a fisherman on a riverbank, he will say,
''How I envy that man his peace, I really do.''

He really doesn't, of course. The United Nations is practically his whole life.
He is devoted to his family - his wife, Elisabeth (called Cissy), and his three
children - but he spend s almost all his time at the United Nations. Mrs.
Waldheim is his ' 'safety valve,'' and he talks over many of his concerns with
her. A t all, handsome woman, sheis trained in the law, highly intelligent, am
bitious for her husband and fiercely protective of him.

Their social life revolves, naturally, around the United Nations, but their
favorite evenings are those spent at home alone, listening to Mozart or Verdi.
If the Secretary General's eyes aren't too tired, he'll read an Agatha Christie
detective story.

The Waldheims have a home in Austria near Salzburg, but they seldom get there.
They also have the use of a friend's house in Connecticut where they spend
occasional weekends and where Mr. Waldheim rides horseback. Over the Christmas
holidays, they usually take a house on Florida's west coast.

Both the Waldheims are very much involved with the United Nations in human term
s. When one of Mr. Waldheim's secretaries left to get married, they gave her a
dinner party for 60 people at their home.  When another staff member, an
unmarried woman, got pregnant and decided to have the baby, the Waldheims
invited her to stay with them during her pregnancy.

Considering that Mr. Waldheim advocates radical economic and social change, his
attitude toward women is surprisingly old-fashioned.  Once, when he was helping
two countries to resolve a dispute, he said to one of the negotiators, a
hard-headed young woman, ''Now, my dear, don't forget to use your feminine
charm. ...''

At the United Nations, Mr. Waldheim's closest associates include a Briton, a
Pakistani, a Somalian, an Ecuadorean, an American, a Yugoslav, a Frenchman and
several Austrians - a mini-United Nations.  Probably his most trusted advisor is
Under Secretrary General Urquhart of Great Britain, knowledgeable, resourceful,
articulate, more creative than Mr. Waldheim, less accommodating.

Mr. Urquhart, who has worked for the United Nations since it began, says of Mr.
Waldheim, ''In terms of usefulness, not glamour, he's actually been the best
Secretary General. He's done what none of the others did, kept on working terms
with almost everyone, which is essential. He also manages to get people together
in a reasonably constructive spirit and helps them find areas of agreement.
People are always underrating him.''

Just last June, Kurt Waldheim quietly, diplomatically, helped the United States
and Iraq reach agreement on a resolution condemning Israel for its attack on
Iraq's nuclear reactor. At that time, some of the so-called nonaligned delegates
were pressing for Security Council sanctions against Israel, hoping to force an
American veto and widen the split between the United States and the Islamic
countries. Mr. Waldheim introduced the American delegate, Mrs. Jeane J.
Kirkpatrick, to the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Saadun Hamadi; he sat with them for
three days during intensive negotiations, making discreet suggestions, providing
the right ambiance. When the resolution was finally drafted and approved by the
Security Council, Mr. Hamadi and Mrs. Kirkpatrick were lavishly praised. Hardly
anybody mentioned Mr. Waldheim's role.

Salim Ahmed Salim, 39, Tanzania's Foreign Minister, former United Nations
delegate, former General Assembly president. Able, articulate, Marxist-oriented,
pro-Chinese (when the Assembly admitted Communist China to the United Nations in
1971 over American protests, Mr. Salim danced in the aisle). Washington and
London are concerned about his militant support of third-world causes, but they
have not yet decided whether to veto him.  Carlos Ortiz de Rozas, 55, Argentine
ambassador to Britain, former United Nations delegate. Competent, experienced -
especially in disarmament negotiations. In the 1971 race for Secretary General,
he received more votes than Mr. Waldheim but was vetoed by the Russians because
they distrusted Argentina. With the recent American grain embargo, however,
Argentina became Moscow's breadbasket and the Soviet Union might now look more
favorably on him.  Sir Shridath (Sonny) Ramphal, 53, of Guyana. Secretary
General of the Commonwealth, former Guyanan Foreign Minister and United Nations
delegate. Highly regarded by many Western countries, but the Russians and some
Africans consider him too close to white Commonwealth nations.  Tommy T.B. Koh,
44, Singapore's United Nations delegate and president of the Law of the Sea
Conference. Articulate, nonpartisan, competent, strong personality. Moscow
considers him anti-Soviet and would probably veto him.  Jorge Castaneda, 59,
Foreign Minister of Mexico. Competent but may not get his own country's support
because President Jose Lopez Portillo might decide to run for Secretary General
one day, and if a Mexican were elected now, it would spoil his chances.
Alejandro Orfila, 56, Argentine Secretary General of the Organization of
American States in Washington and former Ambassador to the United States. Has
held many diplomatic posts, but never served at the United Nations Latin
American colleagues are pressing his candidacy. - J.R.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Waldheim while flying over Middle East photo of
Waldheim with Peking representative, Chen Chu photo of Waldheim with Iranian
officials photo of Mr. and Mrs. Waldheim photo of Salim Ahmed Salim photo of
Carlos Ortiz de Rozas photo of Sir Shridath Ramphal photo of Tommy Koh photo of
Jorge Castaneda

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARKETING THE PRESIDENT

SECTION: Section 6; Page 43, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4590 words


Sidney Blumenthal, author of ''The Permanent Campaign,'' is writing a book on
the economic and intellectual roots of Reaganism. By Sidney Blumenthal s
Washington sweltered through a July heat wave, Richard S. Beal was working on
the outline of a

Presidential speech.  Beal is not a speechwriter - he is a pollster, an expert
in market research. And the speech he was working on was President Reagan's
State of the Union address, which is to be delivered only next January.

''We lay out the scenarios for winning and losing,'' says Beal.  ''Our work
concerns the identification of issues, goals and principles at the macro
level.'' By analyzing polling results, he believes he can tell what public views
on what questions are likely to prevail at a given time in the future; this
helps the President decide how to proceed.

''The whole issue of running the Presidency in the modern age is control of the
agenda,'' he says. ''We deal with what ought to be the buildup of things six to
nine months out. It's a process question.''

Ronald Reagan is governing America by a new strategic doctrine - the permanent
campaign. He is applying in the White House the techniques he employed in
getting there. Making more effective use of media and market research than any
previous President, he has brought into the White House the most sophisticated
team of pollsters, media masters and tacticians ever to work there. They have
helped him to transcend entrenched institutions like the Congress and the
Washington press corps to appeal directly to the people.

Just as the methods are new, the language is new. Unlike the old politicos who
talked of party bosses delivering the goods and mobilizing the party faithful,
Reagan's men converse about ''open windows'' (the relative openness of public
opinion to Presidential initiatives), ''targets of opportunity'' (events or
issues that can be quickly taken advantage of), ''sequencing'' (the timing and
order of a series of actions), ''resistance ratios'' (the degree to which the
public accepts Reagan and what he is doing) and the need to be ''proactive''
rather than reactive.

The new order was not, of course, created overnight. It has been evolving with
the growth of television, which enabled political leaders to reach the voters
more efficiently than through precinct captains; and Presidents from John F.
Kennedy on have been relying increasingly on computers and pollsters in
following the fluctuations of voter sentiment. But with Reagan - the leader as
''Communicator in Chief'' - the new politics is in full flower.  Reagan's
stunning success in shaping public opinion and transforming his ideas into law
has derived to great extent from the new techniques.

This does not mean that the President goes by the polls rather than by his own
conservative ideology. The polls don't change his beliefs or shape his policies;
they tell him how to plan his strategy. And the planning is generally precise
enough to encompass what he will do and say six months, or more, in advance.

Private polling for politicians bears only a faint resemblance to the standard,
publicly reported horse-race polls on who is ahead and who is slipping.
Political polling is a scouting operation seeking to identify groups that feel
intensely on any issue. It reveals which groups are wavering on which issues for
which reasons. It tells which issue s can be prudently avoided and which can be
pressed, and it suggests ways to blunt, divert or win over the opposition.
Polling has become an essential guide for the distribution of a politician's
financial and political resources, the basis on which he constructs his image.

Consider, for example, Reagan's Presidential campaign. On Oct. 9, 1980, the
candidate was handed an internal memo, ''Seven Conditions of Victory.'' The
author was Richard B. Wirthlin, whose firm, Decision Making Information, is
under contract to the Republican National Committee and who has been conducting
polls for Reagan since 1968. Wirthlin advised: ''Focus campaign resources to
reinforce the Governor's image strengths that embody the Presidential values a
majority of Americans think are important.  ... At the same time, we must
minimize the perception that he is dangerous and uncaring.''

The candidate took Wirthlin's advice. The polls had revealed that many moderates
whose votes were needed for victory had difficulty visualizing the Republican
candidate as President. Reagan's television ads proceeded to stress what
Wirthlin called ''leader perceptions,'' and Reagan's inauguration as Governor of
California in 1967 was depicted in docudrama fashion, underlining the themes of
competence, credibility and decisiveness. And when Reagan addressed the camera,
he was a talking head - cool, calm, dry. The object was to make him appear more
Presidential than President Carter; this would enable him to fend off Carter's
scathing attacks and gain the adherence of the necessary ''voter cohort
targets,'' in the language of the memo.

Immediately after Reagan won the Presidency, his campaign began turning itself
into a governing operation. Wirthlin was named planning director of the
transition office. On his recommendation, Reagan created an Office of Planning
and Evaluation, and Richard Beal, Wirthlin's assistant for the last eight years
(and a former professor of international relations at Brigham Young University),
was put at its head. Wirthlin supervised the preparation of a memo, ''Initial
Action Plan,'' outlining a strategy for ''establishing direction'' instead of
just reacting to events, and the memo provided the basis for what became known
internally as ''The First 90 Days Project.''

The project's chief was David R. Gergen, former managing editor of the Yale
Daily News, speechwriter for President Nixon, communications director for
President Ford, managing editor of the influential magazine Public Opinion,
George Bush campaign operative and the adviser who told Reagan to end his debate
with President Carter with the penetrating line: ''Are you better off now than
you were four years ago?'' Gergen swiftly assembled a thick volume, which he
called ''The First 100 Days,'' listing the events, both major and trivial, of
the first 100 days of every President since Franklin D.  Roosevelt.

''We drew three conclusions,'' he says. ''One, the first 100 days is the time
during which the President establishes his Presidential persona. Two, the
general character of the Administration is established and lasts at least the
first term. And, three, the President is vulnerable to making a big mistake, the
obvious example being the Bay of Pigs or Carter's energy program, which he never
made good on.''

Both the Wirthlin memo and the Gergen book advised the new Administration,
according to Gergen, ''to keep a simple focus and go strong on the economy.
Don't come up with other mischief.'' Other moves, whether on social issues like
abortion or on foreign-policy problems, would distract from the main event and -
so the argument went - tend to weaken the Presidency.

The advice was accepted; polling and marketing were entrenched in their central
role. ''The Reagan people have merged their communications with their political
needs in a tighter definition than you've seen in previous Administrations,''
says Patrick Caddell, pollster to former President Carter. ''I could kiss them
for using thematic approaches. They really do understand the importance of
themes as the great projecting force of political management.''

The political managers of the Reagan White House are the troika of Michael K.
Deaver and Edwin Meese 3d, counselors to the President, and James A. Baker 3d,
the White House chief of staff. The ''communications needs'' are served by
Wirthlin, who makes personal presentations to the President; Beal, who assesses
the Louis Harris, George Gallup and other public polls and reports directly to
Meese, and Robert M. Teeter, head of Market Opinion Re-search and pollster to
former President Ford, who also advises the White House.

In the middle of this enterprise stands the 6-foot-5-inch figure of David
Gergen, whose official title is Assistant to the President for Communications.
Having taken over from press secretary James S. Brady when Brady was wounded
during the assassination attempt against the President, Gergen now serves as
chief White House spokesman, oversees the operations of the press and
communications offices and plays a highly in fluential role in setting strategy
a nd policy. Apart from the troika, no one on the White House staff s ees more
of Reagan than Gergen.

While Reagan's aides present him with varying scenarios and ideas, suggesting
forums where he might have the greatest impact, the President alone decides what
he will say. ''The staff,'' says a Presidential aide, ''doesn't presume to tell
him, if it's a question of how you persuade people. No one challenges him,
because he's far better than anyone on the staff.''

''Everything here is built on the idea that the President's success depends on
grass-roots support,'' says Gergen. Reagan, according to this concept, mobilizes
the people personally through television ap pearances. Polls provide him with
the rudiments of a script. He ha s a craftsman's sense of how to translate the
''numbers'' - what the polls reveal - into a dramatic narrative replete with
Aesopian anecdotes. The former actor is more than the White House l eading man;
he's the auteur.

Although Reagan needs no coaching, he retains a technical media consultant. Mark
I. Goode, a former Hollywood television producer, has an office in the old
Executive Office Building next to the White House. His credits include the
Johnny Cash and Pat Paulsen shows. (In 1968, comedian Paulsen spoofed the
candidates with a series of ''Presidential campaign'' speeches on television.)
Goode has also served as a consultant to Presidents Nixon and Ford. ''The act of
communicating on television or radio is as natural to Reagan as picking up the
phone is to us,'' he says. ''Reagan's so good, the job is terribly easy. He's
been at it all his life. He's a total pro.'' Reagan's advisers admit that their
strategy does not always function perfectly. For instance, they say, there was a
slip-up on El Salvador. The Reagan Administration, as aides recount that
episode, was sincere in its strongly held belief that the Soviet Union was
intervening in the Western Hemisphere by supplying the Salvadoran insurgents
with Soviet-bloc arms and Cuban training. The President's political strategists
saw in this an opportunity to enhance Reagan's popularity by playing on the
national security theme. The Administration launched a full-scale campaign
portraying the Salvadoran situation as a crucial confrontation between the
United States and the Soviet Union.

But, to the strategists' dismay, Wirthlin's polls showed Reagan's support
dwindling as a direct result of the rising sense of crisis.  Women, especially,
were mistrustful of Reagan's stand on El Salvador. They had been a problem to
him throughout the campaign, and now, barely a month into his term, he was again
raising their suspicions.  (''Women are more concerned with the possibility of a
conflict,'' says Wirthlin. ''They look at building up defenses with less support
than men.'')

The President's strategists were further alarmed by the fire bell clanged by the
media. ''The White House did not appreciate how rapidly El Salvador would take
off in the minds of the press as a Vietnam,'' says a Presidential assistant.
''We were astonished at how the news media treated it. We didn't think it was a
Vietnam. But when it became apparent it was going to play that way, we had to
low-key the issue. It would drain support from the President's economic
program.''

Gergen had an aide draw up a chart comparing the placement and amount of time
being given on the network news to El Salvador and the economic program. The
higher up the story and the longer it runs, the greater its importance, in the
White House view, as a public issue.  The President's strategists see themselves
in constant competition with network-news producers over what appears on the
screen and how it is emphasized. When El Salvador began receiving more time than
the economic plan, Gergen showed his colleagues his chart.  It was a turning
point in the crisis. The White House decided to ''lower the octave.'' One high
official apparently did not get the message soon enough. Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr., who, according to a Presidential aide, is ''outside the
circle of communications'' and sometimes ''gets out of sync,'' did not reverse
course immediately; his slowness kept the issue alive. When State Department
spokesmen began blaming the press for making too much of the El Salvador affair,
Haig, by this account, was not setting policy but belatedly falling into line.

After that, says a Presidential aide, the issue ''began to recede in the public
mind.'' The gap between Reagan's support among men and among women began to
close. At the height of the El Salvador crisis, in late February, it had widened
in Wirthlin's polls to more than 10 percent. By mid-July, it was only 5 percent.
''What was wrong with El Salvador,'' says Beal, ''was the packaging of the
activity, in terms of policy and presentation to the public. It wasn't well
staged or sequenced.'' ''Before Reagan was shot, his control of events was
slipping,'' says a White House official. ''Events were coming at us too fast. We
didn't quite have a firm grip.''

Moreover, the public impression of Reagan was somewhat foggy. ''His image
characteristics were those of a conservative right-wing Republican, fiscally
responsible, strong on defense,'' says Wirthlin. ''There tended to be feelings
he was brittle, no t warm. Reagan had carried a lot of that perceptual baggage
for a good part of 1980, too.''

Then came the assassination attempt. ''What the crisis was about in terms of
image was a totally unscripted event,'' says Beal. ''It focused uniquely on the
President. It did a lot to endear the President to the people. If the endearing
thesis is right, his personal attributes might never have come across without
the assassination attempt.''

The change in public opinion was reflected in Wirthlin's private polls. Before
the shooting, Reagan had been regarded favorably by Wirthlin's respondents by a
2-to-1 margin. After the incident, Wirthlin cond ucted another poll, asking:
''As a result of the assassination attempt, have you changed your opinion of
Ronald Reagan?'' Ele ven percent said they had. They admired his courage,
calmness and humor. Reagan's ''resistance ratio'' had improved; it was now 3 to
1 in his favor.

''The shooting gave us space to get back on top,'' says a Presidential aide.
Less than a week after the event, Deaver, the Presidential counselor, convened a
strategy meeting in Blair House to decide how this new ''political capital,'' in
the words of a White House official, ought to be invested. At Gergen's
suggestion, Reagan's first major public appearance after his hospitalization was
a speech on the economy before a joint session of Congress.

This decision was in keeping with overall strategy. To a greater extent than any
other policy initiative, the President's economic program was being conducted as
a national political campaign. Before the vote in the House of Representatives
on the competing Republican and Democratic tax-cut bills, the National
Republican Congressional Committee placed radio ads deriding Speaker Thomas P.
(Tip) O'Neill Jr. and promoting the President. (Wirthlin had been ''profiling''
O'Neill since 1978.) But ads were a minor tactic; control of what appeared in
newspapers and on television was seen as the decisive factor.

The key vote on the President's budget was set for June 25. Through a procedural
move, the House Democratic leadership hoped to make every individual cut in
funds subject to a separate vote, rather than have the budget voted on as a
whole; this would put many Congressmen on the spot when the interests of their
districts were at stake. It was June 23 before Reagan's advisers realized what
was going on. The President was then aboard Air Force One, on his way to deliver
a speech in San Antonio. Quickly, his Texas speech was amended to include a
reference to the happenings in the House.

But Reagan's strategists felt the wording was too vague. ''We felt the speech
hadn't turned the tide,'' says a Presidential assistant.  ''It was clear from
the leads on the wires.''

By this time, Reagan was in the air again, en route to California.His advisers,
both aboard the plane and back in Washington, debated whether the President
should make an-other speech at the Los Angeles airport or just release a
statement calling attention to the urgent situation. ''The critical thing,''
says a White House official, ''was to top our own story. The President decided
to issue a statement. We got it out just as the plane landed. We made two out of
the three networks.''

The White House also enlisted the support of its business allies, including the
Chamber of Commerce of the United States; the results amazed the White House.
''The surprising thing is the modern technology available to the special
interests,'' says a Presidential assistant. ''Within 24 hours, one Congressman
had 75 to 100 calls from businessmen in his district. You couldn't have done
that 15 years ago.''

The Democratic maneuver was defeated; passage of the Reagan budget was assured.
In the subsequent tax-cut battle, the White House once again enlisted business,
which repeated its tactics with a vengeance.  During the 1980 campaign, Reagan
pledged that he would nominate a woman to the Supreme Court. This was not done
casually: Wirthlin had surveyed public opinion on the issue and had determined
that the promise would contain no pitfalls.

''We knew it was an all-win situation,'' says Beal. ''We had some research on
the kind of nominee. We worked with the specifications.'' When Associate Justice
Potter Stewart decided to step down, he provided the Administration with the
opportunity it had planned for. Arizona Court of Appeals Judge Sandra Day
O'Connor fleshed out an image that had prior statistical existence. And
nominating her would contribute to closing Reagan's ''favorability gap'' between
men and women - which had widened during the El Salvador crisis. ''It was
done,'' says Baker, ''to help us with the woman problem and to keep a campaign
pledge.''

The nomination was also intended to exploit residual voter feelings about Jimmy
Carter, who, according to Wirthlin, ''is still in people's minds.'' The purpose
was to juxtapose a Carter who made promises he did not keep with a Reagan who
''delivered on a promise'' - demonstrating at the same time, as Wirthlin puts
it, that ''while he's a conservative he's not tradition-bound - he has broken
the moldid, living in the past.' ' Teeter, the pollster, adds: ''The contrast
with Carter is serving R eagan well.''

If the O'Connor nomination is viewed in the White House as a successful marriage
of style and substance, Reagan's initial plan for slashing Social Security
payments is remembered as its divorcement, which occurred because the issue
managed to escape the close scrutiny of Reagan's strategists. ''It's not a tidy
process,'' says a Presidential aide. ''Some events you create, some events you
go with the flow.'' But the Social Security proposal violated a basic rule
ofReagan's media and marketing brain trust: Don't let policy drive politics.

''The process here was bad on Social Security,'' says Baker. ''We rushed it
through. The political side never had a chance to consider it before the horse
left the barn.''

After this experience, the ''political side'' was determined to prevent any more
precipitate action. When the air traffic controllers struck, the President
himself had to be restrained.

Back in February, Wirthlin, who routinely polls on many issues, had taken a poll
on support for strikes by public employees. ''It was a wash,'' he says, meaning
that the numbers fell roughly even. But the controllers were a special case.
They had broken their no-strike oaths, they were isolated within organized
labor, and much of the public regarded their strike action as unreasonable.
Politically, the Administration could well afford to be tough.

To Reagan, however, this was not a political but a ''right-or-wrong moral
issue,'' says a Presidential assistant. The President wanted to serve the
controllers with a stern ultimatum before they walked off their jobs, giving
them 48 hours to withdraw their walkout threat or face dismissal. To his
advisers, this was going too far. They believed it would make him look
provocative, and they persuaded him to wait until the controllers struck to make
his statement - get back to work or lose your jobs.

In the interim, his strategists heightened the Administration's rhetoric, so
that the ultimatum, when it came, would sound logical.  And they adopted a
position aimed at countering the strikers' tactics. As far as the Administration
was concerned, the strike was over and it was Day One of rebuilding the system.

By the time the President escaped Washington for his summer vacation at Rancho
del Cielo, the Administration had fulfilled the broad objectives laid down by
Wirthlin's ''Initial Action Plan'' and Gergen's ''First 90 Days Project.''
Reagan's persona had been successfully established, his focus on the economy had
determined his Administration's character and he had made only one egregious
mistake -on Social Security.  The campaign method of governing implies a vision
of the voters as passive yet movable; supportive of bold action, yet possessing
shallow allegiances; willing to endorse new possibilities, yet afflicted with a
short attention span. Reagan's strategists believe it was the volatility of the
electorate that gave him his 1980 victory. ''People hold their party
identifications lightly,'' says Gergen. ''There are a lot of floaters in this
society, and they'll leave you fast. We want to cement in the leavers early.''

More than that, his advisers see President Reagan as the man who, with their
help, can bring about a long period of Republican dominance. Their prescription
for achieving this end turns conventional Republican wisdom on its head.

In 1969, in his seminal book ''The Emerging Republican Majority,'' Kevin P.
Phillips argued that the G.O.P. could become the dominant party by exploiting
social issues. He contended that blue-collar and Roman Catholic voters could be
won over by playing on ethnic and regional rivalries, and he viewed the Sun Belt
as the potential bastion of Republican strength. Richard Nixon's landslide in
1972 was seen by many Republicans as fulfillment of this thesis, and Reagan's
1980 victory appeared to offer climactic proof. A Sun Belt candidate had been
sup-ported by a burgeoning new right that owed its spectacular growth to the
exploitation of social issues.

Reagan's advisers, however, believe they have gained about as much as they can
from social issues. At a certain measurable point, they believe, these issues
can work against the Administration. That point, they feel, has probably been
reached. ''The Phillips thesis,'' says Baker, ''is deader than a doornail.''

The President's strategists do not want him to lend more than rhetorical support
to farouche new-right causes. Involving him deeply in an issue like abortion
would seem to pit him against opponents of the new right and thus counteract the
formation of a new Republican majority. As Baker says, ''There are some issues
that are political losers. Abortion cuts both ways hard. If you come down one
way or theocial issues are polarizing. No President can govern effectively who
can't build consensus.'' ''The social issues,'' says Gergen, ''are the ones that
are divisive. Those are the issues on which this coalition could fracture.''

The strategists' goal, in short, is consensus; the way to achieve it is by
focusing on the economy. ''The Phillips theory was to divide and then put the
pieces back together,'' says Teeter. ''You don't have to do that with economic
issues. The Democrats taught us that.''

Gergen agrees: ''The issues that unite people are economic in nature.'' The
President's radical program of deep budget cuts and supply-side tax reductions
is intended to do more than resolve the country's economic problems. It is the
Administration's chosen instrument for achieving a realignment of party
preferences and creating a long-term Republican majority.

Pat Caddell, President Carter's pollster, thinks the White House has little
choice. ''The Reagan people,'' he says, ''are under enormous tension to hold
what gave them the margin - essentially weak-preference Democrats. The only way
to hold these people is on economics.''

But there's a contradiction in the Reagan strategy. The President's men think
they are realigning party loyalties; they don't seem to appreciate that the
traditional party system itself is rapidly disintegrating. American politics is
no longer defined by stable parties and lifelong adherents, marshaled by
acknowledged party bosses who make use of patronage to maintain their partisan
troops.  Instead, there is a new system, in which party organizations for
reaching the voters are superseded by television. Supplanting the old bosses at
the commanding heights are the media and marketing specialists, who seek to
build support on specific issues by playing on the needs and feelings of
separate voter groups. An early example of this approach occurred in the 1972
Democratic primaries, when, on Caddell's advice, the liberal, antiwar candidate,
George McGovern, won the conservative blue-collar voters of New Hampshire by
appealing to their sense of being misunderstood and ignored.

The new political operators have hastened the weakening of the old-style
political machines by identifying discontent and appealing to it, in order to
create swing voters who can provide the margin of victory. Once elected,
candidates have to deal with shaky coalitions held together by momentary moods,
not stable party structures. They then must try to govern through permanent
campaigns. This is something more than the selling of the President - even of a
telegenic President able to project an attractive image. It has become an
inescapable necessity for Reagan, and probably for his successors.

The President's strategists are at the center of the new political age. At the
end of the day, they become spectators, seeing their performance tested by the
contents of the television news programs.  For the Reagan White House, every
night is election night on television. How an Administration action is placed
and portrayed on the network news often determines what initiative the President
will take the next day.

Gergen's office desk faces a television set, on top of which are stacked a dozen
newspapers, mostly unread. Like other important White House officials, Gergen
has a special hookup, so that he receives a broadcast of the CBS Evening News
from Baltimore a half-hour earlier than it is shown in Washington. On a recent
occasion, he turned the set on by remote control, saying, ''Let's see how
Casey's playing.'' Allegations of financial wrongdoing on the part of William J.
Casey, the new Director of Central Intelligence, had not been good news for the
Administration.

That night, the lead news item was about Britain. ''Good!'' Gergen exclaimed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of chief pollsterRichard Wirthlin photo of survey
expert Richard Beal photo of spokesman David Gergen photo of pollster Robert
Teeter photo of Reagan at news conference after assassination attempt

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAKING OF A LITERARY SHOGUN

SECTION: Section 6; Page 46, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5287 words


Paul Bernstein is a freelance writer based in California. By Paul Bernstein
efore the end of World War II, James Clavell was shot in the face, and wandered
lost in the jungle for days. A Malay village eventually took the British Army
officer in as one of its own, but he was later captured by the Japanese, and he
is convinced to this day that, if it had not been for the atom bombs dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki to end the war, he would have died in a Singapore prison
camp called Changi. Food amounted to a quarter-pound of rice per day, one egg
per week and occasional vegetables. Flies, heat, disease and unimaginably harsh
living conditions killed off 14 out of every 15 prisoners.

For 15 years after leaving Changi, Clavell talked to no one about it, not even
his wife, April, whom he married in 1952 shortly before they came to America,
where he began a career in screenwriting and directing. Long after he had
stopped carrying a can of sardines in his pocket at all times and fighting off
the instinct to forage in trash cans for food, bad dreams and a nervous stomach
kept him awake nights. In 1960, for reasons he cannot explain, stories about
Changi started spilling out of him. When the Writer's Guild went on strike,
giving him unexpected time off, his wife locked him in the den and told him he
could come out when he had written five pages. Twelve weeks later he had
finished ''King Rat.''

That was the beginning of the ''Asian Saga,'' which Clavell now plans as seven
volumes. The fourth volume, ''Noble House,'' entered the national best-seller
lists at No. 1 more than four months ago in the same week it was published and
has stayed near the top of the lists since. ''Shogun,'' the third volume, which
was adapted for television and seen by more viewers than any other miniseries in
television history except ''Roots,'' has now sold more than seven million copies
in novel form and is in its 40th printing, and plans have recently been
completed to turn it into a Broadway musical.  ''Nippon'' is the working title
of the next volume in the series, which, if Clavell keeps to his present
production pace, will be completed in 1993 -with the last volume running to
3,000 pages.

Last spring, when Ronald Reagan was shot, James Clavell was an hour late for a
press conference in Tokyo. He had just heard the news and was in a state of
confusion, not knowing whether the President would live or die, certain only
that he could not face the Japanese newsmen and answer trivial questions about
''Shogun.'' He canceled the press conference, but later in the day went on
Japanese television to offer himself as the resident American authority in
interpreting the news. Later, back in the United States for a publicity tour in
connection with the publication of ''Noble House,'' he took it as his personal
mission to report at every opportunity that he had dined with the President and
Mrs. Reagan at the White House and that the President was in splendid health.
''But don't say I sat next to Nancy Reagan at the White House,'' he told an
interviwer. ''That would be pretentious.''

James Clavell's appearance at the White House for a state dinner honoring the
Prime Minister of Japan occurred in large part because his Asian novels - though
their historical authenticity is currently the subject of some debate both in
Japan and in this country - have made him, in the minds of many people,
something of a cross-cultural phenomenon. Clavell himself talks with some
justification about Japanese-American relations in terms of ''pre-'Shogun' ''
and 'post'Shogun.' '' And at least one Middle Eastern oil sheik agrees with the
scope of that assessment. The ruler, whom Clavell does not identify, has offered
him a tanker loaded with oil if he will do for the image of the Arab's country
what ''Shogun'' did for Japan's.

Despite the enormous success of his Asian books, James Clavell seems equally
preoccupied at the moment with American politics, as his frequent allusions to
the White House dinner suggest. Indeed, his ''The Children's Story,'' which he
is having published in book form this month 18 years after it first appeared in
print, has the overtones of a campaign speech on foreign policy; the ''speech''
has already caused considerable controversy, and can now be expected to cause
more.

Clavell is as unshy about ''Children's Story,'' as he is sure about the
correctness of his being seated between the American First Lady and the Japanese
Prime Minister. ''It's an extraordinary piece of work,'' he says of the book.
''Normally, I write and rewrite and rewrite, and in this one I changed hardly
anything.''

He wrote it in one ''magical'' day, compared with an average of three years for
each of his last two novels - but then ''The Children's Story'' is only 96 pages
long (compared with the 1,206 of ''Noble House''), and it is a a padded 96 pages
at that. It first appeared as a magazine story, in The Ladies' Home Journal in
1963, when it prompted more than 3,000 letters, at least half of which were
expressions of vigorous protest. The story concerns a young, attractive,
well-trained teacher who rather effortlessly wins the hearts and minds of her
American primary-school pupils, shortly after America loses a war, and persuades
them to tear the American flag into pieces. One reader's reaction was to suggest
that Clavell would be more at home in Pravda. The John Birch Society called him
un-American, and called for his impeachment, though from from what it did not
say.

If the book becomes a success - his publishers predict that it will give Clavell
two books on the best-seller list at the same time - he will will have his own
daughter, Michaela, to thank. As an adult, she helped design the Delacorte
edition; more important, as a child, she inspired the story when she came home
from first grade excitedly reciting the pledge of allegiance. ''What's pledge
mean?'' asked her father, not yet an American citizen. ''Plege'illigience is
plege'illegience,'' she replied with impatience. Not only had Michaela's teacher
neglected to explain what the words meant, but Clavell found upon asking his
adult friends that none of them knew who wrote the pledge, or when it became an
obligatory ritual in schools, or why it was considered so important. ''It was
then that I realized how completely vulnerable my child's mind was - any mind
for that matter -under controlled circumstances,'' Clavell says.

It is curious that the heavy criticism of ''The Children's Story'' should have
come then from the right, since Clavell himself sees ''The Children's Story'' as
''bluntly and cleanly right-wing.'' Actually, in the 1960's, as the Vietnam War
dragged on, it was generally the doves and the left who questioned the idea of
blind national allegiance. But Clavell taunts the left now for its present
disarray and takes pleasure in the return of patriotism. ''The wonderful thing
about the book is that it's just at the right time, with Reagan, the right-wing
approach, America first, the awareness of an enemy called Communism. We are in a
sweep away from the leftwing attitudes that have been creeping in against our
Constitution. This is a democracy, isn't it? It's not a socialist state.''

Advance copies have been sent off to several American politicians.  Senator
Strom Thurmond, responding to a questionaire supplied by the publisher, said,
''Any adversary, whether foreign or domestic, does not need to win on the
battlefields of our minds if we allow ourselves to be intellectually weak.
Ignorance of our Constitution is an open door that will allow our passive minds
to be persuaded by the decep tive phi losophy of Communism.'' Senator Bob Dole
wrote, ''I wishevery American citizen could read it (''The Children's Sto
ry''),'' and Senator Orrin Hatch pledged ''new emphasis to my deter mination to
do everything possible to make the American way of life extend to future
generations.''

President Reagan evidently wrote Clavell a warm, positive letter (which Clavell
declined to make public), about which he said, ''I'm honored that the book seems
to have touched in some small way upon some of the important issues that concern
the President.'' The reaction from those who have objected to the Reagan
Administration's foreign policy as oversimplifying world problems by defining
them solely in terms of Communism and anti-Communism - a notion the book tends
to promote - is yet to come.

One advance reader, the California author Mickey Ziffren, suggests that ''The
Children's Story'' will have a greater impact than one of simply affecting
current politics. Wouldn't it be ironic, she says, ''if this slim, passionate
and chilling volume'' turned out to be what Clavell was best remembered for?
Thus far, however, none of Clavell's other works have riveted the American
public's attention as ''Shogun'' has.

''Shogun'' readers have commonly reported becoming so engrossed in the novel
that their jobs and marriages pale by comparison. At work, they hide it in desks
and sneak peeks when no one is looking. On vacations, they tear the paperback
into sections and pass it around so that two or three can read it
simultaneously. Henry Kissinger, the publisher proudly reports, began issuing
orders to his wife and addressing her as ''Woman!'' while under ''Shogun's''
spell. Webster Schott wrote in The New York Times Book Review: ''It's almost
impossible not to continue to read 'Shogun' once having opened it.  Yet it's not
only something that you read - you live it. The imagination is possessed. ...
Clavell creates a world: people, customs, settings, needs and desires all become
so enveloping that you forget who and where you are. 'Shogun' is history infused
with fantasy. It strives for epic dimension, and occasionally approaches that
elevated state. It's irresistible, maybe unforgettable and, finally, exhausting.
... Clavell's hero is not a person. It's a place and time.''

Scholars who do not ordinarily bother with popular fiction found themselves
besieged by students who had read ''Shogun'' and wanted to know more. George
Elison, professor of East Asian languages and cultures at Indiana University,
for example, found his lectures on early Tokugawa Japanese history drawing
unprecedented crowds. ''Not for a moment did I suffer under the illusion that
they were there to hear me,'' he says.

What the students learned about ''Shogun'' may have surprised them, because
scholars take issue with Clavell's portrait of 16th-century Japan. Elison is
probably the most outspoken: ''It's a novel with plenty of sex plus plenty of
violence equals success. By God, these swarthy Nippons, you've got to hand it to
them. Their swords cut straight and never has a samurai botched a butchering
job. But it's totally lacking the flavor of authenticity.'' Henry Smith, who
teaches Japanese history at the University of California, Santa Barbara,
gathered essays by scholars on various aspects of ''Shogun'' into ''Learning
From Shogun, Japanese History and Western Fantasy'' (distributed by the Japan
Society, New York). It cites numerous discrepancies: Only in the late 20th
century did abortion become the accepted and low-risk operation depicted;
carrier pigeons, though indispensable to ''Shogun,'' apparently were not known
in 16thcentury Japan; death poems - the ritual of a warrior composing a poem
before seppuku - or imminent death in battle -were devised by the modern
Japanese military class.

Elison is particularly offended by the character Mariko, the highborn Christian
convert who defies her husband to become the Englishman Blackthorne's teacher
and lover. It is clear from specific, detailed information Clavell provides in
the novel that the model could only have been Hosokawa Gracia, one of the most
honored names in the history of early Japanese Christianity. ''There's no doubt
that she was a convinced Christian, almost a saint,'' says Elison. But in
''Shogun,'' ''there's this bizarre business of 'if it's natural it has to be
good,' with which she leads the reluctant, prudish English sailor, mind you,
into popping into a hot tub together with her.'' She would not thought or
behaved that way, he says.

In Japan, critics panned the American television version, shown there earlier
this year on eight consecutive nights. Asahi Television's New York bureau chief,
Yasushi Miyakawa, says it had ''some funny points, some curious, some
inadequate.'' Yoko Shimada, who played Mariko, and Edwin O. Reischauer, former
United States Ambassador to Japan, appeared on television the first evening to
ask the audience's indulgence in a Western view of Japan that contained admitted
errors. The first night, 31.3 percent of all televisions in use in Japan were
tuned to ''Shogun.'' That figure dropped to 10.4 percent by the seventh night.
''Most intellectuals thought the TV version bad if not insulting,'' reports
Henry Smith from Tokyo, where he has been studying this summer, ''and most
others found it harmless entertainment, no better and no worse than what they
normally get on Japanese TV.''

Given this disdain for ''Shogun'' from those most familiar with its subject
matter, how does one explain its vast appeal t o American readers? A pessimistic
explanation is that it provides ste reotypes which Americans can recognize, feel
comfortable with and a ccept as authentic. Michael J. Arlen, writing in The New
Yorker, pl aced ''Shogun'' in ''the long line of Anglo-American raptures o ver a
dark-skinned superrace ... the time-honored white man's de scent into the
fascinating world of spectacular punishment.'' William LaFleur, an associate
professor of Oriental languages at U.C.L.A., speculates that, in Japan, Clavell
met Japanese who were willing to t ell him what they thought he wanted to hear.
If the reader feels t hat he understands Japan after reading ''Shogun,'' says
LaFleur, it is less likely to be real understanding than a testimony to Clavel
l's abilityto create realistic fantasy, and the psychological impact on the
reader of sharing, vicariously, Blackthorne's exotic trans formation into a
samurai.

Clavell has a simple if defiant explanation for ''Shogun's'' success: ''It was a
crackerjack story.'' He reacts with amusement to the scholars. ''Of course you
have to be amused,'' he says. ''You have to be patient. Because, after all,
unfortunately I seem to have usurped their function more or less single-handedly
by creating an acceptance of the Japanese culture, which is exactly what they're
supposed to be doing.'' While the NBC television publicity for the show claimed
that ''Shogun'' is ''historically accurate, faithfully reflecting the conditions
of its time'' and columnists such as Cecil Smith of The Los Angeles Times wrote
that ''he (Clavell) knows Japan as it was in 1600 probably better than anyone on
earth,'' Clavell vacillates between claiming that his history is completely
accurate and taking refuge in the claim that he has a right as a novelist to
create a fantasy world. ''Clavell gives you a kind of a double-talk on that,''
says Dwight Chuman, the English-language editor of Los Angeles's Japanese daily
newspaper Rafu Shimp. ''I've heard him talk to all-white audiences and he says,
'This is a historical drama of Japan, based on fact.' But then when he's with a
knowledgeable or Asian audience, he'll cop to the fact that it is his invention,
fantasy based on fact.''

Asked directly whether he believed ''Shogun'' was history or fantasy, Clavell
replied, ''Well, it's as accurate as history can make it. But history's a point
of view anyway. It's the point of view of the guy who writes it. It's as
accurate as the academicians' own writings and their own readings. I've read all
the same books they have. It's possibly 'more' accurate in that part of it is
intuitive.''

Clavell argues that no historian can say for certain that a highborn Japanese
Christian such as the fictional Mariko could not have expressed the ideas she
does. Or that Blackthorne could not have achieved wa, or spiritual harmony, in
only a few months so that he would attempt ritual suicide. ''Have you ever been
in a war? Have you ever been shot at?'' he asks, his voice rising. He said that,
after he was hit in the face with a machine-gun bullet during World War II, he
was ''in a village in Malaya, and in a six-month period I learned Malayan
perfectly. It's very difficult for someone sitting in Harvard or Yale as a
professor of history to really know what it's like when somebody stuffs a
bayonet in your face and pricks your skin. You can't imagine it if you are
sitting outside on a sunny day sipping an ice-cold beer. Obviously, they've
never been put in a position of danger. You learn very quickly. I've always felt
you can only learn about life at the edge of death.''
PICK UP PART TWO, TAKE NUMBER 165957

James Clavell first heard of the Orient from his father, a captain in the Royal
Navy who counted the time he served in China as one of the high points of his
life. Only later did James realize that the long stories about charging up the
Yangtze River to rescue damsels in distress were fiction. Much of the Clavell
family history makes good storytelling. The line starts with Walterus de
Clavile, who went to England in 1066 with William the Conquerer and is said to
have saved his life. As a reward, Clavile became the Kings's armor bearer and
was granted 100 square miles in Dorset for himself and his descendants in
perpetuity. One of those descendants, the legend goes, lost the land in a card
game. For the last 200 years, Clavells have served as officers in the Royal
Navy. ''I was brought up to be one of these people who ruled the empire,'' says
Clavell. ''You know, two or three people used to go out in dinner jackets in the
sweltering jungle and rule the natives.''

At the age of 17, James Clavell joined the Royal Artillery and was trained for
desert warfare. But when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor in 1941, the plans
changed -hastily. Clavell and colleagues were sent to Singapore with only eight
antiaircraft guns and a ship so small they had to remove the barrels to fit the
guns on board. In that condition, they were soon sunk by Japanese bombers in the
Bangka Straits, but picked up hours later by a Dutch ship escaping to India.
That sounded like a fine idea to everyone except the major, ''a total twit,''
who insisted that, as they were there to fight a war, their duty was to return
immediately to the nearest port and resume their weaponless attack.

Clavell tel ls his war stories as a comedy of errors, but the humor is black.
Why he survived at all is a question he still asks himself,but, he says,
''Changi became my university instead of my prison.  Among the inmates there
were experts in all walks of life -the high and the low roads. I studied and
absorbed everything I cou ld from physics to counterfeiting, but most of all I
learned the a rt of surviving, the most important course of all.''

After the war, he returned to England, spent a year at Birmingham University,
worked at odd jobs, and through his wife, a dancer and model, became interested
in film. Bluffing his way into screenwriting and directing despite his lack of
credits, he eventually managed to establish himself in Hollywood as a man who
could bring in a commercial film on a low budget. (He still does a wonderful
imitation of the half-man, half-fly caught in the spider's web of the first film
he wrote, ''The Fly,'' calling in a tiny voice, ''Help me! Help me!'' ''Walk
Like a Dragon'' and ''Watusi'' took 18 days each to film, with Clavell
producing; ''Five Gates to Hell'' took 15 days.  ''To Sir, With Love,'' which he
wrote, produced and directed, cost $625,000 to make and grossed $25 million.
Benson Fong was sitting in the office of his Ah Fong restaurant in Beverly Hills
around the time ''King Rat'' was published in 1962, chomping on a fat cigar and
paying little attention to the baseball game on television, when the phone rang.

''Ben, I'm going to write another book.'' It was Clavell, whom he had first met
at the time Clavell was writing ''The Fly.'' Fong has worked in film since he
played Tommy, Charlie Chan's No. 3 son, in six films of the 1940's.

''What do you want to write about?'' ''Of course, the Orient. ... When are you
going on your next trip?'' ''Sometime in September.'' ''May I go along with
you?'' ''Oh, Jim, by all means. In fact, if you go with me, if you don't have
the best time of your life I'll reimburse every nickel you spend.''

He and Fong had not traveled in Asia long before he decided that it would be a
big, sweeping book that he wanted to write and that it would be about Hong Kong.
His research there began informally. In a restaurant, two Chinese were
quarreling at the next table. ''What's going on over there?'' he asked Fong.

''Oh, they're just discussing the races.'' ''Why are they so angry?'' ''They're
not angry. They're just happy.'' Clavell made a mental note: ''When a Chinese
goes red in the face and pounds the table, he is not necessarily angry.'' Though
he did not, and still does not, speak conversational Chinese, Clavell sought out
situations in which no one spoke English. ''Most Caucasians whom I've taken back
to the Orient would be insulted and unhappy,'' says Fong. ''Why don't they speak
English? But Jim was enjoying it because he would look at the facial expression
of each person and he would know just what they were talking about. Jimmy shows
a very keen sense of picking up things from the ethnic people. With his mind, he
was observing everything.  He knew what he was going to do.''

The next year, 1963, Clavell moved into a Hong Kong apartment with his wife and
two daughters, and stayed for a year. Though ''King Rat'' was a best seller, his
publisher did not offer an advance on the next book. But $157,000 that he
received for the film rights to ''King Rat,'' spread over five years for tax
purposes, financed the writing of ''Tai-Pan.'' His Hollywood colleagues thought
he was crazy, says Clavell, for taking such a long sabbatical from his film
career.

Clavell's original idea for ''Tai-Pan'' was to start with the founding of Hong
Kong and bring his story up to the present. It got too long, though, so he
stopped at the death of the first taipan, the founder of the Noble House trading
company. ''Noble House'' picks up the story in 1963; he may fill in more of the
years in between in another novel. For historical background, he relied on old
newspapers and court records, reading voraciously and catholically. He still has
18 hours of stories on tape that have yet to find their way onto paper.

His writing on Hong Kong fares better with the experts than his writing about
Japan. ''The general opinion in Hong Kong about Mr.  Clavell's novels is that
they are the work of an extremely professional reporter who goes to great
lengths to provide accurate background for his stories which reflect much of the
spirit of the places about which he is writing,'' says James N. Dreaper,
publicrelations manager for the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. ''He
is certainly regarded as one of the few writers who really 'knows' Hong Kong.''
Alvin Rabushka, a senior fellow at Stanford's Hoover Institution and author of
three books on Hong Kong, was married in Hong Kong the day before ''Noble
House'' opens in 1963. Aside from a slight exaggeration of the importance of the
large trading companies to Hong Kong's economy, he finds ''Noble House'' so
uncannily accurate in all aspects that the general public may not have the
background to apprec iate just how good it is.  John Ford, the director, once
told Clavell always to start his films with a long shot of the hero galloping
into town in a swirl of dust. Being a man of the sea, Clavell starts ''Tai-Pan''
and ''Shogun'' by bringing his heroes into town on sa iling shi ps; in ''Noble
House,'' via MG sports cars. For dust, he substitu tes storms.Except for flowery
renderings of Oriental speech and expos itory breaks for history or philosophy,
his prose is a combinati on of Dickens (had he had access to jet air travel), B
movies an d Sigmund Freud. Dickens's big-hearted orphans become Clavell's
larger-thanlife men of action; Dickens's hard-hearted vill ains, Clavell's
hardhearted business or political adversaries. T he social commentary of Dickens
becomes in Clavell cross-cultural ed ucation andreactionary political warnings.
Clavell, with the example of 20th-century psychological novels to follow, is not
limite d to observation and action in describing his characters. He ca n, and
freely does, enter their minds to explain how Dunross mane uvers and traps his
enemies or how Toranaga puts aside the pressures of state even in the worst
crisis to go hunting with his falcons. T his psychological approach gives many
readers the perhaps mist aken impression that they have learned more of the
Oriental min d through Clavell than through any number of newspaper articles or
s cholarly studies.

When it comes to setting down on paper all his assorted facts, fictions and
impressions, Clavell uses no outline and no researchers. He lets no one read the
manuscripts until he has finished and does not discuss writing with other
writers. He combats writer's block by reading Hemingway or the King James Bible.
''King Rat'' was edited heavily; ''Tai-Pan,'' moderately; ''Shogun,'' ''Noble
House'' and ''The Children's Story,'' hardly at all. He claims to start on page
one with no more than a vague idea of his story and a mass of research stored,
uncatalogued, in the back of his mind. ''If you knew too much in advance, how
could you sustain the writing for three years?'' he says, professing to be as
surprised as the reader at some of his plot twists. Critics have called his
prose anything from ''epic'' in ''the oldest and grandest tradition that fiction
knows'' (Webster Schott, The New York Times Book Review) to ''silly, sophomoric,
clumsy, turgid, interminable'' (Jonathan Yardley, The Washington Star). ''One
man's art is another man's poison,'' says Clavell, unimpressed. ''I think the
reviewers are conning the public.'' After 19 years of testing the waters, James
Clavell has evidently concluded it was safe to plunge into public view. But the
first interviews he granted after agreeing to hit the promotional circuit in the
spring were stiff and unpleasant. He still winces at some questions and
occasionally allows himself a testy retort (''Did you go to Japan to research
'Shogun?' '' ''Obviously.'' ''How did you develop such an impressive
understanding of the culture?'' ''Magic.''). He still tries to dismiss questions
with the line: ''Everything worth knowing about me is in my books.''

James Clavell's main characters are risk takers, men of action and wealth,
manipulative, adventurous, powerful. Though Clavell has yet to rule a nation or
become a samurai, he does like to describe himself as ''half-Irish,
half-arrogant'' (his mother was Irish; he is English by birth and an American
citizen since 1963) and one Hollywood colleague describes him as ''cold, hard,
ruthless and ready to kill.'' But there is a character in Clavell's fiction who
is not like that at all - Peter Marlowe, who, like Clavell, was incarcerated in
a Japanese prisoner-of-war camp for three and a half years; who, like Clavell,
wrote a book about his experience; who, like Clavell, became a Hollywood
screenwriter and producer, and, who, like Clavell, went to Hong Kong in 1963 to
research a book on the large trading companies. Marlowe is a likeable, gentle
man, sensitive to cultures other than his own, always an observer on the fringes
of power, comfortable and accepted at all levels of Oriental and British
society, and aware that, while he may admire the high and mighty, he will do
best to stay faithful to his proper British military background. ''Jimmy is a
very shy, very private person,'' says Fong. ''But there's no door he can't walk
through by himself.  He's a good man. In fact, he's more good than nice. He
doesn't have time to be nice.''

So far, Clavell has managed to keep his private life private.  ''That's the
English way,'' observes Peter Marlowe in ''King Rat.'' ''Just let out a little
at a time, when you're in the mood. What you are or who you are is your own
affair -until you wish to share with a friend. And a friend never asks.'' Like
Casey Tcholok, the heroine of ''Noble House,'' Clavell has been looking for his
''drop-dead'' money, enough to turn down any project or tell anyone to drop
dead.  The success of his books and films and spin-offs from the Clavell empire,
including ''Shogun'' T-shirts, wind chimes and tours of Japan, make one
skeptical of his claim that he is not a millionaire.

Still, whatever he has earned, it does not for him constitute dropdead money; it
is not enough to give him the kind of freedom he wants. ''People think they own
me,'' he says, referring to the position a best-selling author in American finds
himself in as captive to a round of television appearances, interviews, talk
shows. ''This lionization is great. But you can't do this sort of thing and
still work.'' Though he was clearly happy with the brief spotlight atthe Reagan
Wh ite House, clearly happy to sit, like Peter Marlow, on the fringe of power,
it is equally apparent that what he wants most is to be his own captor, locked
in his own den - as long as he holds the key. He i s really interested in one
thing only, he says: ''Just doing my job, trying to en tertain people and
illuminate th e world, and perhaps bridge East and West. I'm just a
storyteller.' '

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Yoko Shimada and Richard Chamberlain in
'Shogun' photo of James Clavell

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A HISTORY OF ILLUSIONS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 976 words


SENTIMENTAL IMPERIALISTS The American Experience in East Asia.  By James C.
Thomson Jr., Peter W. Stanley, and John Curtis Perry.  323 pp. New York: Harper
and Row. $17.50.

By GADDIS SMITH

AMERICAN approaches to East Asia have, since the first contacts in the late 18th
century, been suffused with illusion and sentimentality -hence the title of this
readable and intelligent survey by three historians, specialists respectively on
American relations with China (Mr. Thomson), the Philippines (Mr. Stanley) and
Japan (Mr. Perry).

The authors have much in common. Born in the decade before Pearl Harbor, they
have lived and traveled extensively in Asia. They admire and respect the
civilizations about which they write, although not so inordinately that they
refrain from criticism. All were students in the 1950's, when the McCarthyite
charge that disloyal Americans had ''lost China'' to Communism was poisoning the
academic environment and driving American Government officials who knew most
about Asia, especially about China, into intellectual exile. The authors were
too young to have had their own careers ravaged, but they have not forgot ten
what hap pened in those dismal years. Two of the three have been in Governme nt
service, most notably Mr. Thomson, who was a China speciali st in the Kennedy
and Johnson Administrations until 1966, when he r esigned in opposition tothe
Vietnam war. All see the tragedy of Vietn am as an avoidable consequence of
American ignorance and sentime ntality.

All are committed to combating sentimentality with a realistic understanding of
the ''multicultural complexity'' of American relations with East Asia. In this
they are inspired by John King Fairbank (who contributes a foreword) and Edwin
O. Reischauer, their friends, mentors and the leading historical interpreters of
American relations with China and Japan respectively during the last three
decades. Finally, as teachers, they all saw the need for a single volume which
treated the subject as a whole through two centuries and which included the
entire region rather than limiting itself to American relations with one
country.

Writing the history of American-East Asian relations has always been difficult.
Some historians of an earlier generation never learned an Asian language or
understood internal Asian social or political dynam-
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Gaddis Smith teaches the history of American foreign relations at Yale
University.
ics. They were part of the problem. On the other hand, the amount of time and
energy required for an American to become immersed in the culture, history and
language of an Asian country can produce a purely Asian specialist with little
time or inclination to keep abreast of American history. Messrs. Thomson,
Stanley and Perry avoid this pitfall. They are confident scholars on both sides
of the equation.

Given its importance both in American perceptions and in reality, China quite
rightly occupies half the book. The chapters on Japan are illuminating but too
brief. The interpretation of Philippine-American relations, a subject about
which Americans know relatively little, stresses the ways in which American
colonial policy preserved a ruling eli te.

The book is a description and deflation of a series of illusions: the illusion
of a commercial pot-of-gold at the end of a Pacific rainbow, the illusion that
the United States had an attainable destiny to convert China to Christianity and
modern democracy, the illusion that it was within American power to build a
united, anti-Communist China after 1945 and the illusion that the Vietnam war
was a test of America's dedication to freedom. Underlying all these illusions
was the unstated assumption that Americans were active and Asians passive and
that the outcome of any transaction was determined by what Americans thought and
did. This assumption united the missionary enthusiasts of the 19th century, the
exponents of the United States as China's political savior and guide to the 20th
century, the McCarthyites searching for those who ''lost China,'' and the
Johnsonian visionaries dreaming of Mekong River Authorities while directing the
fighting in Vietnam from computerized and airconditioned command centers.

The authors deplore the hostility following the establishment of the People's
Republic in 1949, when ''America's East Asian relations became engulfed by years
of blind and lethal zealotry.'' Zealotry on both sides, it should be noted. They
applaud the healing process since 1972 and end characteristically on a word of
caution. ''But the danger remained - as always in this relationship - that
excessive hopes and illusions would be followed by dangerous despair,
disillusionment, and hostility.''

The absence of footnotes and bibliography is the book's one serious flaw. The
authors acknowledge in general their debt to a great river of scholarship which
they adapt, synthesize and condense with great skill. But they provide no
references, no guide to further reading for that ''general reader'' for whom the
book is intended. Of course, footnotes and bibliography can be overdone, but so
fine a book as this should not omit entirely what is often disparaged as
''scholarly paraphernalia.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Uncle Sam in rickshaw

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Westchester Guide;
OLD FILM CLASSICS

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 11; Westchester; Page 18, Column 5; Weschester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words


A film series for children and young people that may also interest older movie
lovers is soon to begin at Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville.

Judy Garland in ''The Wizard of Oz'' at 1 and 3 P.M. Saturday will be followed
Oct. 3. by George Pal's ''The Time Machine,'' adapted from H. G. Wells's
science-fiction novel.

''King Solomon's Mines'' will be shown Oct. 17 and ''Treasure Island,'' made in
1934 with Wallace Beery and Jackie Cooper, is on the Dec. 15 bill. From November
through May the attractions include ''Drums Along the Mohawk'' with Henry Fonda
and Claudette Colbert; ''The Mark of Zorro'' with Tyrone Power; Mickey Rooney in
''The Adventures of Huck Finn''; ''Ivanhoe'' with Elizabeth Taylor and Robert
Taylor, and Errol Flynn in Rudyard Kipling's ''Kim.''

Children under 8 years of age must be accompanied by an adult. The screenings
will be in the Performing Arts Center of the campus at Glen Washington and
Kimball Avenues. Admission is $1.50 for all ages. Call 337-0700, ext. 412 for
more details.

BERRIGAN POETRY READING

During the years that his anti-Vietnam War activities received considerable
attention, it was sometimes overlooked that the Rev.  Daniel Berrigan had more
than a dozen published volumes of verse, prose, essays and fables to his credit.

The now 60-year-old Jesuit priest will read from his poetry at 7 P.M. Thursday
in Reisinger Hall at Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville.

In the early 1970's, with his brother, Philip, Father Berrigan served two years
in Danbury Federal Prison for his part in a protest break-in at the Catonsville,
Md., draft office. He is now appealing another sentence of from 3 to 10 years
for a similar break-in at a nuclear-missile plant in Pennsylvania.

The reading is free. For more information, call 337-0700, ext. 412.

AID FOR STRAYS

Finding someone who can love and care for a three-legged cat is characteristic
of the work done by a Westchester group called Just Strays, headquartered in
five volunteer foster homes where 60 cats are temporarily housed.

''Traditional animal shelters are not the a nswer,'' said Carole Davis,
president of the nonprofit organizatio n. ''Grown animals are usually destroyed
because they are considered unadoptable, and those that are not put to death
tend to pick up add itional medical problemsfrom the crowded conditions. These
days there are more strays than ever because so many landlords won't allow pe
ts.''

Just Strays will occupy a booth at the Valhalla Lions Club Flea Market from 10
A.M. to 5 P.M. today at the Kensico Dam Plaza, offering skis, boots, bindings,
golf carts, glassware, jewelry, antiques and household items. All proceeds will
be used for the rescue and care of the animals and for educational work among
young people.

''Foster parents'' are provided with food and litter, but are expected to pay
$30 for males and $40 for females to cover the cost of neutering, worming and
shots to prevent disease. ''The fee would be $70 and $80 at a private
veterinarian,'' Mrs. Davis said.

The Animal Welfare League in Valhalla, Animals by Choice in Thornwood and 10
participating veterinarians carry out the medical aspect of the program.

People wishing to adopt or to become foster parents may meet with the animals in
any of the five foster homes. ''At present we have no dogs,'' Mrs. Davis said.
''It's more difficult to place dogs in foster care.''

For more information, call 4 28-7969 or 939-7253.

ON THE WILD SIDE

The Greenburgh Nature Center on Dromore Road, Scardsdale, also runs a
foster-parent program - but for infant animals from the wild. High school
students are needed to volunteer a few hours weekly to help feed and care for
the animals until they are mature enough to be released.

Birds, squirrels, raccoons, skunks and other creatures are taken to the center
in greater numbers than the staff alone can handle, although staff members will
provide guidance and food to volunteer helpers.

To sign up or obtain more information, call 723-3470.

ELEGANT TABLES

An opportunity to acquire a piece of Haviland china personally autographed by
Frederick Haviland, senior vice president of the prestigious company that bears
his name, will be availabale to those who attend his Neiman-Marcus seminar on
table settings at 11 A.M.  Tuesday in the White Plains store. China pieces may
also be taken in for identification and appraisal.

The grandson of David Haviland, the American founder of the Limoges
manufacturing company, Frederick Haviland was born and educated in France, then
returned to the corporation's headquarters in Manhattan. He retains his American
citizenship and lives in a pre-Revolutionary house in Somers, N.Y.

There is no charge for any of the programs, but reservations are suggested for
the Haviland seminar. Call 428-2000, ext. 2304.

'BEOWULF' PUPPETRY

''Beowulf,'' the Old English legend about a Geatish (Scandinavian) warrior-hero
that is often part of the high school or college curriculum, is now available to
small children in puppet form.

The Rod and Rose Puppet Theater will present a tragi-comic interpretation of
this ancient tale at 2 P.M. Saturday in the New Rochelle Library.

Amy Silberkleit, Michael Schiffer and Rhonda Fregoe, puppeteers who manipulate
three-foot rod puppets with unusually expressive faces and body movements, will
conduct a question-and-answer period following the performance.

The library is in downtown New Rochelle on Memorial Highway, between Main and
Huguenot Streets. There is no admission charge.

58th YORKTOWN FAIR

The Yorktown Grange Fair enters its final day today as it completes its 58th
annual weekend fair amid a series of colorful exhibits and diverse
entertainment. Over the years, the fair has maintained the rural characteristics
of the area's former agricultural economy while adding rides and entertainment
for all ages.

This year's livestock and crafts exhibits, along with produce and floral shows,
are expected to be the largest to date. Small and large livestock, including
goats, hogs, cows and horses, and large numbers of pigeons, poultry and rabbits
are among the featured animal exhibits being provided mainly by local Four-H
club groups.

Other attractions today include blue grass music by the Horse Country band at 1
and 3:30 P.M., square dancing at 2 P.M. and Paula's German band at 6 P.M. There
will also be a pie-eating conte st today at 3 P.M. Food of all varieties will be
on sa le.

Because of limited parking at the fairgrounds, free bus-shuttle service will be
available today from 11 A.M. to 10 P.M., leaving from the Boces Technical Center
on Pinesbridge Road and shopping areas in town. Admission is $2.25 for adults,
$1 for children under 12. Parking at the Rochambeau Park fairgrounds, on Moseman
Road, is free.  Eleanor Charles

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IN U.N. SESSION, DECISIONS WILL BE MADE AT LUNCH

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 13


The 36th General Assembly session begins here Tuesday, but most diplomats will
watch events outside rather than inside the blue-domed Assembly hall.

A meeting of the Assembly, now swollen to 155 members from the original 51 who
met at the first session at Church House in London in 1946, is an occasion for
dozens of foreign ministers to descend on New York to conduct secret diplomacy
in hotel suites, over lunches and dinners, and in the more austere offices of
missions.

This year, these private sessions are especially charged. Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. meets Foreign Minister Andrei A.  Gromyko of the Soviet
Union on Sept. 23 and Sept. 28 for the first high-level contacts between Moscow
and the Reagan Administration.

Out of their talks, diplomats hope a new foundation will be laid for
negotiations to curb strategic nuclear weapons. At the very least, each could
come away with a clearer notion of the other's intentions.

Haig to Meet Allies' Ministers

On Sept. 24, Mr. Haig has a date with four allied Foreign Ministers - Lord
Carrington of Britain, Claude Cheysson of France, Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West
Germany and Mark MacGuigan of Canada.  The five hope to agree on a set of
principles guaranteeing the rights of all citizens in South-West Africa.

South Africa's refusal to give the territory, known as Namibia, its freedom has
inflamed black African nations and many other third world countries. The Reagan
Administration insists on linking Namibia's independence to the removal of the
20,000 Cuban troops in neighboring Angola. That has caused dismay among the
other Western allies.

The allies hope that the guarantees they plan to outline here will overcome
South Africa's reluctance to grant Namibia independence and ease black African
charges that the United States has given Pretoria a free hand. But few diplomats
are confident that the proposals will move South Africa very far.

In another key meeting, the two principal figures, Foreign Minister Agha Shahi
of Pakistan and Shah Mohammad Dost of Afghanistan, do not plan to face each
other. They will talk through Secretary General Kurt Waldheim.

85,000 Soviet Troops

Mr. Shahi, on behalf of the overwhelming United Nations majority, wants Mr.
Dost's support for the removal of the 85,000 Soviet troops battling Afghan
insurgents. Mr. Dost wants guarantees, backed by the major powers, that no
outsiders will ''interfere'' in Afghanistan. It is doubtful that the Soviet
forces will leave as long as the Moscowbacked Kabul regime is threatened with
broad opposition from within. But the talks through Mr. Waldheim could be a step
toward a facesaving withdrawal some day.

Mr. Waldhei m is the center of an issue that will be settled in the Security
Coun cil, not the Assembly. His term runs out this year and he wants anot her.
Moscow and Washington have indicated that Mr.  Waldheim is a ll right with them.
But China, which can block his ambitions, wa nts a Secretary General from the
third world. It has a candidate - S alim Ahmed Salim, Tanzania's Foreign
Minister, the choice of the black African nations.

The Assembly session begins with an election for the largely honorary job of
president. Khwaja Mohammed Kaiser of Bangladesh is narrowly favored over Ismat
Kittani of Iraq. There are two other candidates in the first contest for the
presidency since 1962.

In the last two Assembly sessions, the Soviet Union was on the defensive because
of its intervention in Afghanistan and the invasion of Cambodia by an ally,
Vietnam. This year, many diplomats think that the United States will be on the
receiving end of verbal darts.

Washington's support for South Africa and Israel, outlaws in third world eyes,
could make the work of Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief delegate, uncomfortable.
The United States has said that it is ''neutral'' toward South Africa's white
minority rulers and black majority. The main question is whether this view will
so antagonize Africans and others that it will affect the United States in other
areas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM HAIG'S BERLIN SPEECH

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1316 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 13


Following are excerpts from the prepared text of Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr.'s speech today before the Berlin Press Association, as made public by
the State Department:

Special to the New York Times

WASHINGTON, Sept. 13 - Following are excerpts from the prepared text of
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s speech today before the Berlin Press
Association, as made public by the State Department:

Today, throughout our alliance, both the quality of our societies and the future
of our trans-Atlantic relationship are being hotly debated. This is neither
unusual nor unhealthy. Democracies have never been short of critics, and the
Atlantic alliance, a free association of nations, has always been distinguished
by the exchange of opinions.

Nonetheless, both the substance and tone of our debates of late have begun to
take a disturbing turn.  Too many are prophesying a future devoid of hope,
indecisive, unable to cope with the challenge of the 80's, and the ever-present
critics of NATO are once again acting as though the alliance were about to
crumble.

Every healthy society goes through periods of the most arduous soul-searching.
But when this becomes compulsive, an end in itself, dire consequences inevitably
follow. Excessive introspection, as the American people have sadly learned,
paralyzes the will and thereby threatens the peace. On such occasions, we must
remind ourselves of our values. We must work to restore the balance in society
that makes for creativity. And we must be careful not to cross the fine line
between liberty and license.

Democracy and Rule of Law

Democracy and the rule of law cannot survive if we are not prepared to defend
them.  Pluralism cannot work if the interests of one group are advanced at the
expense of the common good.  Society cannot advance if violence and sabotage
come to be regarded as legitimate methods of achieving personal and political
goal.  Excessive introspection and pessimism offer no solution to our problems.
We must adopt, instead, a more tolerant and optimistic attitude. Despite its
difficulties, democracy alone, of all the world's political systems, honors the
diversity of man. Democracy alone, despite its defects, nurtures the creativity
of man, and democracy alone safeguards those rights that enable the individual
and his society to grow in peace. That is why our alliance has always been able
to surmount its problems. We believe in the genius of the individual.

A Second Danger

There is a second danger to the democratic revolution today that must be
confronted. I detect a growing double standard in the West towards appropriate
norms of international behavior: one is a supercritical standard applied to
those who cherish diversity, tolerate dissent, and seek peaceful change.

The Soviet Union has occupied Afghanistan since 1979. The Afghans' religion,
culture, and national life are in danger of destruction.  One fifth of the
entire nation has been exiled. The people of Afghanistan cherish their freedom.
They are not going to give up their struggle. But why are the voices of
conscience among us which cry out against this aggression so muted?

Vietnam, which inspired such widespread concern in the West not long ago, has
enslaved its southern populations, has seized Kampuchea and now threatens the
peace of Southeast Asia.

Where are the demonstrations against these outrages?

International Terror and Violence

The phrase ''national liberation'' has been used to justify international terror
and violence. Can a nation be liberated when its people are deprived of liberty?
Can a nation be free when its independence is subordinate to the will of a
foreign power? Can a people be uplifted when innocent civilians are the targets
of terror?

Despite its pr ofessions of peace and good w ill, the Soviet Union has engaged
in enormous military buildup beyo nd all requiements of self-defense. It has, as
well, armed and enco uraged its proxies to promote violent change that serves
its strate gic objectives. Where are the protests against such Soviet actions?

Democracies invariably expect more of themselves than of their adversaries. Our
openness, our free, our democratic institutions subject our actions to a
relentless criticism that they do not experience.

This is a source of strength and health for democracies. But when it paralyzes
essential efforts to defend freedom, as it did in the 1930's, not only freedom,
but peace too, is endangered.
Threat to Peace of Europe

It is Soviet tanks, not NATO's defense against those tanks, that threaten the
peace of Europe. It is the rapid expansion of Soviet nuclear weaponry in the
European theater that has forced NATO to respond in a positive way to Soviet
restraint.

When democracies become too feeble or too fearful to resist aggressive
dictatorships, then who is there to defend democracy? To us here today, children
of the 20th century, this is more than a rhetorical question.

Once more, terror and intimidation are being used to silence those who speak
out; once more a totalitarian regime is invoking the slogans of
self-determination to advance its imperial ambitions. And at the very time when
the United States is being accused of delay on arms control, others appear to be
violating one of the oldest arms control agreements - that prohibiting the use
of toxins.

For some time now, the international community has been alarmed by continuing
reports that the Soviet Union and its allies have been using lethal chemical
weapons in Laos, Kampuchea, and Afghanistan. As a result of this deep
international concern, last fall the United Nations established an impartial
group of medical and technical experts to investigate the matter. In spite of
this international attention and action, however, reports of this unlawful and
inhuman activity have continued. Moreover, we now have physical evidence from
Southeasst Asia which has been analyzed and found to contain abnormally high
levels of three potent mycotoxins -poisonous substances not indigenous to the
region and which are highly toxic to man and animals.

Use of Toxins Prohibited

The use in war of such toxins is prohibited by the 1925 Geneva Protocol and
related rules of customary internatiional law; their very manufacture for such
purposes is strictly forbidden by the 1975 Biological Weapons Convention. We
are, therefore, taking steps to ensure that this evidence is called to the
attention of states and that it is provided to both the Secretary General of the
United Nations and to the group of experts investigating this problem under his
auspices.

There is a third danger to democracy. We are debating today how to prevent the
Soviet military build-up from upsetting the balance of power. It is agreed by
all knowledgeable students that our margin of safety has narrowed. But the
democracies are torn by the argument that our security will actually be
compromised by greater defense efforts. We are told that the resources required
for defense will come at the expense of social peace. A dollar more for the
military, so goes the argument, in my own country as well as as here in Europe,
is a dollar lesss for welfare, for health, and for other necessary benefits.

We have heard this reasoning before. Its premise is a lack of confidence that a
democratic society can provide for both social progress and an adequate defense.
Yet the democracies have proven time and time again since the Second World War
that they can achieve these objectives. The West has been able to defend itself.
And behind that shield, we have registered extraordinary social progress.
Clearly, the two are complementary. If we are not prepared to defend ourselves,
then we shall lose the chance to reform our societies, and if we are not
prepared to seek social justice, then we shall lose the will - and the reason
-to defend ourselves.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIOLENCE IN BERLIN MARKS HAIG'S VISIT

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 866 words

DATELINE: WEST BERLIN, Sept. 13


The loudspeaker truck played ''The Star-Spangled Banner,'' but it was Jimi
Hendrix's moaning, mocking guitarsolo version. A girl carried an American flag,
but it had the shape of a pig, its hocks and ribs, red and white stripes, its
head and eyes, a mosaic of misshapen stars.

A crowd estimated by police at 30,000 and at 80,000 by its organizers took the
occasion of a visit by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. to protest
against an America they see as increasingly warlike.

The police looked on and said later that it was probably the biggest
demonstration in West Berlin since the Vietnam War. A handful of families,
pensioners, people waiting for buses, watched too as the parade went past,
staring, keeping quiet, moving on.

''Haig the vulture, hang him higher,'' said one of the signs carried by the
marchers. ''Should the calves welcome their butcher?'' asked another of the
demonstrators' banners.
U.S. Helicopters Overhead

A photo montage of the Secretary of State showed him with his hand over his
heart, as if taking an oath, while napalm-deformed children stood at his side.
United States Army helicopters flew overhead, tracking the demonstration, and
marchers knelt directing mock antiaircraft fire against them.

The West German Communist Party stepped into the parade too, and it had signs
demanding that the allies leave West Berlin and that West Germany quit the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization. The homosexuals marched behind the artists' union,
following the teachers' union, and they spoke in purple script about the new
American cold war.  Behind them, at the end of the assemblage of complaints
against the United States and President Reagan, came the anarchists, in black
ski masks, leather outfits and boots.

The organizers of the demonstration, t he Youth Wings of the Social Democratic
an d Free Democratic parties, the West German coalition partners, had promised
that they would try to hold the protest in line. But jus t as they could not
direct the tone of the march to criticize onl y the Administration's foreign
policy, they could not keep control of some of the groups who pushed into the
Winterfeldpla tz in the middle of the afternoon after the parade through the d
owntown shopping area had ended.

While Mr. Haig signed a golden book at the City Hall about a halfmile away,
about 1,000 of the anarchists charged away from the crowd and toward the heavily
guarded building. They smashed store windows, crushed the windshields of cars
with axes, and set automobiles alight, sending sheets of flame across the
street.

The West Berlin police turned tear gas and water cannon on the attackers and
drove them off before they reached the City Hall. The police, who had put 7,000
men on the streets, said they made 110 arrests, and counted 50 to 60 injured
officers. There were tens of injured attackers, many beaten with clubs, but no
official count was given.

Right to Protest Defended

Mr. Haig saw or heard none of this, and had no notion of the lines of
demonstrators, or the poster at the Winterfeldplatz that showed a wrecked
automobile and carried the assertion, ''2.7 seconds too late.'' The car was an
automobile accompanying Mr. Haig's limousine, bombed by terrorists in Belgium in
1979 when he was Supreme Commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Or ganization.
Mr . Haig escaped injury, and the poster said this was a tragedy for ma nkind.

The Secretary of State, who in a speech defended the demonstrators' right to
protest, said it was ''the warmest reception I've received since I returned to
Washington'' from Europe. Talking to Richard von Weizsacker, the Mayor of West
Berlin, at City Hall, Mr. Haig described his trip to West Berlin as ''a
discomforting visit, or at least a dislocating one for many.''

What the many voices wanted from the United States was imprecise, but it was
clear the demonstrators considered the foreign policy of Mr. Haig to be the
cause of all the world's tension. The Soviet Union, which has 400,000 men in
East Germany, a 20-minute walk from the site of the demonstrations, had no place
in the banners or shouts. All the guilt was America's.

Horst Heitmann, a student, who came to the demonstration wearing a New York
Yankee baseball cap he bought during two years of going to school in New York,
explained that he thought the demonstration was part of a political process in
West Germany signaling movement away from NATO and the United States, a turn, he
said, that would eventually end with West Germany finding its ''own middle
way.''

His friend Jochen Hellmann explained the situation with a little less caution.
''We don't just say it yet,'' he said, ''but we think we should reach
neutralism. Let's say like Austria or Finland. We'd better do it as soon as
possible, otherwise we're not going to survive Reagan.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 867 words


A Presidential panel studing how compensation might be paid to the Americans who
were held hostage in Iran is concerned that the eventual awards not seem as
outsized as the national outpouring that greeted their homecoming.

Lawyers for some of the former hostages have proposed that each person receive
payments of up to $1,000 for each of the 444 days of imprisonment. But
knowledgeable officials indicate that the study panel will propose something
more like the limited compensation standards used after the Vietnam War for
repatriated American prisoners.  These involved not flat payments, but a scale
of factors including forced labor, food deprivation and duration of
imprisonment.

The going rate then was $5 a day, and many P.O.W.'s came home after deprivation
measured in years, not clocked by the nation each day, and with little of the
celebrity status that fell upon the Iranian hostages. The study panel is facing
no less a questi on than "What price glory?" it must keep precedent in mind as
it considers such disparate factors as patriotism, hard cash an d the public's
own impression of deep involvement with the Irani an hostages.  It is poignant
to see the summer wither in Washington, to be amid the final concert sprawl of
picnickers listen ing to the National Symphony's season farewell and there on
the g rass to watch a crowd oftens of thousands suddenly perk up for some a d
hoc political mischief. This occurrred in the gloaming outs ide the Capitol as
applause was offered for each mention of rank ing executives and legislators who
are the nomina hosts of the c oncerts.  The canny crowd noticed the omission of
any mention of Interior Secretary JamesG. Watt.  They shouted for his name.
When th e master of ceremonies obliged, carefully mentioning only "the offic e
of the Secretary of the Interior," the crowd had the cue it sough t.  There came
forth a round of booing that rolled down the Mall lik e a mannoth
strip-miningcontraption.

The Reagan Administration's now steady practice of reversing case by case and
city by city the Carter Administration's school busing policy has heightened
interest in the Justice Department's silent delay over an even more basic issue.
A score of bills waiting in Congress would go beyond enacting antibusing laws
and legislate an outright denial of the courts' jurisdiction in cases involving
such sensitive social areas as busing, abortion and school prayer.  Attorney
General William French Smith promised earlier this year to draft the
Administration's official position on these "court-stripping" bills, and Justice
Department testimony was scheduled in Congress, then canceled, last spring.
Civil rights lawy feel such bills are patently unconstitutional, but they wonder
what the Administration's continued silence portends.

Word has come from Plains, Ga., that former President Jimmy Carter occasionally
composes verse of some sort on the same home video display terminal on which he
is writing his memoirs.  Confidential sources would disclose neither rhyme nor
reason, but they suddenly glimpsed Mr. Carter's private poesy one day when he
was trying to summon something from the memory banks and the Muse flashed forth
unexpectedly.  He rebanked these private words just as quickly, without
explanation, encouraging hope that at least a few words of a retired President
might be kept off the literary market.

There has been a sensitive departure from protocol.  President Reagan, entering
the state dinner at the White House for Israel Prime Minister Menachem Begin,
watched the guests arise to honor him and saw former Senator Jacob K. Javits of
New York struggling a bit.

Spotting Mr. Javits's effort, the President strode directly to him with a
greeting, a restraining hand and the insistence that the New Yorker, who is
troubled by a neural muscular disorder, remain seated. Since losing majority
power in the Senate, Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the Democrats' leader, has
tended to be overlooked as a study in melancholia and even privately mocked by
some of his peers.  But lately he is very much on the minds of Administration
strategists planning the difficult campaign to overcome Senate opposition to the
sale of Awacs radar planes to Saudi Arabia.  As opponents have made a public
display of whittling support for the sale, Senator HOward H.  Baker Jr. of
Tennessee, the majority leader, has been quietly courting his nominal adversary
and friend acro ss the aisle.  Senator Byrd, while e xpressing some reservations
about security questions, has not yet d eclared a position either way. The
Administration, dearly hoping he would be the keystone in a bipartisan Awacs
strategy, has already had Richard V. Allen, the President's national security
advi ser, over to see the Senator on the subject, and Under Secretary of State
James L. Buckley has also come calling.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ROLE REVERSAL IN THE REA GAN CABINET

BYLINE: By Hedrick Smith

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1341 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 13


The two men seem to enjoy their role reversal. After a lifetime in the Army,
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. displays fondness for stylishly cut,
diplomatically striped suits. He delights in lecturing on the nuances of foreign
policy.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, the career civilian, relishes slogging
around military installations to watch firepower exercises, his Presidential
cuff links and white shirt camouflaged beneath an infantry outfit. Always the
gentleman, he apologized the other day to one G.I. after ''shooting'' the
soldier in a demonstration of a new laser target system.

Mr. Weinberger is bemused by his growing reputation as Washington's leading
hawk. ''I can't believe I am the heavy,'' he says with an airy laugh. ''I don't
feel like the heavy.''

Mr. Haig, who shares the amusement, said facetiously to a former colleague the
other night, ''I came in looking like I had the talons of a hawk, but you know I
have the heart of a dove.''

The reversal of their roles has become the talk of Washington insiders who still
enjoy categorizing Government officials as ''hawks'' and ''doves,'' long after
those Vietnam-era terms disappeared from common use around the country.

The Reagan Administration, of course, brought in no real doves, but last January
the conventional wisdom here was that Mr. Haig would emerge as the super-hawk of
the new team. Trained at West Point, battle tested, seasoned in the Watergate
White House and crowned with the NATO command, Mr. Haig came by his hard-line
image naturally. He reinforced it with early rhetorical salvos at leftist
guerrillas in El Salvador, a startling public tiff with the White House over who
would head crisis management, and a nervous, nationally televised display of
personally taking charge on the afternoon that the President was shot.

By contrast, in those early weeks, Mr. Weinberger charmed most of political
Washington as an urbane, genial, @Harvard-trained lawyer (and former president
of The Crimson) with a ready wit, wide smile and understated manner. So widely
did some misjudge him that Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina and other
conservatives fought his Senate confirmation out of fear that a soft-liner might
be taking over the Pentagon.

But reality does not always match appearances; substance does not always follow
style. It has taken months for much of the press and public to accept the notion
of Mr. Haig out of uniform and Mr.  Weinberger in command of the military. But
by now the most discerning Washingtonians have come to appreciate that, in fact,
Mr. Weinberger is the Administration's most sharply taloned hawk and that
Secretary Haig is often counseling restraint.

''It's a matter of degree, not a major difference in ideology,'' observed one
White House official. ''They're both tough, but I can't think of a single issue
where Haig was more hawkish than Weinberger.  Generally, Haig is a much more
moderate influence on policy.''

It was Mr. Weinberger, for example, who first floated the idea of reviving the
antimissile defense system and who pushed President Reagan to order production
of the neutron warhead, overriding Mr.  Haig's pleas for delay. And it was
Secretary Haig who persuaded the President - over Mr. Weinberger's objections -
to begin talks with the Russians this year on reducing nuclear forces in Europe.
And in dealing with allies like Japan, West Germany and Israel, Mr. Haig has
advocated gentler diplomacy than Mr. Weinberger.

''Before the Japanese Prime Minister's visit, Mr. Haig argued against pushing
the Japanese into a corner on higher defense spending,'' one Presidential
adviser disclosed. ''He said we could get more out of them if it did not look as
though we were lecturing and pressuring them publicly, whereas Cap felt we
should be hardnosed.''

The proposed $8.5 billion arms sale to Saudi Arabia was originally pushed by Mr.
Weinberger, and the new, more open military sales policy toward China was a pet
idea of Mr. Haig's. Contrary to some disputed news accounts, they took a common
position on suspending jet shipments to Israel after Israeli attacks on Iraq and
Beirut. But they differed later on how hard to press Prime Minister Menachem
Begin for assurances that American planes would not be used for similar raids in
the future.

According to other officials, Mr. Haig opposed extracting promises from the
Israelis or imposing conditions, out of concern for Israeli sensibilities about
national sovereignty, while Mr. Weinberger wanted to press for something more
precise to help protect wider American interests in the region.

Their different approaches spring in part from Mr. Haig's experience in Europe
and in the Nixon Administration. But more significantly, where they stand
depends on where they sit. Like other Pentagon bosses, Mr. Weinberger focuses on
the menace of the Soviet buildup, while Mr. Haig, like other Se cretaries of
State before him, stresses arms control and trade w ith Moscow in return
forglobal restraint. But the two men have such a similar overall view ofthe
strategic rivalry that recently they comb ined forces to oppose any slackening
in the pace of the Reagan mili tary buildup.

From rather testy beginnings, their relationship seems to have mellowed
considerably. They have breakfasted together once a week to compare notes and
air differences. It is no secret that some of those early breakfasts were stiff,
though lately they have grown relaxed.

Still, the two men do not hesitate to twit one another. At one briefing for the
President before an important foreign visit, Secretary Haig gave a lengthy
expostulation on arms policies. Others in the room wondered what was left for
Mr. Weinberger to say.  Puckishly, the Defense Secretary rose and said, ''Well,
now that you've had a briefing on defense, let me give you the foreign policy
briefing.'' The room filled with laughter, Mr. Haig included.

More recently, as Mr. Weinberger was in the headlines making an unwavering stand
for his military budget, he received a phone call from Mr. Haig, who was in a
ribbing mood. ''What's the matter, you're not a team player?'' he needled.
''This is a collegium.'' Then, mocking gossip about how his own open-heart
surgery might have increased his bluster, he quipped: ''Have you had open-heart
surgery, or what?''

Personally, the two men still cut very different figures - Mr.  Weinberger,
low-key, precise as an accountant, fluidly articulate, always in control of
himself; Mr. Haig, quicker to show temper, more openly assertive, prone to
bureaucratic jargon and occasional malapropisms. Last spring, in one classic
mixed metaphor, he told leaders of Jewish organizations not to prejudge the arms
sale to Saudi Arabia. ''Keep your powder dry,'' he advised, ''until you see the
bottom line.''

In the bureaucratic infighting that is so much a part of Washington politics, as
one White House official put it, ''Al Haig is a man who telegraphs his punches
and goes straight toward his objectives, but Cap Weinberger plays things closer
to the vest. He lays back and watches how things play. He's harder to read.''

Which is probably why some moderates, remembering that Mr.  Weinberger was known
as ''Cap the Knife'' when he was budget director, counted on him as a potential
ally at the Pentagon and why hard-right conservatives underestimated his
military zeal. ''I think Caspar has surprised a lot of folks,'' Senator Helms
conceded, smiling. ''I'm vastly more comfortable with him than I was when he was
nominated. He's been very impressive.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Casper Weinberger Photo of Al Haig

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 14, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 963 words


International
The use of poisonous chemicals in Southeast Asian conflicts is demonstrated by
evidence in the possession of the United States, Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr. said in a speech in West Berlin intended to boost West European morale
and invigorate the Western alliance. He said the acquisition of the evidence
followed ''continuing reports'' that the Soviet Union and its allies had been
using ''lethal chemical agents'' in Southeast Asia and Afghanistan.  (Page A1,
Column 5.)
Mr. Haig's visit to West Berlin set off demonstrations by thousands of people
protesting United States foreign policies. The police estimated that as many as
30,000 demonstrators turned out; the protest organizers said 80,000 had taken
part. It was probably the biggest street demonstration in West Berlin since the
Vietnam War, the police said. (A9:1.)
A hunt for $90 million in gold ingots lost when a British battleship was
crippled in a German U-boat attack in World War II has been started by British
divers. (A1:3.)
Defeat of Norway's Labor Party, which has governed for eight years, is expected
in the general election. Every recent public opinion poll indicated that Prime
Minister Gro Harlem Bruntland, who took office in February, had been unable to
reverse her party's decline in popularity. Labor is expected to win the larg est
share of the vote in the balloting, which ends tonight, but not enough to
govern. The new Prime Minister is expected to be Kare Wil loch, who leads the
Conservative Party, which has its largest pub lic support since the 1920's.
(A3:1-3.)
National
Congress wants larger military cuts than the $13 billion in outlays announced by
the White House Saturday, Senator Pete Domenici, the Republican chairman of the
Senate Budget Committee, said. Following several weeks of intense negotiations
between Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and the David A. Stockman,
director of the Office of Management and Budget, the White House said that
President Reagan had decided on a reduction of $13 billion in projected military
spending in the fiscal years 1982-84. Mr. Stockman and other principal White
House aides had proposed cuts of $20 to $30 billion.  (A1:6.)
U.S. military programs will not suffer from the cut in proposed military
spending announced by the Reagan Administration, according to Defense Department
officials and military officers. The military men said the Army, Navy and Air
Force would recommend some reductions in new weapons and the establishment of
new forces, but they would resist a reduction in munitions and supplies needed
in war and a cutback in troops. (B15:1-2.)
Opposition to oil and gas exploration seems to be unanimous among militant
conservationists and Chamber of Commerce businessmen in a Wyoming town, despite
the policies of the Interior Secretary, James G. Watt, who wants to open as much
land as possible to exploration.  And last week, a company that wanted to drill
for oil and gas in Cache Creek Canyon, near Jackson Hole, suddenly withdrew its
application. (A16:1-5.)
John McEnroe won the U.S. Open, defeating Bjorn Borg at the National Tennis
Center in Flushing Meadows, New York, for his third consecutive singles title.
The scores were 4-6, 6-2, 6-4, 6-3. (C1: 2-6.)
William Loeb, the publisher of New Hampshire newspapers, died of cancer at the
Leahy Clinic in Burlington, Mass., at the age of 75.  Publisher of The
Manchester Union Leader and The New Hampshire SundayNews, Mr. Loe b often used
the papers to express his sharp opposition to views that differed from his
deeply conservative position. His opinions earn ed him quadrennial notoriety
because of the Presidentialprimaries in New Hampshire, the first test for the
candidates.  (D15:1-3.)
Metropolitan
A controversial clean air program for the New York City region has been approved
by the Reagan Administrtation, which rejected a position taken by the Carter
Administration, and said that New York State is responsibie for meeting mass
transit needs. As a result, New York is fully in compliance with the Clean Air
Act for the first time since it was passed by Congress more than a decade ago.
The law's intent is the reduction of carbon monoxide levels in the New York
region to Federal standards by the end of 1987. Various requirements of the
Clean Air Act have been met over the years, but whether the state was making
appropriate mass transit improvements to discourage the use of cars in New York
City and in adjoining counties was the main sticking point. The issue is now
resolved. (A1:1.)
The City Council is hard at work preparing its defense of a districting plan for
New York City that is being attacked by blacks and Hispanic groups as
discriminatory. Their protests led to the enjoinment of the Sept. 10 Primary by
a Federal court, but the Council has no intention of redrawing the lines, its
officers said.  (A1:2.)
Cost-of-living wage increases for 35,000 New York City bus and subway employees
is an issue still dividing Transit Authority and union officials, who face a
deadline for agreement less than three weeks away. The issue is productivity.
The wage increases will become effective Oct. 1 if $16.8 million in cost
reductions through improved productivity can be agreed on by that time.
Agreement has been reached on only $7 million of the total, the authority said.
(B3:5-6.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By JOHN LEONARD

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


It is Humphrey Carpenter's bad luck that his biography of W. H.  Auden should
appear just two months after the publication of "Young Auden" by Edward
Mendelson (Viking).  Although Mr. Mendelson stops in 1939, when Auden and
Christopher Isherwood abandoned England for the United States, he has already
made an impressive case for the continuity of a career. According to this case,
Auden shrugged off modernism.  He even came to suspect symbols.  He rid himself
of family, ghosts, trolls, landscapes, history and pure form.  Inside his
exacerbation, he sought the words to praise.  The end of his quest, "the real
world," was rootless America.

Mr. Carpenter, while he emphasizes the chur ch to which Auden returned as if to
his difficult mother, finds in the career less continuity than hodgepodge.  He
would seem to agree with Stephen Spender: "One of Auden's characteristics is t o
make a cult of whatever he happens to be doing, which become s to him what the
poet must do." Mr. Mendelson and Mr. Carpenter ag ree on the invidious
influences - Icelandic Sagas and English boar ding schools; Hardy, Eliot and
Yeats; D.H. Lawrence and Georg Grod deck; John Layard, HomerLane and Gerald
Heard; Kierkegaard, Berth and Reinhold Niebuhr; undigested Marx and Freud - but
one, the fast idious critic, is looking for literary heroism and the other, a
delicious gossip, is looking for good copy. Last Great Eccentric

Mr. Carpenter's Auden is the last great English eccentric.  The young boy looks
at a bone in Julian Huxley's hand and tells him, correctly, that it is "the
pelvis of a bird." The young teacher sleeps outside in the garden; when it
rains, the geese gather under his umbrella.  The poet in New York, flat-footed
and corn-afflicted, resembling at times "a big, mad, white rabbit," at times "a
thatched cottage" and at "a wedding cake left out in the rain" wears carpet
slippers in the snow, but not socks and not socks and not underwear; he also
urinates in his bathroom sink.

In China, according to Isherwood, Auden knew he wouldn't be killed "because
Nanny would never allow it." In Iceland, spending the night in a mental
institution, he talked to the doctor in Latin.  In the homes of his friends, he
was rude, arrogant and ate like a pig.  He loved volka and hated sugar.  LSD did
nothing for him, but he depended on benzedrine and Seconal.  He believed in
black magic, graphology and the telepathic power of cats, and he once laid a
curse on Dylan Thomas.

Anthony Blunt told him about Spain; Guy Burgess telephoned him before fleeing to
the Soviet Union; Edmund Wilson was annoyed to hear from him that Tristan and
Isolde must have been a pair of lesbians "because a man making love to woman
couldn't really get into that rapturous state"; and Hannah Arendt rejected his
proposal of marriage.  The worst lines he ever wrote were "Isobel, who with her
leaping breasts/Pursued me through summer," and he thought they would have been
an ideal caption for a Thurber cartoon.

You are wondering about the sex.  Mr. Carpenter does not stint.There was the
homosexual uncle who collected photographs of naked choirboys. There were the
school chums, the Berlin boys, Fire Island and, of course, Chester Kallman.
Auden apparently had a brief fling with the late Richard Crossman, but not with
the late Benjamin Britten.  He and Isherwood, while wasting their time in China,
considered their visits to the homosexual bathouses to be "afternoon holidays
from their social conscience." The same Auden who approved of Don Giovanni as "a
hero for whom seduction is a vacation" walked out of "Pal Joey" enraged by the
behavior of the chorus girls.  I didn't know any of this.

If you think sex will explain the poet, then Mr. Carpenter is your man. He is as
interested in sex as he is in why Auden only got a Third at Oxford.  (Mr.
Mendelson is more concerned with spies and boundaries and "the absolute gift of
pardon.") All that wit seems to have led to sadness, and yet Auden thought he
had been a happy man.  Mr. Carpenter can't be sure, and neither is Mr.
Mendelson.  At the end, Auden refused to allow conversations about dreams: "The
subconscious," he, "is inherently boring." One wonders about his dreams, about
orpheus and the school marm.

Unanswered Questions

Was he slumming in Spain and China?  How could "The Court Poet of the Left," as
Mr. Mendelson describes him, have come to support American involvement in
Vietnam?  Did he desert England in her hour of need? Were his thin days and
years after the war our fault, Kallman's or his won?  Were they indeed thin?
Mr. Mendelson and Mr.  Carpenter don't think so; Edmund Wilson and Randall
Jarrell disagreed.  B ut as Jarrell said: "One never steps twice into the
sameAuden."

After the poems, the documentary films, the libretts for Britten and Stravinsky,
the anthologies and the aphorisms and the sex, what did he add up to? "I must
have knowledge and a great deal of it," he said, "before I can feel anything."
and: "Political social history would be no different if Dante, Michelango, Byron
had never lived.  Nothing I wrote against Hitler prevented one Jew from being
killed.  In the end, art is small beer." Too bad.  We wanted him to be a great
poet, and every once in a while he chose to be one.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Humphrey Carpenter

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PRESENTS AN ANALYSIS TO BACK ITS CHARGE OF TOXIN WEAPONS' USE;
Text of the statement, page A6.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 984 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


The State Department today produced what it described as ''significant, although
preliminary'' evidence to support charges that toxic chemical weapons have been
used in Southeast Asia and possibly Afghanistan, in violation of international
agreements banning their use.

Yesterday in Berlin, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr charged in a speech
that confirmation had now been found to give substance to what he called
''continuing reports'' that the Soviet Union and the Vietnamese had been using
lethal agents known as mycotoxins, poisons produced organically that are not
indigenous to Southeast Asia.

The Soviet Union denounced the charges as ''a big lie'' but made no effort to
substantiate its rebuttal. Instead, the official press agency, Tass, accused the
United States of using chemical weapons on a greater scale than ''any country in
the history of international relations.'' (Page A8.)

The main piece of evidence presented by the State Department today was an
analysis of one leaf-and-stem sample collected in Cambodia near the Thai border
in March of this year. That sample indicated ''high levels of three potent
mycotoxins of the trichothecene group,'' according to the statement read by
Walter J. Stoessel Jr., Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs.

Until the sample was collected, the United States had relied on information from
witnesses and victims over the last five years. They had described the
symptomatic effects of what has become known as ''yellow rain'' from the colored
powder in which the toxins reportedly were released from aircraft.

No further physical evidence was presented, but officials said that other
samples had been collected for study. A panel of defense, intelligence and
medical experts assembled at today's briefing, who, in an unusual move, were not
identified by name or title, said that for a number of years American
specialists had been seeking a conventional chemical compound to explain the
reported effects of ''yellow rain.''

Only recently, they said, were they able to ''shake out '' evidence that they
were dealing with another kind of b iological-chemical agent.

Mycotoxins are poisonous to animals and humans. In humans, contact with the
mycotoxins - in this case three agents producing separate symptoms -leads withi
n minutes to vomiting, itching and tingling of the skin, dam age and
hemorrhaging from mucous membranes, multiple skin blisters and, ultimately,
death.

Those symptoms have been reported from Cambodia, Laos and Afghanistan.
Administration officials said today there was evidence that the toxins had been
used against villagers in Laos and against the remaining forces of the former
regime of Pol Pot still fighting in Cambodia.

Mycotoxins occur naturally in certain parts of the world, among them the Soviet
Union, where outbreaks of such poisoning have been traced to grain stored
improperly in damp conditions. Soviet scientists have been researching the
toxins for more than 50 years, Administration officials say. The officials
appeared to link Soviet and Eastern European expertise in the field to the
appearance of the chemical weapon in areas in which the Soviet Union is
strategically involved, but they said they had no direct evidence of the link.

According to a State Department fact sheet distributed to reporters today, the
toxins, produced from Fusarium fungi, can be made in large quantities.
''Preparation does require, however, large-scale biological fermentation
facilities,'' the statement said, ''and no such facilities are known to exist in
Southeast Asia.'' No evidence for the existence of specific facilities in the
Soviet Union was presented, but officials said that they had been able to
identify a number of laboratories in Warsaw Pact nations where there had been
research on mycotoxins.

Administration officials acknowledged at the briefing that the research of
Sterling Seagrave, collected in a soon-to-be published book, ''Yellow Rain,''
had been ''instrumental'' in bringing the problem of chemical warfare in
Southeast Asia to the attention of the Government, but they said that it was not
the book that had identified the compound. They said their own research had been
going on concurrently with that reported in the book.

Sterling Seagrave is the son of the late Dr. Gordon S. Seagrave, a medical
missionary who became widely known as the ''Burma surgeon.'' The son, a
journalist, grew up in Burma.

The officials added that Government research was continuing and that there were
other samples from the Laotian and Cambodian area still to be tested.

Reports of the use of chemical warfare in Southeast Asia have been of concern to
the United States since at least 1976. In 1979 there were hearings in the House
Foreign Affairs Committee's subcommittee on Asian and Pacific affairs after
medical and other witnesses reported chemical attacks by Vietnam on the hill
people of Laos. The Carter Administration concluded that the Meo hill people had
been the victims of at least three chemical agents.

In June 1980, the United States Government prepared a compendium of all reports
received on suspected use of chemical weapons. The document was used in support
of a December 1980 United Nations resolution establishing an international
investigation into chemical weapons. That investigation has not been completed.

Mr. Stoessel said today that the United States had expressed its concern to the
Soviet, Vietnamese and Laotian governments and had been told that the fears were
unfounded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW SAYS TOXIN CHARGE MADE BY HAIG WAS A 'BIG LIE'

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 544 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Sept. 14


The Soviet Union today described as a ''big lie'' the allegation in a West
Berlin speech yesterday by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. that the
Soviet Union has been supplying poisonous chemicals for use in warfare in
Afghanistan, Cambodia and Laos.

A long article by the official press agency Tass offered Soviet readers none of
the details set forth by Mr. Haig, and apart from dismissing the Secretary's
charges as ''libelous and groundless,'' made no attempt to substantiate its
rebuttal.

Instead, it countered with a chronicle of purported abuses by Washington, saying
that ''no country in the history of international relations has used chemical
weapons as extensively as the United States.'' Apart from American military
practices in Vietnam, the Soviet agency said that American-manufactured chemical
weapons were being used by anti-Government insurgents in Afghanistan and by the
United States-backed junta in El Salvador.

'Arrogantly Anti-Soviet'

The Tass article, describing Mr. Haig's speech as ''more vituperatively and
arrogantly anti-Soviet than any other of his speeches,'' was written in the
indignant tone characteristic of Soviet propaganda since the Reagan
Administration took office with its tough stance on relations with Moscow.

Nothing in the Soviet press, or for that matter in speeches by Soviet officials,
including the Communist Party leader, Leonid I.  Brezhnev, has suggested that
Moscow foresees an easing of ten-sions when Mr. Haig meets in New York later
this month with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko. Rather, the
official Soviet posture suggests that the meeting, the highest-level contact
since the Reagan Administration took office, could prove to be one of the
chilliest since the cold war.

Soviet propagandists rarely pass up an opportunity to note Mr.  Haig's
background as a career military officer, and today's Tass article was no
exception. It said that the Secretary of State ''who fought in Vietnam during
the 1960's, should know more than anyone else about the large-scale use of
chemical agents by the U.S.  aggressors in Indochina.''

'Criminal Practice Continues'

It added: ''This criminal practice continues to be used today.  Bands of
counterrevolutionaries are supplied with chemical grenades made in the United
States and use them against the civilian population of Afghanistan. The
Salvadoran junta backed by Washington drops chemical bombs of the U.S. make on
patriots and civilians in El Salvador.''

As for the Soviet Union, Tass said that Moscow was one of the first governments
to sign the 1925 Geneva protocol banning the use of suffocating, poisonous and
other similar gases and bacteriological agents in warfare. The agency also noted
that the Soviet Union offered a draft convention that would have banned the
development, production and stockpiling of chemical weapons, as well as the
destruction of existin g stocks, in the disarmament committee of the United
Nation s in 1972.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 923 words


T URF conflicts are inevitable in Washington, but this one has a new twist. The
Republicans, who hold a four-year lease on the real estate, are saying Democrats
are at fault.

Initially, Richard S. Schweiker, the head of the Department of Health and Human
Services, was known to be upset about the powerful role that the budget
director, David A. Stockman, was exerting on social welfare and health policy.
There were also grumbles in Mr.  Stockman's shop about the caliber of some of
Mr. Schweiker's appointees

Now aides to Mr. Schweiker indicate that he is also irked at Robert Carleson, a
White House special assistant who was welfare director in California when
President Reagan was Governor. Aides to Mr. Schweiker even say that the
California welfare specialist is floating rumors that Mr. Schweiker plans to
resign because Mr. Carleson wants his job.

Mr. Carleson, the architect of the Administration's ''workfare'' program, says
he's ''getting along great'' with Mr. Schweiker. ''I'm pleased with everything
going on there and our relationship's been fine,'' he said. White H ouse aides
say all the smoke is actually being fanned by disgruntled Democrats in the
agency, trying to work up a feud bet ween Republicans. Privately, some
Republicans say where there's smoke , there's ...

I SRAELI officials traveling with Prime Minister Menachem Begin, who is in New
York and scheduled to return home tomorrow, are feeling withering heat from an
unexpected quarter: their own supporters. The Israeli officials shrug and say,
in effect, blame Nancy.

An edict laid down months ago by Nancy Reagan said that all White House state
dinners should be limited to 96 people - a rule that was observed without great
difficulty at dinners for such recent visitors as President Anwar el-Sadat of
Egypt and Prime Ministers Malcolm Fraser of Aust ralia and Zenko Suzuki of Japan
.

And then Mr. Begin arrived.  ''In the past the numbers at these dinners have
reached as high as 140 or 150 and there just wasn't any room,'' said Sheila
Tate, Mrs.  Reagan's press secretary. ''Waiters bumped into chairs. You couldn't
lean back. We wanted dinners to flow better.''

Flow or no flow, Israeli officials, especially Ambassador Ephraim Evron, were
bewildered at the restrictions as aides fended off dozens of calls from
disgruntled American supporters of Israel who sought White House invitations to
the dinner last week. ''Everyone wanted to be invited,'' Mr. Evron groaned to a
friend.

A T the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Secretary Samuel R. Pierce
is spending $26,455 to refinish and clean cherry paneling in the offices of his
deputies.  At the Commerce Department, Secretary Malcolm Baldrige is spending
$12,445 to redecorate and enlarge his private dining and conference room, $55
apiece for jackets for security guards (''When I first arrived, the guards
didn't even wear neckties'') and $2,185 to put a coat of navy blue paint on the
guard shacks outside the agency.

''Haven't been painted in many years and look like-third rate outhouses at
second-rate rodeos,'' says Mr. Baldrige.

J UDGE Sandra Day O'Connor, her confirmation as a Supreme Court justice all but
assured, just saw ''First Monday in October,'' the film about the first woman on
the Court. She didn't like it.

A N administration's commitment to specific issues is often measured in its
appointments - or lack of appointments - to certain jobs. The Carter
Administration's earliest announcements involved nominations for the human
rights, arms limitation and refugee positions in the State Department. The
Reagan Administration has not yet selected an ambassador at large and
coordinator for refugee affairs, nor has anyone been appointed Assistant
Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. Ernest W. Lefever
withdrew his name from consideration for the latter job following Congressional
opposition in the spring. Although Eugene V. Rostow is now the head of the Arms
Control or Disarmament Agency, none of his principal subordinates have been
announced.

A T the Pentagon, Gen. David C.  Jones, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, is scheduled to retire next summer, and intense jockeying has already
begun to fill the slot. The front-runners are Adm. Thomas B. Hayward, a
57-year-old Navy pilot who fought in Korea and Vietnam, who is now Chief of
Naval Operations, and Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Edward C. Meyer, a 53-year-old
West Pointer who served in Europe and the Pentagon before assuming his current
job two years ago. Both men are low-keyed and have earned reputations as
intellectuals.  Francis X. Clines

Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SAIGON AIDE: 'THEY SAY, HOW ARE YOU, MR. GOLDBERG?'

BYLINE: By LYNN ROSELLINI, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 443 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


When sales are slow at Goldberg's Delly, Bui Diem sometimes sits behind the cash
register and wonders how he wound up selling pastrami sandwiches.

''Here, among all the customers coming and going,'' said Mr. Diem, the former
South Vietnamese Ambassador to the United States, ''I must confess, I keep
thinking about the country. Where did we go wrong?''

For the last three years, Mr. Diem and his wife, Kim Ngoc, have operated the
delicatessen on K Street in downtown Washington.  ''Pretty dull,'' he said the
other day, sitting in a back booth during a break in the lunch hour trade.  The
Delly is just a few blocks from the old South Vietnamese Embassy, where Mr. Diem
served as Ambassador from 1967 to 1972, and later as Ambassador-at-Large. As a
close adviser to former Premier Nguyen Cao Ky, Mr. Diem was once wined and dined
by diplomats and s ought after by journalists.

But Mr. Ky now runs a dress shop in California, and Mr. Diem seldom sees his
former pals from the media and diplomatic corps, unless they drop by Goldberg's
for a sandwich.

''They joke with me. They say, 'How are you, Mr. Goldberg?' '' said Mr. Diem,
who observed that many people think it's funny to see a Vietnamese man running a
Jewish delicatessen. ''I tell them I'm second generation.''

Washington is full of men who, like Mr. Diem, have lost their once-prominent
positions but have stayed on here in semi-exile.  ''I'm not embarrassed,'' said
Mr. Diem of his new job. ''It is normal for everyone to earn honestly a
living.''

Mr. Diem, a sl ght man with glasses and thinning hair slicked back from his
forehead, lives in Rockville, Md., with his wife and their 14-year-old son. He
left Vietnam two days bef ore the fall of Saigon in 1975. ''I lost everything,''
he said. ''I was jobless. I was penniless.''

With the help of friends, Mr. Diem came to Washington and supported his family
by writing articles and working for the Rand Corporation.  Three years ago, he
borrowed money to buy a share of the Delly, which has never been owned by anyone
named Goldberg.

But neither Mr. Diem nor his wife was familiar with delicatessen food, and there
were some initial problems. Once, for instance, a customer came in and demanded
Dr. Brown's soda, a delicatessen favorite.

''You run a deli, and you got no Dr. Brown's?'' the man asked.  Mr. Diem had
never heard of Dr. Brown's. ''But I learned,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bui Diem

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 15, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM DEAD HONORED IN BOSTON CEREMONY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 335 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 14


Several thousand people participated yesterday in ceremonies in Independence
Park honoring the 25 South Boston men who lost their lives in the Vietnam war.

''This is a lasting memorial to my father,'' said Sean Sheehan, 17 years old,
who was 4 when his f ather went to war. ''It may be a little late, 12 years too
late. But it's time for it. People have to acknowledge t hat Vietnam veterans
should be treated like everyone else who went to war.''

The youth's father, Paul H. Sheehan, a career sergeant in the Marine Corps, was
killed in combat.  Members of several military groups participated in the
ceremony along with members of the 25 families of the dead. They dedicated a
black stone monument that welcomes home those who served in Vietnam from 1961 to
1975 and includes the names of the 25 men who died and the services they
represented.

Recognition From President

The dedication received official recognition from President Reagan and all
branches of the military.  ''This has helped me more than anything else in 13
years,'' said Kathy Stanley, whose brother, John P. Jacobs, a marine, was among
the 25 honored.

Paul Duffy, a Vietnam veteran, said: ''This means that we are finally uncovering
the idea that we lost, and saying: 'So what. We lost, but individual effort was
not lost.' ''

Thomas Lyons, Thomas Irwin, George Egan, Henry Carrol and Jerry Turner, all of
South Boston, worked more than three years to get the monument to South Boston.

The people of South Boston contributed more than $38,000 to the monument.
''They did it the old-fashioned way, by putting tin cans in bars,'' said the
Rev. Thomas P. Forry, who celebrated a memorial mass for the 25 men in St.
Brigid's Church yesterday morning.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 16, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR' OPPOSITION

BYLINE: By Carlos Fuentes

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


When President Jose Lopez Portillo of Mexico and President Reagan meet in Grand
Rapids, Mich., on Friday at the opening of the Gerald R. Ford Library and
Museum, the explosive Central American situation will have changed substantially
since their last meeting, in Washington in June. The new factor is the joint
Franco-Mexican declaration, issued Aug. 28, recognizing the opposition in El
Salvador as a ''representative political force.''

The document, presented to the United Nations Security Council by Foreign
Ministers Claude Cheysson of France and Jorge Castaneda of Mexico, has been
denounced as ''interventionist'' by nine Latin American countries, among them
Venezuela, a democracy, and Chile, a brutal dictatorship.

But here in Mexico City, public opinion is reasoning that the Salvadoran
opposition - both the guerrillas of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation
Front and the political leadership of the Democratic Revolutionary Front -
already have been given a powerful representative role by the militant policies
of the Reagan Administration.

Washington's approach could lead to interna tionalization of the Salvadoran
conflict in terms of East-West con frontation. But while this is only a
potential danger, genocide has become an everyday occurrence: 25,000 Salvadorans
have died, and it is not peace that isat hand but rather the prolonged horrors
of a stalemated civil war inwhich the army and death squads murder indisc
riminately while the ruling military-civilian junta desperately as ks Washington
for more and more military aid.

The Franco-Mexican initiative serves two immediate purposes. First, it
deliberately creates a situation in international law that permits invocation of
the Geneva convention for the protection of combatants in cases of civil strife
and the application of a policy of neutrality toward all the parties in the
conflict.

To argue that Mexico and France are intervening in El Salvador by asking
everyone not to intervene is pure nonsense. But to argue that the junta has
invited the United States to furnish it with arms and money, thus legitimizing
United States interven tion, is to evoke the parallel ghos ts of Afghanistan,
Czechoslovakia, and Vietnam. It mighteven incite a symmetrical Soviet action in
Poland.

Since the Reagan Administration has cast the Salvadoran conflict in East-West
terms, both the genocide and prospect of internationalization legitimately worry
Mexico and France.

As for its second purpose, the joint document foresees, with reasonable hope,
that the Salvadoran people are capable of comprehensive political negotiations
that would both restructure the armed forces and create proper conditions for
free elections.

The Franco-Mexican declaration seeks to open a realistic democratic process that
cannot begin with elections but rather must recognize that without a previous
negotiating process, the planned elections for a constitutional assembly next
March will be a sham.

Who will participate in elections under the shadow of the unregenerate army and
security forces that only last winter murdered the top echelon of Democratic
Revolutionary Front leaders and that in 1972 deprived President-elect Jose
Napoleon Duarte and Vice President-elect Manuel Guillermo Ungo of their
legitimate victories at the polls? President Duarte and Mr. Ungo, who now heads
the Democratic Revolutionary Front, are rivals. Why should the army respect in
1981 what it so wantonly disregarded in 1972?

The present course of events in El Salvador will lead to largescale
extermination. The triumph of the extreme left in the field would provoke an
extreme reaction by the United States, thus inviting even more merciless
repression; the triumph of the extreme right would perpetuate uncontrolled
genocide.

Presidents Lopez Portillo and Francois Mitterrand have acted to avoid all these
extremes. They offer Mr. Reagan the opportunity to give up his phantasmagorical
argument of Communist intervention.

El Salvador's representative forces are now recognized by two countries with
close political, economic, and diplomatic ties to the United States. Neither
France nor Mexico want a Sovietized regime in El Salvador but neither do they
want a United States protectorate that is fated to suffer relentless violence.
Their proposal would lead to a social democratic republic that is attainable
only if the rights and duties of the opposition are recognized along with the
social and economic causes of the Salvadoran upheaval, thus creating conditions
for the implementation of a comprehensive democratic process.

Real friends are independent friends who speak truthfully and propose
intelligent, even if difficult, solutions. Mexico and France have offered the
United States a way out of the swamp. Mr. Reagan should seize the opportunity.
Michigan is a good place to do it, and, since Prime Minister Pierre Elliott
Trudeau of Canada also will be present, it might be a good time to demonstrate
that in the Western Hemisphere, the United States prefers its friends to its
satellites.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Carlos Fuentes, a novelist, was Mexico's Ambassador to France from 1975 to 1977.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 16, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS PEOPLE;
Coaches Hard to Get

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 213 words


Richard Keenan, a physical education teacher, and Jame s O'Neil, a teacher of so
cial studies, have sued in Superior Court in Morristown,N.J., against the
Hanover Park (N.J.) Regional District Board of Education. Th ey are contesting
their selection as assistant football coaches at Wh ippany Park High School
without their consent. Keenan, who served as head coach at the school for 12
years until his resignation i n 1977, said he was under contract to coach
wrestling atMorris County College. O'Neil, who had been Keenan's assistant for
five years, s ays his exposure to the her bicide Agent Orang e in Vietnam has
made him susceptible to illness in cold, damp weather.  Lloyd H. Steen, the
superintendent of the school district, said he had not been aware of O'Neil's
illness when he recommended him for the job. Mr. Steen said the board had been
authorized to a ssign teachers to extracurricular jobs if qualified volunteers w
ere not available. He said he had advertised the jobs, which pay $ 1,473, in
colleges, newspapers and on radio and cable television. Ju dge Reginald Stanton
will hear the case Sept. 28.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Bernard Weinraub

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words


A T the White House, President Reagan's advisers have carefully weighed the best
way to react to the first major anti-Administration march protesting the budget
cuts and labor policy. The labor ''solidarity'' demonstration, on Saturday, is
expected to lure tens of thousands of demonstrators to Washington.

Initially, Mr. Reagan's aides scheduled a highly visible weekend trip to the
Southwest for the President to meet Hispanic leaders.  Now Mr. Reagan has
tentatively decided to lower his profile. He will fly to Camp David on Friday
and stay at the retreat through the weekend.

Paradoxically, the White House is hoping that the controllers' strike will limit
the numbers of demonstrators. Most unions have ruled out air travel because of
the strike and are scheduled to swarm into the capital by bus.

F OR years the Veterans Administration has been a quagmire, a big, faceless
bureaucracy whose own officials concede that it is often unresponsive to the
needs of 30 million veterans. The Reagan Administration promised to reform the
$25 billion agency (which employs 220,000 civil servants) but another kind of
upheaval has taken place.

Alan Clark, a Vietnam War Green Beret and double amputee, who was nominated
deputy administrator, quit in a bureaucratic tug-of-war with the third-ranking
official, Nick Longworth, an Indiana Republican who was named chief of staff by
Robert P. Nimmo, the director.

Then Mr. Longworth resigned because of ''differences of perception'' over his
role, according to Mr. Nimmo, a California Republican and close friend of Edwin
Meese 3d, President Reagan's White House aide. Mr. Longworth's resi gnation was
quickly followed by the departure of such Republicans as Harry Donohue, head of
the V.A.'s Congressional liaison; Joan Standlee, Mr. Longworth's executive
assistant; and Doug Bazata, the Vet erans Administration's aide for liaison with
other agencies. Mr. Nim mo says he's now seekingto reorganize the top tier of
the V.A., which is the second largest Government agency, after the Defense
Departme nt.

T HE seriousness of the White House about cutting spending even further was
underscored yesterday by President Reagan himself. He canceled his weekly
Wednesday afternoon horseback ride in Quantico, Va., and met, instead, with the
budget director, David A Stockman.

R ETURNING to his office recently after the summer recess, Representative
Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, picked up the phone for a reporter's
question.

Any overseas trips in the last few weeks? asked the caller.  Mr. Solarz
bristled. ''I went to Brighton Beach, Coney Island, Boroough Park and Flatbush.
I visited subways in the morning, shopping centers in the afternoon and the
boardwalk in the evening, O.K.?''

Mr. Solarz is a leader among Congressional travelers, and took more trips abroad
than any other member of Congress for three years in a row, 1976-78. Last year
he visited the Middle East, Asia and Europe.

Mr. Solarz, a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, vehemently defends his
trips, saying he has helped save ''hundreds of millions of dollars otherwise
squandered on boondoggles abroad.'' Had Congressmen examined first-hand the
Vietnam situation in the 1960's, he says, the war could have been avoided.

''Would anyone criticize a member of the Education Committee for visiting
schools or someone from the Agriculture Committee for touring farms?'' asks Mr.
Solarz. He is especially piqued at Representative John LeBoutillier, a Nassau
County Republican who defeated Democrat Lester L. Wolff on the junketing issue
and crusades against foreign travel with the fervor of a warrior .

''There's so little check on any of these trips, you can get up and go
anyplace,'' said Mr. LeBoutillier. '' People going to look at the sewer system
of Paris. That's ridiculous.''

A T the memorial services yesterday morning for Joseph H. Hirshhorn, who died
two weeks ag o at the age of 82, friends recounted stories of the immigr ant boy
from Latvia who arrived penniless in Brooklyn and amassed a fortune in gold,
uranium and silver. The museum encompassing Mr. Hirshhorn's extraordinary art
collection opened in Washington, D .C., in 1974 amid some controversy, with some
critics sniffing that it was unthinkable that a museum on the Smithsonian
complex shoul d be named ''Hirshhorn.''

To which the elfin, blunt-spoken art collector replied: ''Would they complain if
my name was Rockefeller?''

T HE cruise down the Potomac River was marred by rain the other night, but the
diplomats, businessmen and politicians didn't seem to mind. Especially Senator
S.I. Hayawawa.

Wearing a dapper blue dress shirt, plaid tie and white jacket, the California
Republican danced a jitterbug with the wife of the Ambassador from Nepal,
grabbed a reporter from Women's Wear Daily and did a little shuffle to
''Sentimental Journey,'' and swept up a blonde real estate agent from New York
for a fast foxtrot. As if that weren't enough for a hard-working Senator, Mr.
Hayakawa stepped to the dance floor moments later and performed the Charleston
alone while a band wailed ''When the Saints Go Marching In.''

As one guest marveled at the Senator's stamina, his date for the evening, a
California public relations woman, confided a strategy: ''We're trying to make
him a viable candidate.''

Senator Hayakawa is up for re-election next year and his age - 75 - is expected
to be a major issue.  Francis X. Clines
Bernard Weinraub
Bernard Weinraub

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Washington's Hirshhorn Museum

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 17, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
SMITH'S OFFICIAL SECRETS

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 16


A potentially far-reaching step toward greater secrecy in government was taken
the other day by the Attorney General, William French Smith. His action drew
little notice, very likely because the meaning of what happened was not
immediately understood.

Mr. Smith revoked guidelines adopted last December by his predecessor, Benjamin
Civiletti, for the Justice Department's exercise of what Mr. Civiletti has
called ''an extremely dangerous power.'' That is the power to silence or
severely penalize present or former Government employees if they violate what
some official decides were ''secrecy obligations.''

The subject is complicated, but the most drastic effects of Mr.  Smith's order
can be summarized. It opens the way for this and future Administrations to:

* Penalize employees who publish information about Government activity without
first clearing it with their superiors even if the employees have never signed
any agreement to clear material and are not aware of such an ''obligation.''

* Seek prior restraints not only on Government employees but also on the press.

* Invoke severe financial penalties even when no classified information was in
fact disclosed.  The Justice Department's power to silence Government employees
arises from the case of Frank Snepp, which was decided by the Supreme Court last
February. Mr. Snepp, who had been a C.I.A. officer in South Vietnam, wrote a
book about American blunders there, particularly the abandonment of Vietnamese
who had worked for the C.I.A. He did not clear the manuscript with the agency
before publication, as he had promised to do in a secrecy agreement.

The Supreme Court held that Mr. Snepp had violated a binding contract and could
be deprived of his gross receipts from the book, $140,000. Then the Court added
a more sweeping suggestion. It said that any Government employee with ''access
to confidential sources,'' whether or not he had signed a secrecy agreement and
whether or not he was an intelligence agent, could be in a ''trust
relationship'' subjecting him to the same drastic penalties if he published
something without clearance.

That was what led Attorney General Civiletti to speak of a ''dangerous power.''
Congress has never passed a law making it a crime for Government employees to
disclose information, except for codes or nuclear se-crets or under espionage
circumstances. Yet the Supreme Cou rt, by using the novel concept of a ''trust
relationship,'' created a potential equivalen t of the British Official Secrets
Act.

The Civiletti guidelines were designed first of all to discourage use of that
vague, judicially created theory of secrecy based on a ''trust relationship.''
They said that Justice Department lawyers could recommend suits only if
Government employees had failed to obtain clearance ''required by an express
agreement or agency regulation.''

The guidelines said that the department should be especially cautious in seeking
a court injunction against an employee's uncleared publication, regarding such
prior restraints as ''an extraordinarily serious matter.'' And there were to be
no suits for injunctions against other persons who had employee information -
the press, for example - except in such special circumstances as an ''imminent
threat to the national security.''

In deciding whether to recommend a suit, the guidelines said, lawyers should
consider aggravating factors -whether, for example, classified information was
disclosed and whether it was likely to do ''substantial harm to particular
operations of the agency or endanger individual lives.'' Finally, lawyers were
told that in seeking monetary penalties ''the Government does not seek to reduce
defendants to penury.''

All of those cautions and protections were swept away by Attorney General Smith.
His policy statement did not exactly alert the reader to what he was doing. It
blandly said that the guidelines were being revoked ''to avoid any confusion
over whether the United States will evenhandedly and strenuously pursue any
violations of confidentiality obligations.''

Use of the word ''obligations'' showed what Mr. Smith was really doing. He was
making clear that future s uits - for prior restraints or savage pen alties -
would not be confined to violations of express secrecy contr acts. Indeed, the
order at one point spoke of employees being ''oblig ated by contract or
otherwise.''

Mr. Smith earlier revoked a policy of resisting Freedom of Information Act suits
only if disclosure would be ''demonstrably harmful.'' Together, his two orders
indicate that the Justice Department will no longer exercise the independent
judgment that has always been its pride; it will simply carry out the wishes of
its official clients. In short, Mr. Smith has adopted the hired-gun theory of
law practice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 316 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 19, 1981 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

EL SALVADOR AT WAR

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 2; Column 4; Cultural Desk; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 329 words


The current small festival at the Paramount Theater is called ''Movies for
Cynics,'' but some of the offerings have less to do with cynicism than with
vigorous outrage. This is especially true of ''El Salvador: Another Vi etnam,''
a new version by Glenn Silber and Tete Vasconcellos of their earlier ''El
Salvador: Another Vietnam?'' whichwas shown on public television last January.

The change in punctuation is significant. There is now no doubt in Mr. Silber's
mind about the true nature of what's happening in El Salvador or about the
dangers inherent in the United States policy designed to support the regime in
power.

The 53-minute film is a heartbreaking review of recent events in that deeply
torn nation, including dramatic interviews with the people in power as well as
with opposition leaders, religious and political, some of whom, before the film
is over, have been assassinated with the tacit approval of the authorities. No
film of this length can do justice to the complexities of the situation, but
''El Salvador'' is less concerned with probing issues in depth than in recording
the mounting indignation, frustration and terror throughout the land.

The anguish expressed is real and profound.

''El Salvador: Another Vietnam'' will be shown today at 4:30 P.M. and Tuesday at
9. On the same bill is ''Nixon: From Checkers to Watergate,'' directed by
Charles Braverman and produced by him and Ken Rudolph.

This 20-minute film is a superficial if jazzily edited recap of the career of
Richard M. Nixon as seen in dozens of newsreel clips. It doesn't even do justice
to injustice.

The Program

EL SALVADOR: ANOTHER VIETNAM, directed and produced by Glenn Silber and Tete
Vasconcellos; edited by Deborah Shaffer; camera, Tom Sigel; music by Wendy
Blackstone and Ber- nardo Palombo; produced in association with M, J, & E
Productions. Running time: 53 minutes. This film is not rated. At the Paramount
Theater, at Columbus Circle, part of ''Movies for Cynics'' series.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

POL POT GROUP WINS AT U.N. FOR 3D YEAR

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 18


For the third year, the General Assembly has decided that Cambodia's seat at the
United Nations should be retained by the deposed Communist Government that was
headed by Pol Pot.

The Assembly voted more than 2 to 1 against a Soviet and Vietnamese effort to
strip the Pol Pot delegation of its credentials and turn them over to the
Communist Government of Heng Samrin, who was installed in Phnom Penh in early
1979 by Vietnam.

The vote today was a victory for China, the principal supplier of arms for Pol
Pot, who is now the field commander of guerrillas fighting in northwestern
Cambodia.

The vote was also a victory for the five members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations - Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines.
The United States quietly threw its diplomatic weight behind this combination.

Vote for Pol Pot Group Grows

The outcome was no surprise to diplomats here save for the fact that the Pol Pot
faction received a slightly increased vote. Two years ago, its credentials were
upheld 71 to 35. Last year, the count was 74 to 35. Today, it was 77 to 37 with
31 abstentions.

Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief United States delegate, absented herself from
today's session as a sign of American disapproval of Mr. Pol Pot, whose forces
are accused of killing up to three million Cambodians during nearly four years
in power. The American vote for the ousted regime was cast by her deputy,
Kenneth L. Adelman.

But to many delegates this gesture seemed diminished by the American action at a
United Nations conference on Cambodia last July. There, according to Asian
diplomats, the United States, in an apparent move to strengthen its ties with
Peking, actively supported China's successful effort to prevent any obstacles to
Pol Pot's eventual return to power.

Vietnam Led Fight for Seat

The unsuccessful fight to strip the Pol Pot faction of its seat today was led by
Ha Van Lau of Vietnam, whose Government is believed to have about 200,000 troops
in Cambodia to support the Heng Samrin regime.

He complained that Cambodia's place had been ''usurped'' because of ''an
extremely dangerous plot woven by the Peking hegemonists and supported by
Washington.'' The two nations, he said, aim at again imposing a ''genocidal
regime'' in Phnom Penh to wage ''a war of attrition'' against the three
Indochinese countries - Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia.

Mr. Ha Van Lau said Vietnam would not withdr aw its troops until this ''threat
had been removed.'' Nor, he said, would it allow the United Nation s to play any
role in a settlement until the Pol Pot group was den ied its seat.

Ling Qing of China replied that Vietnam's ''outrageous aggression'' would be
rewarded if the Pol Pot group lost its seat. The rival Government installed in
Phnom Penh was a ''puppet regime,'' he said, that ''cannot survive a single day
without the 200,000 Vietnamese troops'' in Cambodia.

Past Support Is Noted

Tommy T.B. Koh of Singapore taunted Vietnam and the Soviet Union for denouncing
the crimes of the Pol Pot faction. The Communist nations, he noted, had
championed the regime when it was in power.

Mr. Adelman said that the United States supported the Pol Pot group ''on
technical grounds'' because no other faction had a better claim to the United
Nations seat. He said that Washington remains ''deeply concerned'' over the
''severe human rights violations'' that took place in Cambodia ''over the ye
ars.''

In what has now become a ritual here, the Arab countries, speaking through the
Sudan, questioned Israel's credentials on the ground that it had defied many
United Nations resolutions. But no move was made to bring the matter to a vote.
Delegations here believe that the ouster of Israel would probably lead to a
boycott of the United Nations by the United States and other nations, paralyzing
the organization.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BODIES FROM LAOS SAID TO BE ASIAN, NOT AMERICAN

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 377 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


The Defense Department said today that remains turned over to the United States
authorities in Thailand in July and August were not those of eight American
servicemen missing in Laos.

A Pentagon announcement said the remains were all ''Southeast Asian Mongoloid
and not American.'' The remains had been turned over to the United States
Embassy in Bangkok in two sets of four by ''Laotian sources'' and were said to
be those of missing American soldiers, the announcement said.

''Analysis by the Army's Central Identification Laboratory in Hawaii proved this
contention to be false,'' it said.  The announcement also said the United States
Government was continuing to press the authorities in Indochina for the fullest
accounting of missing Americans but had got ''extremely little cooperation.''

The remains of three American pilots turned over by the Vietnamese Government at
about the same time had been positively identified.  They were buried after a
ceremony in Arlington National Cemetery.

More than 2,400 Americans are still listed as missing in action in Indochina.

Found by Guerrillas

According to a report July 14 from Bangkok, an embassy spokesman, Lieut. Col.
Paul Mather, said anti-Communist guerrillas who had made a recent foray into
Laos had brought back two sets of remains said to be those of American fliers
killed in the war.

The report quoted Colonel Mather as saying the remains had been turned over to
him by an American citizen who lives in Bangkok, identified as Robert W. Schwab
3d. The report added that unidentified sources close to anti-Communist Laotian
guerrillas said he recently accompanied a group into southern Laos to a crash
site where the remains were found.

On Aug. 13, according to a report from Bangkok, the embassy received what were
said to be the remains of four more American airmen shot down over Laos. The
report added that George Brooks, a member of the board of the National League of
Families, an organization set up in 1970 to find Americans missing in action,
said he acted as an intermediary in handing over the remains.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SOLIDARITY DAY'S ENIGMATIC ORGANIZER;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN, Specia l to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1278 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


The man who will lead the first mass protest against the economic and social
policies of the Reagan Administration, the man who, his associates say, thought
up the notion of having it, who gave it its name,

Solidarity Day, is a curious and in some ways enigmatic fellow.  He is a man who
is moderate in outlook, like the 15-million-member federation he heads, which
has not been the kind of organization given to staging such affairs.

He holds strong convictions, apparently with the deepest emotions, about what he
sees as the responsibility of government to assist its citizens and about the
rights of working class people.

Yet he sometimes seems closer to industrialists than to the working class. A
public man, he appears to have the mannerisms and desires of the private man. He
is, it appears, somewhat reclusive, granting few audiences to journalists. He
does not enjoy ''one-on-one situations,'' an associate said.

The man is Lane Kirkland, president of the American Federation of Labor and
Congress of Industrial Organizations, and tomorrow Mr.  Kirkland will lead
perhaps 200,000 marchers, maybe more, up Constitution and Pennsylvania Avenues
to the west front of the Capitol. In fervor and perhaps in numbers, the rally
seems likely to hark back to the protest demonstrations in Washington in the
Vietnam War.

Genesis of 'Solidarity Day'

Mr. Kirkland explained that he he had called the rally for two reasons: He was
insulted in February when President Reagan remarked that union leaders were no
longer close to the rank and file; and in regional meetings arou nd the country
in March and April, the one demand was fo r some kind of mass protest against
Administration policies.

Mr. Kirkland is a man immersed in labor and national history, and his speeches
present carefully reasoned, ardent defenses of working people. This is what he
said this month to the United Steelworkers of America about President Reagan's
contention that Government must get off the backs of the people:

''I remember the days when farm houses were lit by kerosene lamps - the good old
days before the Government got on our backs with the Rural Electrification
Administration.

''I remember the days when malnutrition, pellagra, hookwarm and malaria were
widespread - the good old days before the Government got on our backs with a
Public Health Service.

''I remember the days when the county poorhouse was the sure destination of
destitute senior citizens - the good old days before the Government got on our
backs with Social Security.''

Contrast With Meany

Yet, often, his manner of speaking is one of long, complex sentences in which
thoughts interrupt thoughts, most unlike his predecessor, George Meany, who
would growl quick, angry condemnations and gain the labor movement extensive
publicity.

In August, in defense of the 12,000 striking air traffic controllers, Mr.
Kirkland said: ''All the instruments of public relations and propaganda have
been released against these working people and their families, including
intimidation, fear, harsh reprisals, even arresting some of these working people
in shackles, nice young men hauled off to jail.''

Most members of the federation's executive council say they are pleased with Mr.
Kirkland' s handling of counc il meetings. He has allowed members to speak their
minds, Sol C.  Chaikin, president of the International Ladies' Garment Workers
Uni on, said, unlike Mr.  Meany, who, Mr. Chaikin said, often attempted to
embarrass or humiliate union men who expressed views that clashed with his.

It was Mr. Kirkland who in 1980 personally led the efforts to place the first
woman, Joyce Miller, on the executive council.  Another incident that is perhaps
illustrative of the changes in the federation under Mr. Kirkland occurred in
August when, in a statement passed by the executive council on military
spending, this phrase appeared: ''Our support for national defense is not,
however, to be taken as a blank check for the Pentagon.''

Changes in Federation

This phrase was reportedly inserted through the efforts of William W.
Winpisinger, president of the International Association of Machinists; Jerry
Wurf, president of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal
Employees, and Douglas A. Fraser, president of the United Automobile Workers. As
innocuous as the phrase might appear, it constituted a victory, Mr. Winpisinger
said.  ''It may not seem much to an outsider,'' Mr. Winpisinger said. But ''I
worked four years for that damn thing.''

Yet, more contradictions arise over what Ralph Nader, the activist, calls Mr.
Kirkland's dual lives: the union leader and the close associate of businessmen.

Mr. Kirkland, who earns a salary of $110,000 a year, is a man who appears to
enjoy comfort, a man who likes art and fine wine, whose dress and style are, as
Mr. Nader said, those of the capitalist, not the union man.

Mr. Nader praised Solidarity Day as ''long overdue.'' But he said the federation
remained under Mr. Kirkland, as it was under Mr.  Meany, a conservative
institution.

He noted that Mr. Kirkland had had close relationships with Irving S. Shapiro,
the former chairman of of E.I. duPont de Nemours & Company, which is engaged in
a bitter confrontation with the steelworkers' union over the attempts to
organize 16 Du Pont plants.  Mr. Kirkland, who would not consent to be
interviewed for this article, has defended his sometimes amiable relationships
with businessmen, saying it can do no harm to know the opposition.

Criticism From Nader

Mr. Nader rejects this argument. He said, in addition, that, if Mr. Kirkland
were working to build a more aggressive federation, he would be bringing in new,
aggressive staff members, the kind of men and women ''who don't go home at night
at one minute to five.''

''Lane Kirkland hasn't changed,'' Mr. Nader added. ''His public relations have
changed.'' Others are more charitable. Mr. Chaikin said that, with a
conservative Administration in Washington, perhaps the labor movement could be
better served by a man like Mr. Meany. ''George would have banged on the door of
the White House and demanded entrance,'' Mr.  Chaikin said.

Still, he said, he knows of no one better equipped intellectually to enunciate
the aspirations of working class people or defend them from attacks by business
or government than Mr. Kirkland.

Mr. Kirkland himself has acknowledged that, whatever the enthusiasm and promise
generated in the labor and liberal communites by Solidarity Day, the trick will
be to put together a sustained, aggressive drive against the Reagan
Administration.

In August, responding to criticism that Solidarity Day was being held after
budget and tax programs had been enacted by the Administration, Mr. Kirkland
quoted the jurist, Benjamin Cardozo, who said: ''The inn that shelters for the
night is not the journey's end.'' Tomorrow's demonstration, Mr. Kirkland meant,
will be only a first step.

''We've got a long time ahead of us and a lot of work to do,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Lane Kirkland

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

A FRIEND OF LABOR

BYLINE: By Robert Claiborne

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


A few weeks ago, bound for the airport, I noted a forlorn group of pickets from
the traffic controllers' union. Since I was mainly concerned with making my
flight, their presence barely registered.  Later, however, it occurred to me
that 30 years ago I would as soon have crossed that picket line as I would have
walked through the airport without pants. I had considered myself a friend of
labor - and now labor and I were barely on nodding terms.

It would be easy to blame my defection from the ranks of labor's friends on the
controllers themselves - or, especially, their union whose leaders made every
mistake in the book, plus a few they thought up on their own. It would be even
easier to excuse myself by pointing to the union pilots who keep flying the
planes, the union mechanics who keep servicing them, and the union truckers who
keep fueling and supplying them. The truth is, however, that my disenchantment
with American labor has much deeper roots.

As a young man, I was more than just a friend of labor - I was part of it. My
first job out of college was office manager for a union local; later, as a
war-plant worker, I helped cleanse another local of some gangster officials who
were more interested in looting the treasury than in fighting grievances. As an
employee of a hard-nosed corporation, I knew without being told why honest,
militant unions were needed; my reading of history told me how much more they
had been needed in the 1920's and 30's. And beyond this, I believed, like quite
a few other Americans, that labor would one day use its strength not just to
help its own members but to lead all of us toward a more just, more humane, more
democratic society. I continued to believe this long after I'd moved into fields
where unions could do little or nothing for me personally.

It took me many years to realize that labor was not about to lead the nation
anywhere - and if by any chance it did, that anywhere probably wouldn't be a
place I wanted to go to.

My growing distrust of the unions centered on t hree major public issues:
McCarthyism, which was of course some thing a lot bigger than a Senator from
Wisconsin; the civil rights st ruggle, and the Vietnam War. I won't try to
explain at length why the se things were importantto me. Quite simply, they bore
directly on th e kind of country I wantto live in and hand on to my kids: one in
whi ch people, and their views, are judged on their merits, not on the ir
alleged connection with some ''international conspiracy''; one i n which people
can vote and get jobs without regard to color, and in which the nation's
treasure, especially the lives of its young m en, is not wasted in devastating
small countries that could not in a hundred years threaten our security.

I am well aware that many Americans viewed these issues differently -some still
do. These issues were, and are still, important to me. They were not - to say
the least - important to labor. During the McCarthy years, most union leaders
and members kept their mouths shut - if, indeed, they were not themselves
whooping it up after the Red Menace. When I, along with hundreds of thousands of
other Americans, marched against the Vietnam War, most labor leaders denounced
us - and some of their members stood on the sidelines throwing insults and
occasionally rocks. Labor's record was somewhat better on civil rights, but this
reflected mainly the activities of those unions with a sizable proportion of
black members, who could vote in union elections.

The evolution of the American labor movement was summed up for me 20 years ago
when I and some co-workers on a small magazine, ferociously o verworked and
underpaid, asked the appropriate union to organize us.  We were told: ''There
aren't enough of you. It would cost us more to service you than we'd take in in
dues.'' Most unions today are lik e that union: businesses, concerned at best
with defending mer ely the immediate interests of their own members, at worst
with pr omoting the salaries and perks of their leaders.

I make no moral judgments. If most unions and their leaders are, as I see them,
devoted strictly to self-interest, they are no worse than most business and
political leaders. And if their conception of selfinterest is, as I see it, both
narrow and shortsighted - that's one man's opinion. The fact remains that what
they see as their interest has very little to do with what what I see as my
interest.  And if I have no claim on their sympathy - as I certainly don't -
then equally they have no claim on mine.

I doubt that the leaders of the ''House of Labor'' will lose much sleep over the
loss of one not very influential friend, or even several thousand such. Maybe
they should. Organized labor today is very much a minority, and not a very
popular one; it needs all the friends and allies it can get. If it can't hold
the allegiance of a onetime active union member, old enough to know what it has
done in the past to make life tolerable for working people, then what hope has
it of winning support from the tens of millions who neither know nor care about
these things?

Without friends, it can get mighty lonely out there on the picket line. As the
air-traffic controllers, poor devils, have discovered.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Robert Claiborne, a writer, joined his first union in 1936.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 19, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words


An editor's muckraking roils Mrs.  Gandhi's Government 2
Car bomb believed set by under- ground group kills three 3
6,000 demonstrate against Marcos in Manila and assail U.S.3
U.N. votes to let Pol Pot faction retain Cambodia's seat 3
Around the World 4
Text of Soviet message to Po- land's leaders 5
Israeli-Egyptian talks leave tour- ism issues unresolved 6

Government/Politics
U.S. and Albany sign accord for removal of radioactive waste 26
Golden Nugget chief denies con- doning drug dealing 26
At-large Council seats cannot be included in Tuesday primary 27

Washington Talk
Briefing 7
The dying days of the Community Services Administration 7

Health/Science
Linking genetic controls to the cancer cells 11

Industry/Labor
A new editor is named at Harper's magazine 24
Teamsters agree to renegotiate trucking pact 24

General
Around the Nation 8
South African rugby team to play games in private 8
Bodies found in Laos aren't those of U.S. servicemen 8
Extensive development is caus- ing problems in Orlando 8
Dignitaries attend dedication of Gerald R. Ford Museum 9
Tower West: where landlord and tenants battle 25
The Region 26
In Greenwich, Conn., an old paper's new look is criticized 26
The City 27
68 arrested in second drug sweep of New York City schools 27

Arts/Entertainment
''Love: Emotion, Myth and Meta- phor,'' by R. Solomon reviewed 11
Ensemble Company in ''Salute to Black Classics of Dance'' 11
Paris offers its homage to Gene Kelly 13
City Opera season opens with Grace Bumbry in ''Nabucco'' 13
Classical Japanese theater at Asia House 15
Mehta and Philharmonic play Mahler's Symphony No. 2 16
''El Salvador: Another Vietnam'' at the Paramount 48
''Making Dances,'' a documen- tary at the Public Theater 48

Style
Consumer Saturday 12
New life for old shoes: Repairs surveyed 12
The new furs: Spectacular 12
De Gustibus: When the main item at the meal is how you eat it 12

Obituaries
James S. Kemper, insurance ex- ecutive 21
Rafael Mendez, trumpeter 21

Sports
Islanders' No.1 draft choice must play a waiting game 16
European pros lead U.S. as Ryder Cup golf opens 17
Red Sox, back in division race, play host to Yankees 17
The work ethic of Helen Dillon, a Jets owner 17
Errico reverses stand, testifies in race-fixing inquiry 17
Commercially sponsored events still rare in U.S. horse racing 17
George Vecsey sees umpires still scarred by '79 strike 19
Yale favored to reward Coach Cozza again 19
N.C.A.A. vote on television rights called unfair 19
Ali and Berbick lay plans for December bout in Bahamas 20
Valentine focuses on consistency after a 66 in Texas 20

Features/Notes
Saturday News Quiz 14
Going Out Guide 14
Notes on People 15
Sports People 16
About New York 25

News Analysis
John F. Burns on stern Soviet let- ter to Polish leaders 1
William Serrin d iscusses Lane Kirkland, l abor leader 11

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials 22

Solidarity today Obeying the law, Reagan style The Bible, in brief Letters 22
Russell Baker: now at last it can be told 23
Sydney H. Schanberg: adding up the underdogs 23
Ron Guidry: alligators - from swamp to home plate 23
Robert Claiborne: a friend of labor 23
Bel Kaufman: flagging alle- giance 23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY PONDERS USE OF PARACHUTING DOGS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Par t 2; Page 73, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: FORT BRAGG, N.C., Sept. 19


The Army is considering the feasibility of parachuting dogs with the 82d
Airborne Division.  The possibility arose as a result of a special harness
devised by Sgt. 1st. Class Robert D. Meade, the Military Police kennel master
here. The harness allows a dog to be attached to its handler just beneath the
reserve parachute. In a jump, the dog would rest against the handler's legs in
its harness, leaving the soldier's hands free to manipulate the chute.

While about 200 feet from the ground, the handler would lower the dog on an
18-foot line. This would give the dog and handler more room to maneuver in
landing, reducing the chance of a collision.

So far, Sergeant Meade has trained 12 dogs from the 118th Military Police
Company (Airborne) on a 34-foot jump tower here, and now the Army is considering
whether to approve actual jumps from aircraft.
Dog Acts Like Soldier

''The dog accepts the jumps just as a soldier does,'' said Sergeant Meade. ''The
handler leads the dog and helps him through it. We've never had an adverse
reaction, never had a training accident.''

Before coming to Fort Bragg, Sergeant Meade, a native of Folsom, Pa., studied
dog training methods in Germany and did a stint as a recruiter. Since starting
his canine airborne training more than a year ago, Sergeant Meade has received
nationwide attention.

A parachutist himself and Vietnam veteran, Sergeant Meade believes dogs could
play an important role in airborne operations.  ''We can make the dog an asset
to the commander by making him fit into any situation,'' Sergeant Meade said.
''Everything we do, the dogs go along with. There isn't anything we, the
military policemen, can't use the dogs on.''

Dogs With Parachutes Doubted

The sergeant says he doubts the dogs would ever be given their own parachutes,
although there once was a proposal to fit them with modified canopies.

''Without the lowering line, the handler would lose control,'' he said. ''If the
handler were injured, the dog would be running loose.  This way we're guaranteed
the dog and handler would stay together.''

As the kennel master here, Sergeant Meade is responsible for 42 dogs assigned to
four Military Police companies, including the 118th, which supports the 82d.

All Army dogs are at least part German shepherd because of the species' ability
to adjust quickly to various climates. They attend a 10-week basic training
course at Lackland Air Force Base, Tex., and canine recruits lacking an
aggressive nature are rejected.

Advance Trainining in Specialties

After the dogs report for duty, some are sent back to school for advanced
training in such subjects as bomb and narcotics detection.  ''We capitalize on
all their senses and make them more efficient dogs,'' Sergeant Meade said.
''They're not just doing one thing, they're doing a variety of things.''

Some of Sergeant Meade's dogs participated in amphibious training this spring in
Little Creek, Va. The dogs and their handlers jumped from the fantail of a Navy
destroyer and took part in beach assaults.

Sergeant Meade's dogs are also rappelled from helicopters and given practice in
tracking by smell.  In one such exercise, the dogs captured all but 10 members
of a 30-man team that had been dropped miles from Fort Bragg and attempted to
return without being detected.

Besides routine patrol duties, the dogs run one to four miles a day, along with
their handlers, and scurry over an obstacle course with eight-foot jumps.

Sergeant Meade believes the dogs' rigorous daily routine has contributed to
their success so far in airborne training.  Asked what he believed the dogs
thought of the new challenge, Sergeant Meade said: ''I hate to say dogs are
people, too, but that's the way I feel about it. They can't tell me if they
enjoy jumping, but I can tell because I know them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of military policeman parachuting with dog

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Affairs;
THE ECONOMICS OF EXPECTATION

BYLINE: By Barbara Bergman

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words


T HE idea that expectations about the economy very largely determine the actual
course that it takes has become popular of late. It is a theory that emphasizes
forecasts and moods over what Wall Street calls ''the technical factors'' and
''the fundamentals.''

In fact, there have rarely been periods when analysts of the financial markets
could ignore the influence of expectations on stock prices and interest rates.
What is new is that to some analysts such ''fundamentals'' as the need of
business for working capital or of governments for day-to-day finance counts for
little, except as they influence expectations.

Certain Reagan Administration officials have claimed that the direct influence
of the Federal deficit on interest rates is virtually nil. Only expectations of
inflation count for anything, according to this view.

Expectations have also been held to be the most powerful influence in the price
and wage decisions made by business and labor.  Presidential economic advisers
have gotten into the habit of saying that these decisions would produce more
stable prices and wages when businessmen, workers and labor leaders come to
believe that the Administration and the Federal Reserve Board mean business and
are going to ''stay the course'' in the fight against inflation.

The emphasis on expectations means that mood management has become one of the
most important components of economic policymaking.  Sometimes, as seems to be
currently happening, efforts on the part of government to influence expectations
fail badly. Then the would-be influencers tend to become petulent at the
recalcitrant public mood.  Congressional Republicans, who had hoped to conjure
up expectations of inflation-free growth with big tax cuts are now threatening
to impose credit controls on the financial community if it continues to remain
''unconvinced'' of the efficacy of the supply-siders' prescriptions.

The current emphasis by Administration officials on the importance (for some the
unique importance) of expectations probably springs from developments in the
thought of academic economists. Among academics, talk about the importance of
expectations has proliferated since the late 70's when inflation rendered
traditional models obsolete.

Yet, considerably before that, John Maynard Keynes had emphasized the extent to
which expectations of future interest rates influenced current activities of
professional bond traders. He also stressed the importance of what he called
''animal spirits,'' or unpredictable changes in morale, that affect business
decisions about fixed investment.

For about 30 years, Keynes's expositors gave a lot of lip service to the
importance of expectations. However, the mathematical models that were developed
for forecasting purposes never contained welldeveloped parts that explicitly de
scribed the formation of expectations, or the effect that such expectations had
on behavior.

There were two good reasons for this. First, no one had any clear idea of how to
model the formation of expectations. Keynes himself had emphasized their
capriciousness.

S ECOND, and perhaps more importantly, there was a strong belief that
economists' main stock in trade was their ability to elucidate the interaction
of technologies, tastes and resources in the marketplace. Putting the spotlight
on expectations amounted to abandoning their dearly boug ht expertise on the
fundamentals t o chase the will-o'-thewisp of moods and spirits.

As might be expected, the recent spate of theorizing about expectations that has
occupied academic circles has not noticeably improved the ability of the
profession in either forecasting or policymaking. What has happened, however, is
that the politicians have been given a new hope and a new excuse.

There is a powerful and obvious analogy between the preoccupation with economic
expectations now and the preoccupation with public sentiment during the Vietnam
War. It used to be commonplace for whatever Administration was in power during
the Vietnam era to declare that all that had to happen for us to win militarily
was for the protestors to shut up.

Once the enemy saw that the American people had the right attitude and would
''stay the course,'' the enemy would be easily beaten.  Apparently, military
victory was no longer a matter of guns, ammunition, tactics and strategy. It was
the enemy's expectations that really counted.

Expectations do count for a lot in all spheres and can be independently powerful
at times. It is conceivable that with the right expectations on both sides, the
Notre Dame football team could beat the Pittsburgh Steelers. It is also
conceivable that if the Reagan Administration could implant the right
expectations on inflation everything would start to go right with the economy.

The problem, of course, is that in both football and economic policy, we have a
surer grasp of how to manipulate the fundamental policy tools than of how to
change expectations. Furthermore, expectations, for all their short-run
capriciousness, have a habit of following the fundamentals. Coaches know that
good passing and blocking lead to good morale more often than the reverse.

The Reagan Administration had best refrain from putting too much faith in its
ability to run the economy by influencing expectations, attractive and cheap as
that may appear. Expectations will come around when monetary, fiscal and other
fundamental policies start to be conducive to improved economic functioning.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Barbara Bergmann is professor of economics at the University of Maryland.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of business man pointing to graph

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The World;
Haig Implies Soviet Role in Poison Warfare

BYLINE: By Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 302 words


Forewarned that thousands of demonstrators would turn out in West Berlin last
weekend to protest United States nuclear missile policies, Seceretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. came prepared with a counterattack. Washington, he said,
had obtained ''physical evidence'' that highly toxic poisons, which the Soviet
Union has been studying for decades, were used in Cambodia and Laos.

Reports of use of Soviet-made chemical agents are not new. For at least five
years, the United States has been looking into charges that Moscow's ally,
Vietnam, used chemicals banned by international treaty in Cambodia and Laos.
Last year, the United Nations began its own investigation. In August, Sterling
Seagrave, an American expert on the ''yellow rain'' that spread death in Laos,
made public his conclusion that Soviet-developed poisons were probably
responsible.

In Washington, the State Department marshaled intelligence experts to explain
''significant, although preliminary'' evidence drawn from analysis of a leaf and
stem sample collected in March in Cambodia near the Thai border. The experts
said the sample indicated ''high levels of three potent mycotoxins of the
trichothecene group'' that produce symptoms - vomiting, itching, blisters,
hemorrhaging from mucous membranes and ultimately death - that match the
suffering of Laotian villagers and Pol Pot forces fighting the Vietnamese in
Cambodia.

The Soviet Union did not attempt to explain the presence of the chemicals, not
normally found in Southeast Asia, but branded the allegations a ''big lie.'' It
accused the United States of using chemical weapons during the Vietnam war and
supplying them to Afghan rebels and Salvadoran troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Washington;
SOLIDARITY DAY

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 852 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


President Reagan says that despite the Chicken Littles who think the sky is
falling, he has retained full confidence in his economic program and would ''bet
the rent money on it.''

This is not very reassuring, since he pays no rent for the White House, and is
gambling with Chicken Little's rent. But even so, on Solidarity Day in
Washington, ringing with labor union protests against Mr. Reagan's economic
policy in the biggest demonstration here since Vietnam, he is probably right in
calling for a little patience.

For he is merely putting in place the economic program on which he was elected,
and has startled Washington by the original idea of trying to keep his campaign
promises. But the fact is that his budget, passed by the Congress, won't even go
into effect until next month, and could easily be wrecked by reckless opposition
before it has a chance.

The President has reached a crisis in both domestic and foreign policy much
sooner than he or anybody else expected. He has been in office less than eight
months and has more than three years to go, and already the unions are going
into the streets against his economic program, and the Senate is threatening to
reject his efforts to cooperate with the Israelis and the Saudi Arabians in
building a new security system in the Middle East.

This raises some fundamental questions even for those of us who opposed Mr.
Reagan's election and doubted the policies on which he was elected:

* What will happen if the President's economic program at home, described by his
own majority leader in the S enate, Howard Baker of Tennessee, as a
''river-boat'' gamble, and de pending on the confidence and savings of the
people, is cond emned and rejected, evenbefore it has a chance to work?

* What will happen to the President's foreign policy and authority if his
decision to sell reconnaissance airplanes to Saudi Arabia is rejected by the
Senate under pressure from Israel and its supporters in this country?

The guess here is that we'll have not an Imperial Presidency, but an Impotent
Presidency, precisely at the point when we need ''solidarity'' not merely in the
unions but in the nation.

There is plenty of room here for honest differences and much to be said on both
sides about the President's policies. He felt, with good reason, that the
country had gone slack; that it was living beyond its means on tick and credit
cards; and that it had to be stunned into reality by massive cuts in the budget.
On this point there was general agreement.

The nation was in trouble, he said, and in danger from abroad.  Therefore, he
insisted, it had to sacrifice by cutting the Federal budget for social services,
transferring the welfare budget to the Pentagon, cutting taxes in order to
increase productivity and jobs, and by balancing the budget. Even for economic
delinquents, this required a stretch of imagination beyond either Wall Street or
Main Street, so for the first time, the conflict is coming into the streets.

This is the real danger in the Reagan economic program. It deserves a chance to
work, but if it doesn't get its chance, and it doesn't work, with declining
productivity and over 50 percent black teen-age unemployment, it risks the
dangers of the kind of massive protests Britain's conservative austerity budget
has faced in Brixton and Liverpool.

This is clearly a national problem, but in recent days it has become a party
problem in Washington. The Democrats, defeated in the last Presidential
election, a minority in the Senate and defeated again by the Republican minority
on the budget issue in the House, now sense that Mr. Reagan is in deep trouble
on both economic and foreign policy and they are beginning to launch their
attack on the President for the Congressional elections of 1982.

In the process, if they're not careful, everybody could lose. If the President's
economic program is rejected even before it has time to work; and if his
strategy of cooperation with both the Israelis and the Saudis is voted down by
the Congress, you have to wonder how Mr. Reagan can govern effectively for the
next three years.

This is not to say that the President's policies at home or abroad are right
-they may be wrong and should be amended - but he's the only President we have
and will have for more than three years. If his economic policies and theories
do not receive the op portunity to be tested and his foreign policy approach in
the Middle East is short-circuit ed in the Senate, what kind of Presidency will
we have until the mid dle of the 1980's ?

At least, on Solidarity Day in Washington, with union masses screaming in the
sunshine on the mall, one wonders what ''solidarity'' means - is it for the
unions or for the union of the nation?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Essay;
REAGAN OUT OF TOWN

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19


Although Abraham Lincoln was fearful that the Confederate ironclad, the
Merrimac, was steaming up the Potomac to shell Washington, he remained in the
White House. During the most massive Vietnam demonstrations of the 1960's,
Presidents Johnson and Nixon chose to remain in the White House, ostentatiously
at their posts.

But when Ronald Reagan heard that 200,000 protesters were on the march to
Washington, assembled by the A.F.L.-C.I.O. to demonstrate union solidar ity in
opposition to his policies, this President chose to slip out o f town to Camp
David for the weekend.

That was a mistake. Presidents should not shrink from their symbolic roles. At
least, Mr. Reagan should have been at home, quietly taking the heat, looking out
the window at the streams of demonstrators; at the most, he might have taken a
surprise subway ride to bid farewell to the union's troops, which would have
been a safe foray and a classy gesture.

Mr. Reagan's disinclination to hold the fort or face the unfriendly music -
including parade marshals decked out in ''Impeach Reagan'' T-shirts -provided a
symbol of another sort: he has evidently decided to conduct his Presidency once
removed from the public. He wants to avoid having his scripted generalities
challenged in the give-andtake of hard questioning.

The greatest advance in America's form of democratic government in the last
generation has been the televised press conference of the President. Up to the
Eisenhower years, a parliamentary democrat could say that American leadership
lacked the spirited accountability demanded of Prime Ministers facing hostile
questioning in the House of Commons. Came our new press conference tradition,
and that accountability gap was closed.

President Reagan has held only three full-scale press conferences in his first
eight months, with the last revealing him to be embarrassingly unprepared on
foreign affairs. The average frequency of his three predecessors in office was
one full conference a month; even allowing for Mr. Reagan's recuperation, it is
obvious that he shies away from a format that tests both his memory and his
willingness to do his homework.

Instead, he has chosen a more congenial, less challenging way of meeting the
press: in the clubby atmosphere of a handpicked group, or in a private
one-on-one in which the honored interviewer is often inclined to be gentle.
President Reagan has held seven of the clubby, F.D.R.-style gatherings and given
16 exclusive audiences.

Well, why not? Must our chief executive expose himself to that pack of wolves
every month at full moon? Isn' t it easier and more profitable to restrict the
audience to the re sponsibles, and to direct the questioning to those areas
dearest to the President's heart?

Easier it surely is, but not more profitable for the nation. The central
purposes of the Presidential press conference are not to test the President's
memorization skill and ad-libbing ability, or to exhibit the ranges of cynicism
and naivete in the press corps. The primary purposes, which White House staffers
belatedly realize, are to ensure the systematic development of policy and to
make certain the President is on top of that policymaking.

Here's how it works: before the next press conference, the President will
receive a list of possible questions and suggested answers. If his staff is
doing its job, that would include a question like ''How are you going to make
sure the third-world conference, which you will attend in Cancun, Mexico, next
month, won't turn out to be just organized arm-twisting for more U.S. aid?''

When he sees that, and focuses on the namby-pamby answer probably suggested by
his National Security Council, the President would then realize he is backing
into a buzzsaw next month. He would demand a better answer, based on a more
assertive policy, which would force his Administration to pay attention to a
matter not yet on the front burner.

Thus, the preparation for a monthly press conference whips policymakers with its
dreaded deadlines. Presidential aides are required to knock heads and make
decisions for insertion in the President's ''black book,'' or to betray their
inadequacy; the President is required to get it all into his head or publicly
display shallowness. This is true for the 20 questions that are asked at a press
conference, and equally true for the 50 other questions that must be prepared
for but are not asked.

The press conference tradition is not merely to put on a lively show, which it
does, or to help the people understand their leader, which it also does; the
regularity of a formal press conference disciplines an Administration and makes
a better President.

It's hard to say which is more disappointing - Ronald Reagan's decision to ''get
out of town'' on press conferences, as he did on Solidarity Day, or the press's
apparent willingness to let him get away with it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
DUNDEE COMPARES SUGAR RAY AND AL I

BYLINE: By Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words


THE boxing stage belongs to Sugar Ray Leonard now. The undisputed welterweight
champion is up there doing a solo. He hasconquered Thomas Hearns and Roberto
Duran and Wilfred Benitez over the last two years. He has invented the $10
million pay scale that Larry Holmes and Gerry Cooney each will attain next March
in their heavyweight extravaganza. And he has succeeded Muhammad Ali as the
world's most appealing prizefighter.

Several years ago Muhammad Ali warned that when he's out of boxing, ''the game
will go to the graveyard.'' But the game is healthier than ever now. It's Ali
who has gone to the graveyard that he hopes to escape in his planned charade
with Trevor Berbick in the Bahamas in December.

When the 39-year-old three-time heavyweight champion was introduced at ringside
before Wednesday night's Leonard-Hearns classic in Las Vegas, the applause had a
soft, sad reverence to it, the same sound that accompanied the introductions of
the late Joe Louis in recent years.

Applause for Ali was always noisy and boisterous before. But now that excitement
is reserved for Sugar Ray Leonard, who has emerged as Ali's reincarnation in
miniature. Of all the people in boxing, only the trainer Angelo Dundee has been
privileged to work with both - for five years now with Sugar Ray since he
returned from Montreal with an Olympic gold medal and for two decades with Ali.

As he checked out of Caesars Palace after Sugar Ray Leonard's 14thround knockout
of Thomas Hearns, boxing's most celebrated cornerman spoke of how Sugar Ray and
Ali were the same and yet different.

''The reason Hearns never hit Ray with the right hand that knocked everybody
else out,'' Angelo Dundee was saying, ''was because Ray pulls back his head like
Muhammad did. Even when Hearns hit him, by moving back, Ray lessened the force
of that right hand. Another thing is that Ray don't blink when he's in the ring.
Muhammad didn't either. They never got c aught blinking.''

Aware rather than afraid, Sugar Ray Leonard was staring with wideopen eyes as
Thomas Hearns stalked him in the early rounds. But from the middle rounds on,
Sugar Ray's left eye swelled into a slit.

''That never happened with Muhammad's eyes, not like that,'' Angelo Dundee said.
''Even in the first Spinks fight when he lost the title, Muhammad got banged up
around the face, but neither of his eyes were anywhere near being closed. The
only time Muhammad ever had real trouble with his eyes was in the first Liston
fight.''

That 1964 night in Miami as the 22-year-old challenger for Sonny Liston's title,
Ali was blinded, apparently by a medication that had been smeared on Liston's
bloodied cheek.

''When he couldn't see, Muhammad got frightened,'' Angelo Dundee recalled.
''When he came back to the corner after the fourth round, he yelled, 'Cut my
gloves off.' He thought it had been a plot by Liston's people. I tried to calm
him down. I put a lot of water in his eyes to clean them out and I told him,
'You can't quit now, this is for the heavyweight title, get out there and run
until your eyes clear.' ''

Angelo Dundee pushed Ali off the stool. Ali ran. Soon his eyes cleared. And
before the seventh round, Sonny Liston surrendered on his stool with a sore
shoulder. Ali was the heavyweight champion for the first time.

''I got a little lucky with Ray's eye,'' Angelo Dundee was saying now. ''Some
guy in New Jersey, damn, I forget his name, he gave me a little steel do-hickey
a few months ago for just what Ray had. It's like a little iron. Between rounds
I just pressed it against the swelling under Ray's eye. Even if Ray hadn't come
up with the knockout, I think the eye would have stayed open enough. But doing
what he did, Ray showed everybody what he's made of.''

Sugar Ray did what Muhammad Ali never had to do - preserve his title with a
late-round knockout when he was behind on the scorecards of all three officials.

''Pound for pound, Ray is a better banger than Muhammad was,'' Angelo Dundee
said. ''Ray puts more snap into the shot. And he's a great counterpuncher.
Another thing that helps him against Hearns was that Ray can move four ways - in
and out, side to side, clockwise and counter-clockwise. Hearns could go three
ways, but he couldn't go counter-clockwise.''

Asked to assess Sugar Ray Leonard and Muhammad Ali as ''thinking''fighters,
Angelo Dundee replied, ''both great.'' He also rated them equal in their
willingness to train.

''Ray doesn't neglect the table exercises - the situps and all the other stuff
that's so important. And you never have to get him up for roadwork. He's up on
his own. Ali was that way, too. At least until he got older.''

Sugar Ray Leonard is only 25 years old. With more than $36 mil lion in purses
already (before taxes), he's expect ed to retire before he's 30 - unless he
becomes addicted to center sta ge as Ali did.

''But its a lovable situation with this kid,'' Angelo Dundee said.  ''He doesn't
have all the hangers-on that Ali did. Everybody with him are friends he's known.
Everything's positive with him. He has no negatives like Ali had, especially
early.''

At first, Muhammad Ali's ego alienated many people. Then his Black Muslim
conversion and his refusal to be drafted into military service during the
Vietnam conflict alienated others. But in his own way, Sugar Ray Leonard is
hounded, too.

''If people are betting against me because they prefer the other fighter,
fine,'' Sugar Ray says. ''But not if it's because of envy or jealousy of all the
money I'm making. Some people think I don't deserve to make what I make. It's
hard for them to accept.''

But it shouldn't be hard any more. Not after Wednesday night. Not after Sugar
Ray Leonard moved to center stage. Solo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Angelo Dundee

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
THE MAN WHO MADE METS AMAZING

BYLINE: By George Vecsey

SECTION: Section 5; Page 6, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words


IT was well after midnight in a tavern in Milwaukee. Casey Stengel and his Greek
chorus of journalists were tackling huge platters of fried potatoes and sausages
and steins of beer.

Casey was telling us how, 20 years earlier, he managed the minor league team in
Milwaukee. He was describing a tornado that he said had blown him clear across a
street in 1944. He stood up from the table and did a ballet imitation of flying
through the air. He looked like Peter Pan with elephant ears.

Those of us who had gone light on the beer were aware of a pack of motorcycle
people sitting at the bar. At least in my mind, there was some undertone of
menace as those men of tattoos and axle grease sat gaping at the Old Man.

But Casey f ixed that. He bridged the gap between the sport-jacket crowd and the
black-leather-jacket crowd by including the motorcycle gang in his S ocratic
dialogue about whether the Mets should acquire Roy McMillan, an aging shortstop.

''Now, you want to give me McMillan, who is 33 and we don't know if he can
throw. Then who do you want, Hook? Hook won a lot of games for me and he has a
lovely family. Edna says I can't trade him. Would you like to talk to Edna for
me?''

Charmed by being included in this bit of baseball gossip, the leather-jacket
group relaxed and crunched on their beer cans in peace. Casey had made this
world a little safer for the Mets and their entourage.

In a broader sense, Casey accomplished the same task in New York in the early
1960's. He bought time for the Mets in a rough spot. He chattered and gestured
and, when necessary, imitated a man being blown across the street by a tornado -
anything to obscure the fact that the Mets were the worst team in the history of
baseball.

Using players of little talent and working for a front office that had no sense
of humor, Casey turned the Mets into a national institution. They could get off
a plane in Pittsburgh or San Francisco and find Met fans waving banners and
chanting ''Let's Go Mets.'' In the first months of the first season of 1962,
Stengel made them as popular as the Yankees, who were merely in the middle of a
five-year pennant run that he had begun in 1960 before being dismissed.

For giving the Mets instant parity, Charles Dillon Stengel will be honored today
at Shea Stadium as one of the first two inductees in the Mets' new hall of fame.
Joan Whitney Payson, the team's first owner, who enjoyed the Mets' popularity,
is the other inductee. The two died within six days of one another after the
1975 season.

Many in today's crowd will remember Casey Stengel, but many others will not. His
last year as manager was 1965, and new generations come along fast. This was
brought home to me by a young history instructor I know who, seemingly only a
few years ago, was a teenage protestor against the Vietnam War policies of
President Johnson. The teacher was recently stunned when a student asked in all
innocence: ''What was Lyndon Johnson like?'' His bete noire was to the student
only a musty name from a history book.

So what was Casey Stengel like? Well, for those who came along since 1965, Casey
Stengel was born in 1890 in Kansas City and almost became a left-handed dentist.
Instead, he became an outfielder in Brooklyn who liked to take his hayseed
teammates on subway rides and abandon them at the edge of the city. He managed
in Brooklyn and Boston, and not everybody thought he was funny: the Boston taxi
driver who ran him down was nominated for man of the year in Boston sports.
Casey married in California and managed in Oakland, and was retrieved by George
Weiss to manage the Yankees in 1949. He won 10 pennants in 12 years and was
dismissed for the mistake of turning 70. The Mets hired him to manage their
expansion team in 1962, and before they played a game, he pronounced them
''Amazing.''

I missed the Mets' first spring training, but was on hand that first week in the
Polo Grounds, when Casey informed his writers, ''Here I am, the slickest manager
in baseball, and they won't give me the players I want.'' With Joycean
obscureness, he hinted that he wanted to keep one player but that Weiss, the
skinflint president, had more money invested in another player. Later, some
older reporters translated for me. We all wrote our stories, and Hot Rod Kanehl
stayed an d John DeMerit departed. Were we a bunch of flunkies writing whatever
Casey told us? I think not.  More than once, I heard the Old Man roar, ''I can
make a living telli ng the truth!'' I've used the line myself on occasion. I
also say, ''You make your own luck,'' another saying of Chairman Casey.

Casey's gab brought out the fans, who tried to get into the act by writing their
messages on bedsheet banners. The first instinct of the Met front office was to
tear the banners from the rusting steelwork of the Polo Grounds, but Stengel had
created a monster. The spirit of the people prevailed, and by the end of the
season, the Mets were holding their first Banner Day.

Casey managed the Mets nearly four losing seasons. He tried to win, but the
buttons didn't say ''Richardson'' and ''Kubek'' any more.  They said
''Burright'' and ''Moran.'' Perhaps some other manager could have instilled
order a year or two earlier, but that would have to wait until Gil Hodges had
Tom Seaver and Jerry Koosman to work with. In the meantime, Casey Stengel fought
a glorious holding action.

In the summer of 1965 he broke his hip while out partying. The doctors put in an
aluminum ball, and he scared all of us that September by swiveling the hip the
way Buddy Young turned round left end. Edna persuaded him to go home and enjoy
their final years. They had some good years out there before illness and death
intervened. I remember one visit to the Coast around 1968, when Casey
entertained us at his bank, where I felt compelled to open an account.

Five years later, Casey came up to me in the crowded World Series press room an
d stuck one of those powerful forefingers into my chest and barked, ' 'You still
got money in my bank!'' The Old Man has been gone nearly s even years now, but
the Mets and their fans and a lot ofwriters are s till drawing all kinds of
interest from him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Casey Stengel

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Children's Books

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 419 words


FRIENDS By T. Degens.  161 pp. New York: The Viking Press.  $9.95. (Ages 11 to
15)
By ANNIE GOTTLIEB

Any adult who wonders how the young can cope with the uglier facts of our world,
and any young person who is struggling to do so, will find a curious comfort in
the work of T. Degens. She doesn't serve up happy endings, engineered by the
magical intervention of some benevolent adult. What she does offer is a subtle,
bracing assurance that 11-or 12-or 13-year-olds can find the creative resources
for survival within and among themselves.

In ''Friends,'' Mrs. Degens portrays Nell Atwood, who, in the abnormal year of
1968, is a normal small-town 11-year-old. No writer has better captured the
exact tone of that predawn age (is it being designer-jeaned out of existence?)
when sexuality is still a faint glow on the horizon and what counts is courage
and cool. Nell has plenty of both, along with a weather eye for adult hypocrisy.
She is the leader of her loyal band of friends, a fist-fighter who hopes her
chest will stay flat so it doesn't get in the way. Yet she is also tentatively
trying out the feeling called ''love'' on her 18-year-old friend and neighbor
Gene, who has been drafted and may be sent to Vietnam.

Nell can't remember a time when the war wasn't on television. She and her kid
brother routinely strafe each other and die on the living room rug. Meanwhile,
their parents are strafing each other with silence and contempt, and finally
Nell's mother walks out, asserting that the kids are old enough to fend for
themselves. The story is about how Nell learns she can fend for herself and even
like it - with a lot of help from her friends.

The book's one serious flaw is that Nell's friends lack real individuality; they
are distinguished from one another mainly by cartoon tics (one boy spits on his
glasses every time we see him).  But as a group, they movingly support Nell as
she comes to terms with the hurt and rage of abandonment, the sad alcoholic
abdication of her father, the scary sense of freedom to do anything when there's
no one at home to set loving limits. It is a matter-of-fact, exhilarating book.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Paperbacks: New and Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 43, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1253 words


SHIKASTA and THE MARRIAGE BETWEEN ZONES THREE, FOUR, AND FIVE, by Doris Lessing.
(Vintage, $4.95 each.) The first two of a projected series of novels called
''Canopus in Argos: Archives,'' in which Doris Lessing explores the future.
''Shikasta'' (1979) covers the history of the Earth to the Third World War,
during which humanity nearly destroys itself. ''The Marriage Between Zones
Three, Four, and Five'' (1980) is an allegorical romance taking place in five of
the six shells surrounding the planet after that catastrophe. Our reviewer
Robert Towers found that no matter whether Miss Lessing is writing about the
Earth or its shells, ''her concern for the conditions affecting the lives of
women and men remains as passionate as ever.'' Of the two, ''Shikasta'' is
better written, ''but even wh en her inspiration is not at its strongest, she is
always worth reading.''

SIDESHOW, by William Shawcross. (Simon & Schuster/Touchstone, $8.95.) This
account by a British journalist of American foreign policy toward Cambodia after
1969 - what is often referred to as a ''sideshow'' of the Vietnam War - pictures
it as the foreign-affairs equivalent of Watergate and holds that the policies of
Henry Kissinger and Richard M. Nixon insured the eventual takeover of the
country by the Khmer Rouge. In a lengthy addendum to this new edition of his
1979 book, William Shawcross reports on a visit he made to Cambodia in 1980 and
answers a memorandum critical of the book that was subsequently circulated by a
Kissinger aide. Indispensable to the study of the Vietnam period.

SUPERFUDGE, by Judy Blume. (Dell, $2.25.) In this sequel to her immensely
popular ''Tales of a Fourth-Grade Nothing'' (Dell, $1.75), Judy Blume tells what
happens in the family of 12-year-old Peter Hatcher after the arrival of a new
baby and after the Hatchers move to Princeton for a year so that Dad can try to
write a novel. Through it all, Fudge, the little brother who is Peter's bane and
a charming clown, continues to extend his trail of disarray. A genuinely funny
story for 9- to 12-year olds that deals honestly with the kinks and knots of
modern family life.

TROUBLEMAKER and THE MAN EVERYBODY WAS AFRAID OF, by Joseph Hansen. (Holt/Owl,
$3.50 each.) Dave Brandstetter lives up to the tradition of the California
private-eye detective except in two respects - he is an insurance claims
investigator and an acknowledged homosexual.  In ''Troublemaker'' (1975), his
search for a young man's killer takes him through the local gay world and into
the worlds of art and architecture. In ''The Man Everybody Was Afraid Of''
(1978), he goes to great pains to prove the innocence of the man whom the police
of a small town are trying to nail with the murder of their chief. ''The
Brandstetter series,'' Newgate Callendar wrote, ''is one of the better ones
around, with natural-sounding dialogue and ingenious plotting.''

JANET FLANNER'S WORLD, edited by Irving Drutman. (HBJ/Harvest, $7.95.)
Seventy-six pieces about the European scene - politics, artists, writers,
scandals - published in The New Yorker between 1931 and 1976, but never in book
form. Although Janet Flanner, who used the pen name ''Genet,'' was based in
Paris, many of them deal with Germany, Italy and other countries. In his review,
Stephen Spender found the collection uneven because there were ''too many
snippets,'' yet notable for such longer essays as an account of Paris during the
German Occupation and a profile of Thomas Mann.

UNDER THE FIFTH SUN, by Earl Shorris. (Dell , $3.75.) The life of Pancho Villa
(1877-1923), poor peasant boy, b andit leader, womanizer and soul of the Mexican
revolution, recalled in the words of Popoca, an old Indian healer. According to
our review er Jerome Charyn, in this historical novel Earl Shorris ''surround s
Villa's career with the magic of song, makes facts, myths and nig htmare come
together in one powerful universe.''

THE GETTING OF WISDOM, by Henry Handel Richardson. (Dial, $5.95.) This 1910
Bildungsroman about the four years that Laura Rambotham, a middle-class teen-age
girl, spent at a pretentious, mediocre Australian boarding school was the second
published work of Henry Handel Richardson (Ethel Florence Lindesay Richardson,
1870-1946), who is best remembered for her trilogy ''The Fortunes of Richard
Mahony.'' In an appreciative essay introducing this new Virago Modern Classics
edition, Germaine Greer declares that it is her ''only great work, precisely
because the subject is like the rest of us, ordinary, and therefore deeply
important.''

THE POEM ITSELF, edited by Stanley Burnshaw and others. (Horizon, $7.95.) One
hundred fifty poems by 45 important modern French, German, Spanish, Portuguese
and Italian poets, given in their original languages, followed by line-by-line
literal translations and an analysis of their construction, metaphors, meaning
and allusions - all intended to enable English-speaking readers unfamiliar with
the foreign languages to understand their essence. This 1960 work, now returned
to print, has been hailed by both poets and critics as a pioneering classic.

More cat tales. Since the publication several weeks ago of our report on the
current craze for albums of cartoons about cats, both lovable and loathsome,
we've learned of several others:

- ''Gordo's Cat'' by Gus Arriola (Oak Tree Publications, San Diego, $6.95) is
the creation of an illustrator who has been drawing frolicsome felines for more
than half a century -the films ''Krazy Kat'' and ''Tom and Jerry'' until 1941,
since then the syndicated newspaper strip ''Gordo.'' The 122 cartoons in this
album, prefaced with apt words by Charles Schulz, are offspring of the strip.

- ''Schnoodle and Sam'' by Eric Gurney (Prentice-Hall, $2.95) is the work of an
alumnus of the Walt Disney Studios and a veteran children's book illustrator. He
has previously tried his hand at cartoons for ailurophiles of all ages - ''How
to Live With a Calculating C at'' (1976) and ''The Calculating Cat Returns''
(1978). In this lates t album, Sam, the calculating cat, has a new object for
his wiles, a dachshund named

Schnoodle.

- ''Yet Another Cat Book,'' due in November from St. Martin's Press ($4.95), is
a second collaboration of writer/magazine publisher Arthur Howard and
actor/cartoonist Charles Ortleb. As in their first album, ''Another Cat Book''
(1979), the humans depicted are sophisticated big-city types, but the cats
always know how to outwit them.

- B. Kliban, the man who set off the present craze in 1975 with his
super-selling album ''Cat,'' hasn't drawn any more felines for books, but -
we're told by his agent Toni Mendez - he continues to draw them for other
purposes. His calendar designs have just been collected in ''Cat Calendar Art
Book'' (Workman, hardcover, $17.95). And his cat pictures for licensees are
still finding new homes on a wide variety of products - most recently,
wristwatches and executive desk clocks.  One of Mr. Kliban's latest
inspirations, showing that his cats are very much with-it, is reproduced above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of Kliban cat

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Is Urged to Cut Quota for Indochinese

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20


The United States should cut its quota for refugees from Indochina by one-third
to one-half next year and admit only those fleeing persecution and not simply
seeking ''the land of milk and honey,'' a Senate staff report said today.

The report also urged that the Government ''now join with other countries in
reducing the high profile of our Indochinese resettlement program'' to make it
less inviting for those who migrate for economic reasons.

''It is clear that a growing number of Vietnamese boat people, as well as
Laotians, are risking flight primarily for economic reasons,'' the report said.
It added that through the refugee ''grapevine,'' word had gone back ''from those
who write and describe their safe resettlement in what seems like a 'land of
milk and honey.' ''

The authors of the study are Richard W. Day, chief counsel, and Jerry M. Tinker,
minority counsel, of the Senate Judciary immigration subcommittee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

An Ex-Marine Hunger Striker Buried With Military Honors

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 224 words

DATELINE: OXNARD, Calif., Sept. 20


A former Marine who joined a hunger strike last spring to protest the
Government's treatment of Vietnam veterans was buried with military honors
yesterday, five days after he apparently jumped 11 stories to his death.

A Marine honor guard fired three rifle volleys over the grave of Clarence
Stickler, 35 years old, as a bugler played taps over the flag-draped coffin. A
Marine sergeant handed the folded flag to Mr.  Stickler's mother, Louise, after
the service.

About a dozen of Mr. Stickler's friends attended the funeral and burial service
in jungle combat fatigues, but there was no mention during the services of the
protest he had joined against the treatment given by the Veterans
Administration.

After the 47-day hunger strike in which he participated, Mr.  Stickler was
treated at a V.A. psychiatric hospital in Los Angeles.  Doctors said he was
uncooperative, and he was released about two weeks ago after getting into a
fight with other patients.

His mother had said he should not have been released, and some of his friends
agreed, saying that he had been suicidal. On Monday night, Mr. Stickler
apparently stood on a hallway sofa of the downtown Hilton Hote l, kicked out the
11th-story window and jumped.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

HAIG REBUFFS POOR NATIONS' PROGRAM FOR MORE AID

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 21


Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr. said today that a third-world plan for
a large increase in resources flowing from rich nations to poor ''is simply
unrealistic.''

Instead, he urged Asian, African and Latin American countries to rely for
development on free markets, private initiative and foreign capital.

Mr. Haig's address at the General Assembly surprised most diplomats because it
was devoted almost exclusively to problems of promoting faster economic growth
in the third world and touched only briefly on other aspects of international
politics.

Reaction to Haig Speech

Several third-world delegates, who declined to be named, said they were pleased
that Mr. Haig had dealt at such length with a theme they regarded as critical.
But most made clear that they were distressed by what they saw as a rejection of
their proposal for what they call a new international economic order.

For the last two years, third-world countries have sought unsuccessfully to
begin ''global negotiations'' on their program for a vast increase in transfer
of goods and services from industrial countries.

One Arab diplomat said today, ''Laissez faire and classical liberalism are
favorable for the United States'' but noted that the third-world nations ''need
a minimum of organization'' to achieve their economic goals.

This was the opening day of the Assembly's ''general debate,'' which is usually
the occasion for speeches by ministers in which they outline their major
foreign-policy concerns.

The 121 foreign ministers due here over the next three weeks are typically more
concerned with the private conversations they hold with each other than with
speechmaking. All of them will watch closely the talks Mr. Haig has scheduled
with the Soviet Foreign Minister, And rei A. Gromyko, on Sept. 23 and 28.

In his speech, Mr. Haig did make what appeared to be one important gesture
towards the third world. The very poorest nations like Mali and Bangladesh do
''require long-term and generous concessional aid,'' he said. But he added that
help should come from developing as well as industrialized nations.

Moreover, at a conference earlier this month in Paris on the plight of the 31
poorest countries, the United States successfully opposed the fixing of a
specific time in which the rich nations should meet a target for aid.

For the most part, however, Mr. Haig urged free enterprise economics as the best
prescription for growth.  ''A massive increase in the transfer of resources from
the developed to the developing countries is simply unrealistic,'' he said. ''No
more time'' should ''be lost in sterile debates and unrealistic demands.''

This was taken as a reference to the effort by third-world countries to open
talks on their program.

Raw Materials Prices

Apart from a large increase in conventional foreign aid, the poorer nations seek
agreements to raise prices of the raw materials that many depend on for their
exports. Mr. Haig recognized that the poor can be hurt by ''volatile commodity
markets.'' But he urged them to become ''creditworthy'' and ''borrow on
international capital markets.''

The Secretary also called repeatedly for ''an open international trading
system'' and strengthening of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the
international forum where countries make mutual concessions on tariff barriers.
Third world nations want fewer obstacles to their sales in rich countries but
seek to protect their infant industries from foreign competition.

Mr. Haig said that developing nations should ''support'' the International
Monetary Fund and engage in ''constructive participation'' in its programs. The
third world wants the Fund, which helps nations with balance of payments
problems, to distribute claims on wealthier members as a form of aid. Industrial
nations and the fund itself regard this as neither ''constructive'' nor as
''support'' for the fund.

'Reliance on Incentives'

''Growth for development is best achieved through reliance on incentives for
individual development,'' Mr. Haig said. The history of the United States
demonstrates ''that policies which encourage private initiatives w ill promote
better resou rce allocation and more rapid economic growth,'' he said. ''Within
a framework basically hospitable to market incentives, foreign priv ate
investment can supplement indigenous investment and contribu te significantly to
development.''

Most third world countries, however, are committed to some form of planning,
rely on state-run industries and are frequently suspicious of foreign private
capital.

In his brief discussion of major-power politics, the Secretary deplored ''the
willful violation of the national integrity of Afghanistan and Cambodia by the
Soviet Union and Vietnam.'' He implicitly defended the American refusal to
ratify the second agreement curbing strategic nuclear weapons.

''The international community has tended over the years to overestimate the
beneficial effects of the strategic arms limitation talks in dampening regional
conflict,'' he said. He suggested that arms negotiations are hampered by events
like the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and Vietnam's occupation of
Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Al Haig

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

$12.50 ADAY ASKED FOR IRAN HOSTAGES

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 21


A Presidential commission recommended today that the Federal Government pay each
of the Americans held hostage in Iran $12.50 a day for their time in captivity.

In addition to the proposed tax-exempt payment of $5,550 for each hostage who
was held for the full 444 days, the nine-member commission recommended unlimited
medical and health benefits for those former hostages who are suffering disab
ilities stemming from their detention.

President Reagan can accept, reject or modify the commission's recommendations.
Congress would have to appropriate the money.  The Americans were taken captive
by Islamic militants on Nov. 4, 1979, in the American Embassy in Teheran, and
the last 52 were released last Jan. 20.

The recommended compensation falls far short of the $1,000-a-day payment
suggested by Brice Clagett, an attorney for Flag Inc., a family liaison action
group formed by families of the former hostages.

Terming the commission's proposal a ''noncompensation report,'' Mr. Clagett said
today that he expected some of the former hostages and their families to file
suit in the Federal Court of Claims, seeking ''just compensation.''

He said the basis for legal action would be the fact that the hostages were
barred from filing suit against Iran for compensation under an agreement between
the United States and Iran.

The reactions of some former hostages and their relatives today ranged from
amusement to resignation to sadness. Some refused comment.

Wallaps Tomseth, whose husband, Victor, was a hostage, laughed loudly when told
of the commission's proposal. ''It's so funny,'' she said. ''How can you put a
price on something like this? No amount of money will really compensate for what
they went through.''

The recommendations also drew criticism from some Vietnam veterans. One, Paul
Konka, told the commission that any compensation would be a ''deliberate slap in
the face'' to the veterans who returned to ''scorn, derision or simply complete
inattention from the citizens they served.''
Hostage Relief Act

In its 132-page report, the commission said that the Hostage Relief Act passed
by Congress a year ago effectively dealt with the more pressing problems faced
by the hostages and their families. The measure e xemp ted the hostages from
taxes on income earned during their captivi ty, authorized payment of medical
expenses associated with their or deal and provided payment of education and
training costs of thei r spouses and children.

The commission recommended that further assistance should be given by amending
the Military Personnel and Civilian Employees Claims Act to increase the maximum
payment for damages or loss of personal property from $40,000 to $50,000.

The commission was headed by James S. Dwight Jr. of Washington, a partner in the
international accounting firm of Deloitte, Haskins and Sells. Other members were
Cyrus R. Vance, a former secretary of state; Patricia Roberts Harris, a former
secretary of housing and urban development and later secretary of health and
human services; Robert M. Giaimo, a former Democratic representative from
Connecticut; Henry Bellmon, a former senator from Oklahoma; Constance D.
Armitage, a professor of art history at Wofford College in Spartanburg, S.C.;
Anderson Carter, a New Mexico businessman; Henry Lucas, a dentist from San
Francisco, and Jeanne Ferst, an Atlanta civic leader.

Questions on One Hostage

A spokesman for the State Department said she did not know whether Jerry
Plotkin, a businessman who was held hostage, would be eligible for the
compensation.

The proposed daily compensation for the 52 former hostages would cost the
Federal Government a total of $288,600. The commission's report did not detail
compensation for hostages held for shorter periods.

Moorhead C. Kennedy Jr., who was third-ranking diplomat at the embassy when
taken captive, was critical of what he felt was the commission's reliance on
past detention compensation.

''I think they failed to take into consideration that it is getting harder to
get people to serve abroad,'' he said.  Mr. Kennedy's wife, Louisa, said: ''It's
terribly sad to me that the windup of all this has to be articulated in a small
sum of money. It's as if they want to put those events in a drawer of history,
and it's a very small drawer.''

---- Action on Embassy

WASHINGTON, Sept. 21 (UPI) - The United States will deny Iran its embassy in
Washington and freeze $2 million of its funds until the revolutionary Islamic
government restores the American Embassy in Teheran to diplomatic control, the
State Department announced today.

An attorney for the Iranian Government charged that the action violated the
agreement with Teheran to return all Iranian assets in exchange for the
hostages' rel ease. But State Department officials said the embassy was not
discussed in the agr eement.

The embassy has been closed since Presindent Carter broke diplomatic relations
with Teheran in April 1980.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TRIAL TO BEGIN ON CHARGE OF SELLING CODES TO SOVIET

BYLINE: By GREGORY JAYNES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 762 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, Fla., Sept. 21


Jury selection for the trial of a former Army warrant officer charged with
selling Soviet agents secret coding information in Paris in 1963 and 1964 began
here today.

A list of 53 prospective witnesses, including retired Army Gen.  William
Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam, has been submitted
to Federal District Court here, where the case against Joseph G. Helmich Jr.
will be heard. The trial is expected to take two weeks.

The Federal Government contends that the secrets Mr. Helmich is accused of
selling for $131,000 could have enabled the Soviet Union to decipher and read
American messages ''scrambled'' for security reasons during the Vietnam
conflict.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation, which arrested Mr. Helmich July 15 at the
Jacksonville Beach house of his father-in-law, has not said when or for how long
the Soviets are thought to have used the coding information, or when the United
States authorities found out about it. Indictments charging Mr. Helmich on three
counts of espionage and one count of conspiracy, each of which carries a maximum
sentence of imprisonment for life, imply that he has been under suspicion for 17
years. The F.B.I. has not said why he was not charged until now.
Worked as 'Crypto Custodian'

Mr. Helmich, 44 years old, was born in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., 44 years ago, quit
school in the ninth grade in 1952 and joined the Army in 1954. In 1963 and 1964,
he was a ''crypto custodian'' with the United States Signal Corps in Paris, with
responsibility for custody, handling, safeguarding and destruction of military
codemaking materials.

He is charged with selling the Soviet agents a KL-7 crypto system, which is a
device about the size of a typewriter. It has a keyboard with which teletype
messages are encoded by scrambling them into gibberish. The documents included
maintenance and operating instructions. The indictments say that he met agents
at the Soviet Embassy in Paris and at a Soviet trade mission there.

The indictments say that Mr. Helmich met Soviet agents again in 1980, in a
purported effort to obtain more mo ney. Law enforcement sources here say that
Mr. Helmich met with th e agents in Niagara Falls, N.Y., in the summer of 1980,
at which time he came under F.B.I. surveillance.

In a preliminary hearing in August, a Federal agent, Sammy J.  Miller, testified
that he and another agent walked into the Niagara Falls hardware store Mr.
Helmich managed on Aug. 5, 1980. Mr. Miller said: ''He asked me if he could help
us. I said yes you can. I would like to talk to you about a matter of national
security.''
Many Meetings With the F.B.I.

The agent testified that Mr. Helmich said, ''Fine.'' Nine meetings, all of them
in upstate New York, were held with Mr. Helmich through February 1981. Mr.
Helmich has testified last month that ''the opening dialogue was basically
threats and implied promise.'' He said the agents told him ''if I didn't
cooperate, I could go to jail for 35 years.'' Mr. Miller also said that
initially Mr. Helmich did not think he had done wrong by selling the Soviets the
equipment and information. ''He didn't see he had done a whole lot wrong because
he didn't think he gave the Soviets any classified information,'' Mr.  Miller
said.

Another F.B.I. agent, James K. Murphy, said he asked Mr. Helmich why he made the
sale, and: ''He replied - and I'm quoting - 'I'm not proud of what I did and I
hate to think of the amount of damage I did.' ''

Mr. Helmich had left the Army in 1966. After that, he, his wife and one child
have lived in Miami, where he worked as a camera salesman; Augusta, Ga., and
Aiken, S.C., where he sold automobiles; Niagara Falls, where he managed a
hardware store, and Jacksonv ille, where in June he took a $190-a-week job
installing floor tiles.

Friends and relatives have said in interviews that the Helmichs have had a
hand-to-mouth existence. His wife, Jean, said at the time of the arrest: ''I've
lived with him 24 years. I know where he's been. It's all a pack of lies.'' Bond
was set at $500,000. Mr.  Helmich's court-appointed lawyer asked for a
reduction, saying his client had only $14 to his name. When the bond was reduced
to $400,000, Mr. Helmich laughed.

The jury selection is expected to take at least two more days.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 23, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CALIFORNIA BUSINESSMAN EXCLUDED IN PROPOSAL ON FUNDS FOR HOSTAGES

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22


A Presidential commission that has proposed compensation for the former hostages
of Iran recommended that no Federal compensation be given Jerry Plotkin, a
California businessman, because he was not a Government employee.

Mr. Plotkin, the only non-Government employee held captive by Islamic militants
in the 444-day seizure of the American Embassy in Teheran, said today through
his attorney that he might sue the Federal Government for losses.

While recommending against compensation for Mr. Plotkin, the Presidential
commission proposed that all other hostages be given $12.50 a day in tax-exempt
funds for each day in captivity.

The per diem allowance would be given to the 51 American Government workers held
hostage the 444 days, as well as others who were either released or who escaped
earlier.

Captured While on Visit
Mr. Plotkin was taken captive, along with the other Americans, wh ile visiting
the embassy on Nov. 4, 1979, and he was one of the 52 re leased on Jan. 20 of
this year.

In its report to President Reagan this week, the Presidential panel suggested
that the Government study the question of Federal responsibility toward private
American citizens taken hostage.

One panel member, Patricia Roberts Harris, submitted reservations to the report
involving denial of compensation to Mr. Plotkin.  The report states, ''Mrs.
Harris believes there should be consideration of compensation for nonemployee
hostages where the taking and holding are for the purpose of bringing pressure
on the United States Government.''

In recommending that Mr. Plotkin not be given money, the commission said that
the Government had ''no legal or moral responsibility'' to provide such
compensation to private citizens traveling abroad, particularly since warnings
had been issued against travel in the area.

Mr. Plotkin's attorney has argued that his client is entitled to compensation
because he did not receive any income during his enforced captivity. Families of
the diplomatic and military personnel held hostage received regular paychecks.

Proposal Goes to Reagan

The panel recommendations can be accepted, rejected or modified by President
Reagan. Funds to compensate the hostages would have to be approved by Congress.

There is no contractual obligation for the Federal Government to pay any
compensation to the former hostages. However, as far back as World War II, a
precedent was established to pay some compensation to prisoners of war and
interned American citizens in recognitionof the hardship they suffered.

In arriving at the $12.50 daily compensation figure for each day of captivity,
the Presidential panel said that the sum was comparable to that paid to Vietnam
prisoners-of-war, adjusted to reflect inflation that has taken place since those
earlier payments were made.

Detention benefits paid after World War II and the Korean war were $2.50 a day.
The same sum was given to members of the crew of the U.S.S. Pueblo, which was
detained by North Korean authorities for 11 months in 1968. Vietnam
prisoners-of-war received $5 a day.

----

Rosen Calls Offer 'Repugnant'

FAIRFIELD, Conn., Sept. 22 (AP) -Barry Rosen, the former press attache at the
American Embassy in Teheran, today labeled a proposal to compensate him for h is
time as an American hostage in Iran as ''repugnant.' '

He said the compensation proposal was repugnant considering that members of the
Presidential commission received $192 a day for their work.

Mr. Rosen said that the proposal ''debases our ordeal'' and said he would prefer
''zero'' to that amount, explaining, ''I could accept that verdict and say
that's part of life.''

''How do you figure what it means to be held 24 hours a day in a cell not
knowing if you will be freed?'' he said.  Mr. Rosen could not name the amount he
thought hostages should receive, but suggested it should not be out of line with
the compensation given to military prisoners of war.

He made his comments during a visit to Fairfield University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 23, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CUT TO BE SOUGHT IN REFUGEE QUOTA

BYLINE: By EDWARD T. POUND, Speci al to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 639 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 22


Attorney General William French Smith said today that the Reagan Administration
would attempt to reduce markedly the number of Indochinese refugees admitted to
the United States for resettlement in the next f iscal year.

Mr. Smith told the Senate Judiciary Committee that President Reagan was
recommending that no more than 120,000 Indochinese be admitted in the fiscal
year 1982, beginning Oct. 1. He emphasized, however, that the number was a
''ceiling,'' and that the Administration planned to adopt policies designed to
result in fewer admissions.

In the current fiscal year, up to 168,000 Indochinese admissions were authorized
by the Administration and Congress under the Refugee Act of 1980. The law
requires the Administration to consult with Congress on refugee numbers.

Mr. Smith said that about 125,000 refugees from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia will
actually have been admitted as of Sept. 30. The Attorney General said the
Administration would continue to discourage future Indochinese resettlement in
this country except in cases where refugees fled their homelands because of
persecution.

Under the Refugee Act of 1980, a refugee is one who leaves his country ''because
of a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality,
membership in a particular social group, or political opinion.''

'First Asylum' Nations

Mr. Smith said the Administration would explore new steps with nations, that
initially accept refugees with the expectation that they will be resettled
elsewhere. To be explored are additional means of discouraging refugees from
departing their homelands for reasons other than persecution by making refugee
conditions in the recieving country as unpleasant as possible. According to
Senate aides, Thailand announced such a policy four years ago but has not
enforced it.

Mr. Smith stressed that a continuing admissions program of ''significant'' size
was necessary because of the United States's involvement in Indochina before its
fall to Communist governments.

He said many Indochinese faced persecution if they remained in their homelands
and that the Communist governments in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia were
''dominated by repression and paranoia.''

Mr. Smith and Walter J. Stoessel, Under Sec retary of State for Political
Affairs, also recommended that the United States allow up to 53,000 refugees
from other countries in th e new fiscal year. This includes a ceiling of 33,000
for Soviet emigr ants.

The Soviet Union has restricted emigration, and only 13,000 Russians, mostly
Jews, will have entered the United States this fiscal year, according to the
Reagan Administration. Mr. Smith and Mr. Stoessel said the Administration would
continue to press for a liberalization of Soviet emigration policies.

According to Senate aides, the Judiciary Committee is expected to notify the
Administration that it believes the ceilings for Indochinese refugees should be
even lower than those proposed by President Reagan. However, the panel probably
will approve the proposed ceilings, provided that the Administration agrees to a
review of the situation six months from now, the Senate aides said.  The House
Judiciary Committee must also approve the Administration's plan.

The committee's staff prepared a report recommending that this fiscal year's
ceiling of 168,000 Indochinese refugees should be reduced next year to from
80,000 to 100,000. The staff report said that while there were clearly bona fide
refugees, others were coming to the United States primarily to better themselves
financially.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

1971 TAPE LINKS NIXON TO PLAN TO USE 'THUGS'

BYLINE: By SEYMOUR M. HERSH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1930 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 23


A newly disclosed White House tape recording shows that President Nixon, angered
over widespread civil disobedience in Washington during demonstrations in May
1971 opposing the war in Vietnam, endorsed a suggestion that ''thugs'' from the
teamsters' union be used to assault the protesters.

In a wide-ranging conversation on the morning of May 5, 1971, shortly before a
third day of demonstrations, Mr. Nixon and H.R.  Haldeman, then the White

Excerpts from tape, page D26
House chief of staff, animatedly discussed an idea raised by Mr.  Haldeman of
hiring teamsters to, as the President put it, ''go in andknock their heads
off.''

''Sure,'' Mr. Haldeman responded. ''Murderers. Guys that really, you know,
that's what they really do ... it's the regular strikebusters-types and all that
... and then they're gonna beat the (obscenity) out of some of these people.
And, uh, and hope they really hurt 'em. You know ... smash some noses.''

Comment by Nixon Attorney

There is no evidence that the Nixon-Haldeman conversation resulted in any direct
action against the demonstrators. There is also no evidence that any Federal
law-enforcement agency has investigated the possibility that the President might
have authorized a criminal act.

R. Stan Mortenson, a Washington lawyer who is Mr. Nixon's attorney in matters
relating to the White House tape recordings, was provided an oral summary of key
portions of the transcript yesterday and was asked for comment. He submitted the
following statement this afternoon:

''The New York Times claims to have come into possession of a purported
transcript of a conversations between Richard Nixon and H.R. Haldeman on May 5,
1971. If The Times has an authentic transcript, there apparently has been an
unauthorized disclosure in violation of a Federal statute, court order or
regulation. Who committed this act is known only to The Times at this point.

''What The New York Times has appears to be a transcript prepared by the Special
Watergate Prosecution Force or another investigative group. It does not conform
to the transcript prepared for official court procedures.''

Mr. Haldeman, reached by telephone yesterday in Los Angeles, said: ''I have no
comment. I really don't care much what's on the tapes.  They're 10 years old.''

The 26-page transcript of the Nixon-Haldeman conversation was among more than
750 pages of transcripts prepared by the National Archives in response to a
subpoena filed in 1974 by attorneys for some 1,200 protesters who were arrested
on the steps of the Capitol on the afternoon of May 5, 1971. Despite intensive
litigation over the last seven years, none of the tape recordings or transcripts
have been released. Federal courts have ruled that the arrests in three days of
protest were unconstitutional.

The Times's sources, in providing a copy of the transcript, noted that the tape
recording of May 5 was no longer relevant, in terms of possible criminal
prosecution, because the statute of limitations has expired on possible criminal
infractions by Mr. Haldeman, and because Mr. Nixon's Presidential pardon,
granted by President Ford one month after Mr. Ford took office in 1974, was
absolute and unconditional.
Potential Benefit to Plaintiffs

One official, however, characterized the recording as of potential benefit to
the plaintiffs in the civil damage suit that is still pending against John N.
Mitchell, who was the Attorney General under Mr. Nixon.

Historians at the National Archives have been listening to and indexing more
than 6,000 hours of Nixon White House tapes since September 1978, a year after
the Supreme Court ruled that the Federal Government had a right to maintain
control over the Nixon papers and tape recordings.

The White House tape recording system was first installed in February 1971, and
the May 5 transcripts are the earliest such Presidential conversation to be made
public.

Former members of the Watergate Special Prosecution Force, to whom portions of
the transcript were read this week, generally agreed that Mr. Nixon appeared
more animated and aggressive in that conversation than he did in the hundreds of
hours of tape recordi ngs and transcripts t hat were made available to the
prosecutors.
Period of Political Rebound

Those materials dealt primarily with the period after June 17, 1972, when the
offices of the Democratic National Committee in the Watergate building were
entered. This break-in led to the Watergate scandal, trials in which top White
House aides were convicted and jailed, and in the resignation of Mr. Nixon as
President on Aug. 9, 1974.

Mr. Nixon's conversation with Mr. Haldeman came at a time of political rebound
for the President, who had been disappointed in the failure of Republican
candidates to achieve major gains in the 1970 Congressional elections. And he
was being strongly challeged in public opinion polls by a number of Democratic
Senators, including Edmund S. Muskie of Maine. The Vietnam War was still a major
political issue.

The tape recording of May 5 provides evidence that White House planning for
''dirty tricks'' and other illegal activity prior to the 1972 election,
activities that were to be become known in the Watergate investigation and
various criminal trials, had already begun.

At one point, the May 5 tape recording show s, Mr. Nixon and Mr.  Haldeman
shared laughs over Mr. Haldeman's ac count of how Charles W. Colson, another
high-level White House aide k nown for his total loyalty to the President, had
arranged to shi p oranges in Senator Muskie's name to a group of Vietnam
veterans who were participating in the protests, known as the May Day demonst
rations.

After the laughs, Mr. Haldeman went on to tell the President that Mr. Colson had
''got a lot done that he hasn't been caught at,'' and added that ''we got some
stuff that he doesn't know anything about, too.''

'A Real Conspirator-Type'

In response to a question on this from the President, Mr. Haldeman said that
Dwight Chapin, then the President's appointments secretary, had established
contact with ''a guy that nobody, none of us knows except Dwight ... who is just
completely removed. There's no contact at all. He's, he's starting to build it
now. We're going to use it for the campaign next year.''

''Are they really any good?'' Mr. Nixon asked. Mr. Haldeman replied that ''this
guy's a real conspirator-type ... thug-type guy ... This is the kind of guy can
get out and tear things up.''

Mr. Chapin's operatives, Mr. Haldeman said, had worked against Mr.  Muskie
during one of his early campaign trips to New Hampshire. With the advent of the
renewed antiwar protests, Mr. Haldeman said, ''they're gonna stir up some of
this Vietcong flag business.''

It was not clear from the transcript what sort of action the Chapin group
planned in connection with the waving of Vietcong flags by protesters.

'Do It With the Teamsters'

''What I suggested he do, and I think that they can get away with this,'' Mr.
Haldeman told the President, ''do it with the teamsters.  Just ask them to dig
up those, their eight thugs.''

Mr. Nixon said ''yeah'' and agreed that Frank E. Fitzsimmons, who had replaced
James R. Hoffa as president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, was
trying to - as Mr. Haldeman put it - ''play our game anyway.'' It was at that
point that the two men began discussing the use of teamsters ''thugs,'' as Mr.
Haldeman put it, against antiwar activists.

The conversation suggests that the President was made aware of the White House
''dirty tricks'' political activities prior to the election, a charge he has
repeatedly denied.

Mr. Colson, who is now president of Prison Fellowship, said today, ''I can state
categorically that no teamsters were hired.'' The former Presidential aide
acknowledged that he had on occasion urged the Veterans of Foreign Wars to
create ''counter-demonstrations'' on behalf of the White House, but added: ''If
Haldeman told me to hire teamsters, I must have disobeyed him.''

Mr. Colson also acknowledged that he had sent oranges in Mr.  Muskie's name to
Vietnam veterans during the May Day demonstrations, but he described such action
as ''rinky-dink'' stuff.

Mr. Chapin, reached today in Chicago, where he is a magazine publisher, said he
did not know what Mr. Haldeman had meant in referring to a ''thug-type guy'' who
was in secret liaison with the White House. By May 1971, Mr. Chapin added, Mr.
Haldeman had approved planning for what was to become a political sabotage
effort in 1972 that was directed by Donald H. Segretti Jr., a California lawyer
and friend of Mr. Chapin who later was convicted of political espionage charges.

Mr. Haldeman, Mr. Mitchell and John D. Erhlichman, Mr. Nixon's chief domestic
affairs adviser, were convicted and jailed on ch arges that they con spired to
cover up the break-in at the Watergate offices. Mr.  Colson and Mr. Chapin, like
Mr. Segretti, were also jailed on cha rges arising from the 1972 campaign.

When Mr. Ehrlichman was told this week of the content of the May 5 tape
recording, he acknowledged that he had always ''assumed'' while he worked in the
White House that some of the seemingly spontaneous attacks on antiwar
demonstrators by workers wearing hard hats ''were laid on,'' or inspired, by the
White House.

Mr. Ehrlichman, in Santa Fe, N.M., recalled that Mr. Haldeman's theory in terms
of handling the President ''was that he could not be effective if he disagreed
with him.''

Mr. Ehrlichman further recalled that the former President had always been
anxious about protesters, and that he had sought in the 1968 campaign to hire
outsiders ''to break up demonstrations.''
Nearly 10,000 Arrested

That theme dominated much of the conversation between Mr. Nixon and Mr. Haldeman
on May 5.  Washington had been the scene of violent confrontatio ns between
thepolice and protesters, who had asserted that they would shut the city down.
The police responded by making mas s arrests of nearly 10,000 youths on May 3
and 4.

Charges against the majority of those arrested were dismissed, after short
jailings, for lack of evidence. On May 5, demonstrators were to congregate at
the Capitol and demand that Congress sign a ''People's Peace Treaty'' ending the
war with North Vietnam.

Later that day, the police seized 1,200 protesters in mass arrests during a
peaceful demonstration on the steps of the Capitol.  In subsequent litigation, a
team of American Civil Liberties Union attorneys, led by Warren K. Kaplan of
Washington, won a multimilliondollar judgment against the District of Columbia
for wrongful arrest, but they were unsuccessful in their attempts to compel the
Government to turn over all relevant transcripts of Presidential meetings on the
May Day demonstrations.

While the civil litigation was proceeding in Federal District Court in
Washington, historians for the National Archives determined that 133
conversations were held in the Oval Office in late April and early May of 1971
dealing, in part, with the pending demonstrations.

The issue of releasing the 197l tapes has been before the United States Court of
Appels for the District of Columbia on two occasions, with no final
determination.

Mr. Nixon's attorneys, headed by Mr. Mortenson, have been ordered by the
appellate court to prepare summaries, or indexes, of the conversations that
might be relevant. Mr. Mortenson has done so, but argued that the majority of
the Oval Office conversations were not relevant to the lawsuit, which he said
centered on the May 5 arrests on Capitol Hill.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WAVE OF VIOLENCE IS TROUBLING THAIS

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 542 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept 23


Armed with American-made weapons left behind at the end of the Vietnam War,
gunmen are driving Thailand into a chronic state of violence. Murders have
increased to 50 a day compared with 40 last year, while other violent crimes
like armed robbery and rape are being committed at the rate of one every seven
minutes, according to a senior police officer.

Law enforcement officers attending a recent seminar here on crime attributed the
growing violence to weapons that became abundant in Thailand after 1975.

Thousands of soldiers defeated by Communist armies came into Thailand with
American weapons from Laos, Cambodia and South Vietnam and most of the guns fell
into the hands of crime syndicates and individual gangsters, they said.

The weapons range from pistols to M-16 infantry rifles and M-79 grenade
launchers.
Growing Number of Bandits

Police officials said the weapons were a boon to Thailand's growing number of
bandits and gangsters, who are always ready to lend their services for a fee to
ambitious politicians, businessmen and even Buddhist monks.

The court in Ayutthaya, north of here, recently sentenced to death a senior monk
found guilty of murdering the city's chief abbot through a hired gunman. The
gunman, who was paid $2,000 two years ago for the killing, was given a life
sentence. He had pleaded guilty, unlike the monk.

In the cent ral province of Petchburi, west of Bangkok, gunmen opened fire w ith
M-16 and M-79 weapons on two monks and a family of four, serious ly wounding all
of them.

A day later, in Nakhon Pathom Province, near Bangkok, a rice merchant died in a
hail of M-16 bullets fired from a passing car. The police said the slain
merchant had many business enemies, any of whom could have arranged the killing.
He thus joined the long list of unsolved crimes.

Some Employed as Retainers

Gunmen either work as freelance killers, hiring themselves out to the highest
bidder, or serve as retainers for rich families who are politically and
economically powerful and brook no competition.

''But these influential people are in fact owners of gambling dens or are
narcotics traffickers,'' said the chairman of the law enforcement seminar,
Police Maj. Gen. Sathaporn Vimutanont.

Officials and academics at the seminar feared that Thailand faced more violent
crimes in relation to narcotics because of the bumper opium crop this year,
estimated at 600 tons. The crop is produced in the so-called Golden Triangle,
where the borders of Burma, Laos and Thailand meet, and passes through Thailand
on the way to Western markets.

After the gangland-style slaying last June of a politically powerful
businessman, Chumphol Sukphrangsi, the police cracked down on illegal weapons in
his home province of Chonburi, on the coast south of Bangkok.

The police discovered more than 1,000 pieces of American military hardware held
by various people with bogus gun licenses.  A random police raid here last month
turned up 20 military rifles and several bombs hidden in the modest home of a
former cavalry regiment soldier, who said he collected guns as a hobby.

Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda, opening the seminar, appealed to the public to
cooperate with Government efforts to maintain law and order.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GENERALS TESTIFY IN ESPIONAGE CASE

BYLINE: By GREGORY JAYNES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, Fla., Sept. 23


The United States began its case against a former warrant officer charged with
espionage today by calling two prominent retired Army generals, both of whom
testified that top-secret coding materials he is accused of selling to the
Soviet Union were crucial for national defense.

Joseph G. Helmich Jr., who was arrested in July after a one-year investigation
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, is charged with selling the
communications secrets to the Russians for $131,000 in 1963 and 1964.

The first witness called was William C. Westmoreland, commander of the United
States forces in Vietnam, a four-star general and Army chief of staff when he
retired in 1972. He testified that the coding system Mr. Helmich is accused of
selling was essential when he was commander of the 18th Airborne Corps, a
precursor of the Rapid Deployment Force.

''Otherwise the enemy would be reading our mail,'' the general said. ''He would
know where we were going, and how we were going and when we were going and when
we were going to get there.''

'Key to Everything'

Thomas Rienzi, a retired three-star general who was with the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization in his last posting, answered a question about enemy
possession of the materials by repeating it: ''Would it tip off our enemy? It's
the key to everything. I mean here you've got the key to the damned door. The
answer is yes, Mr.  Prosecutor.''

The Government contends that Mr. Helmich, who was classified as a
crypto-custodian and put in charge of codes and code books in Paris and at Fort
Bragg, N.C., in the early 1960's, sold vital parts of a KL-7 crypto system,
photographs he had made of the device, and a maintenance manual, operating
instructions and coding keys. The military says the KL-7 was ''the work horse''
for coding in those years.

Mr. Helmich, 44 years old, is charged with three counts of espionage and one
count of conspiracy, each of which carries a maximum penalty of life
imprisonment.

Tracked by F.B.I.

In opening remarks, United States Attorney Gary Betz said ''the mosaic'' of Mr.
Helmich's movements were put together by the F.B.I.  starting in August 1980,
apparently after he was spotted talking to Russian agents in Ottawa. Mr.
Helmich, who left the Army in 1966, was working then as a manager of a hardware
store in Niagara Falls, N.Y.

From August until February, the F.B.I. interviewed Mr. Helmich nine times.  In a
preliminary hearing, he testified that he was forced to cooperate under threat
of a 35-year prison sentence. As the meetings continued, he said, the air of
hostility receded and there was talk of sending him back to Paris in a
counter-intelligence role. In June, he informed the F.B.I. that he was moving to
Jacksonville and going to work laying floor tiles. He said he was ''stunned''
when he was arrested July 15.

Attorneys for Mr. Helmich have asked Federal District Judge Susan H. Black to
suppress the evidence from his first seven meetings with the F.B.I. because he
was not advised of his rights until the eighth meeting and because he did not
have an attorney present. The judge has yet to rule on the motion.

'Ostentatious Wealth'

In sketching the case he intends to present, Mr. Betz said that Mr. Helmich
returned from his tour in France with ''ostentatious wealth.'' He said that the
defendant bought a Jaguar for himself and another for his wife, who wore
expensive clothes.

The couple lived well, the prosecutor said, and Mr. Helmich explained to two
Army officers who were asked to look into his affluence in 1964 that he had
parlayed a $2,500 inheritence into an investment in Paris that brought him
$20,000 to $30,000.

Mr. Betz said Mr. Helmich told the Army that a Parisian business consultant
named Claude helped him with the investments. Mr. Helmich told the F.B.I. last
year that Claude was really Viktor Lyubimov, a Soviet agent, Mr. Betz said. He
told friends in h is company that he had won a lottery.

The prosecutor said Mr. Helmich's association with the Soviet Union ceased
earning him money in the summer of 1964, when he was given a final payment of
$30,000 or $40,000 in Mexico City.

Since leaving the Army, Mr. Helmich has held a string of low-paying jobs from
Miami to Niagara Falls and back. Florida journalists who tracked down Mr.
Helmich's friends and co-workers here and in Georgia, South Carolina and New
York have been unable to find anyone who remembers him ever having a substantial
amount of money.
Indeterminate Damage

What has not come out at the trial, nor from the Pentagon, is the extent of
damage the sale of such information would have wrought during the Vietnam years.
Mr. Betz has described it as ''grave, grave damage.''

Outside the courtroom, General Westmoreland refused to speculate this afternoon.
Inside, he had said, ''One time I had a commanding officer who said if you don't
have communications you don't have anything.''

Later, General Rienzi spoke of military coding and said, ''I went through 42
years in the Army and six wars and I'm still alive. And I think I'm still alive
because everybody didn't know what I was doing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SAYS ITS PLANES DUMPED AGENT ORANGE NEAR ITS BASES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 559 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 23


Newly discovered military records indicate that substantial numbers of
servicemen on military bases in Vietnam were exposed to Agent Orange when planes
on defoliatation missions had to jettison cargo, the Government said today.

The discovery could help scientists determine whether Agent Orange caused
long-term health damage to veterans and their offspring, Richard S. Schweiker,
Secretary of Healt h and Human Services, said at a news con ference.

Agent Orange is the code name for a defoliant sprayed on Vietnamese jungles and
crops to reduce food suppies and cover for enemy forces. It contains dioxin, one
of the most toxic chemicals known. About 60,000 Vietnam veterans have told the
Veterans Administration they fear their health was impaired by coming into
contact with the chemical.

''I didn't think anyone quite foresaw that we would be dumping this stuff on our
own people,'' Mr. Schweiker said.

Turned Over to Working Group

The information on the jettisoning was uncovered by the Defense Department and
was turned over to a Government-wide Agent Orange working group under Mr.
Schweiker's jurisdiction, he said. He reported that Pentagon records showed 90
instances when airplanes dumped chemical cargoes in emergencies, including 41 in
which Agent Orange was apparently dumped ''directly over or near U.S. air bases
and other military installations.''

The number of men who came in contact with the spray ''was substantially larger
than anybody expected,'' he said. He could not estimate how many men that was,
he said.

Some veterans have blamed the herbicide for a variety of diseases, including
cancer, birth defects in their children, miscarriages, impotence, respiratory
problems and liver, skin, nerve and emotional disorders.

But so far the Veterans Administration has said it has no evidence that exposure
causes any problem other than a skin disorder and it has refused to pay
disability compensation to veterans who ascribed their ailments to Agent Orange.

Mr. Schweiker said that the Reagan Administration had intensified efforts to
examine the Pentagon's records. He said that the Administration felt that ''a
high enough inquiry'' had not yet been made.

Mr. Schweiker said he was making the disclosure because he felt a responsibility
''to really level with the American people with what really happened.''
''We'd be glad to hear'' from veterans who suspect they were ex posed, he said.

Should Report to the V.A.

Later, a department spokesman, declining to permit his name to be used, said
veterans should write instead to the Veterans Administration, which is compiling
a registry of veterans who suspect exposure.

During the war 12 million gallons of Agent Orange were sprayed from planes. The
spraying stopped in 1971 after Vietnamese women complained they were giving
birth to high numbers of deformed babies.

Until now, only 1,200 pilots and support personnel who sprayed Agent Orange have
been documented as having been heavily exposed.  Two months ago, President
Reagan elevated the Agent Orange working group to the level of a Cabinet council
to add impetus to its work.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1981

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 935 words


International
High-level U.S.-Soviet talks opened between Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig
Jr. and Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko. They conferred for more than four
hours in New York on the issues dividing the two countries and agreed to
announce today that new negotiations would begin on reductions of medium-range
nuclear forces in Europe.  (Page A1, Column 2.)
A Soviet nuclear advantage in Europe is growing, according to the Inter national
Institute for Strategic Studies. In issuing the warning, the private London
research group reaffirmed its support forAtlantic alli ance plans to deploy new
missiles. (A10:4-6.)
Paris disagreed with Washington on international aid, calling for a big increase
in efforts to promote third-world development.  Addressing the United Nations
General Assembly, Claude Cheysson, the French Foreign Minister, urged the
industrialized nations to provide ''tens of billions of dollars'' in assistance.
(A9:1-3.)
The Polish union's bid to compromise on the issue of managerial appointments
could ease the confrontation with the authorities, according to official sources
in Warsaw. Union leaders have agreed to a proposal that the Government keep the
right to appoint managers as long as workers have a veto over the appointments.
(A8:1-3.)
Disorders swept West German cities after a teen-ager was killed in a clash
between the police and evicted squatters in West Berlin. Young people smashed
shop windows, vandalized cars, set fires and rampaged through the streets.
(A6:1-3.)
A purge of left-wing Iranian students and teachers was ordered by Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini in a Teheran broadcast. Parents of children as young as 7 said
they had had to sign a commitment that their children would not even take part
in ideological discussions at school. (A5:1-3.)
National
Doubt over the latest economic plans of the Administration persisted on the eve
of a televised speech tonight by President Reagan. The President, hastily
reshaping his proposals to improve their prospects in Congress, was said to be
reluctant to commit himself to the detailed list of $16 billion in spending
reductions that his aides had previously said would be included in the address.
(A1:6.)
Major cuts in military spending were outlined by Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger in House testimony. He said that the Titan intercontinental missile
would be retired, an Army division would be reduced to skeleton status and 29
Navy vessels would be withdrawn from service to reduce military budgets by $13
billion over the next three years. (A1:1.)
President Nixon was so angered over the civil disorders during the 1971 May Day
demonstrations in Washington that he endorsed a suggestion that ''thugs'' from
the teamsters' union be used to physically assault the anti-Vietnam War
demonstrators. A newly disclosed White House tape recording shows that President
Nixon animatedly discussed the idea of hiring teamsters to, as he put it, '' go
in and knock their heads off.'' (A1:4-6. )
Disclosure of the identity of agents carrying out secret intelligence activities
would be a crime under a bill approved, 354 to 56, in the House. The amended
measure was assailed by critics as unconstitutional. (A1:5.)
A doctors' reference scandal is to be investigated by the Massachusetts Medical
Society. Three physicians at a major Boston hospital wrote highly laudatory
letters recommending a colleague, Dr. Arif Hussain, several days after he was
sentenced to jail for raping a nurse. In recent years, doctors have become
reluctant to write anything critical about colleagues because of fear of
lawsuits.  (A16:1-2.)
Metropolitan
The convict-author who escaped from custody after a fatal stabbing on
Manhattan's Lower East Side in July was arrested by Federal and local
authorities at an oil-pipeline inspection yard outside Morgan City, La. A book
by the 37-year-old fugitive, Jack Henry Abbott, recounting his years in prison
from the age of 12 for a variety of crimes including murder, was published in
June. (A1:3-4.)
A collision over the Meadowlands sports complex in northeast New Jersey killed
two men and injured two. The state police said that the collision of a light
plane and a helicopter occurred at about 8:45 A.M. about two miles from
Teterboro Airport as both craft were approaching the heavily used airfield.
(B2:1-3.)
The political import of New Jersey, one of only two states holding gubernatorial
elections this year, was underscored in a visit by Vice President Bush and
Raymond J. Donovan, the Secretary of Labor. They campaigned for Thomas H. Kean,
the Republican candidate for Governor. (B1:4-6.)
Mayor Koch plans a full campaign, including television commercials, despite his
capture of both the Democratic and Republican nominations in Tuesday's
primaries, his top political aides said. (A1:5-6.)
Part-time work among older people is increasing as they find that they need more
income because of inflation, according to Samuel M.  Ehrenhalt, the New York
Regional Commissioner of Labor Statistics. In the last decade, he said in an
interview, the number of older people in the country employed part time rose by
350,000. (B3:1-4.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON TALK;
REQUIRED READING;
Compensating Factors

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 322 words


Senator Larry Pressler, Republican of South Dakota, in the Congressional Record,
Sept. 22: Mr. Pressler: I rise to say that I sent a letter to the President in
opposition to paying those citizens who were hostages in Iran financial
compensation in addition to their hardship pay and regular pay. This was a
difficult decision, but I do it for a number of reasons.

This payment is blatantly unfair to Vietnam veterans. We cannot find enough
money to fund properly the Agent Orange legislation and Vietnam veterans'
benefits are at about 35 percent on a parity basis with World War II veterans.

Furthermore, it is my conviction that those people who choose to enter a
profession - be it military or the Foreign Service or a similar occupation -do
so at certain risks, and we establish a bad precedent by paying compensation of
so much per day.

You serve y our country, you get a certain level of pay. In this instance they
were also getting hardship pay. There are certain risksand benefits in the
Foreign Service and serving abroad. And one of the great ben efits is one of
public service. These people got their pay, their pr omotions, they also got
many other recognitions, many more than the Vietnam veterans did. To pay each of
them $5,500 more is a great mi stake. I shall oppose it.

The Simple Life
Potter Stewart, the retired Supreme Court Justice, in remarks yesterday on
whether the Court's membership should be increased to ease the workload for each
Justice:

I don't think that would solve the problem. Life on the Court would have been a
lot simpler for me if I had no colleagues at all.

War
An item in the Defense Department Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms:

Total Nuclear War: Not to be used. See general war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senator Larry Pressler

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 24, 1981, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM WHITE HOUSE TAPE OF A NIXON-HALDEMAN TALK IN MAY 1971

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2202 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 23


Following are excerpts from a White House tape recording of a conversation
between President Nixon and H.R.  Haldeman, then the White House chief of staff,
on May 5, 1971:

HALDEMAN: Uh, there's gon na be a, they're going to ...  PRESIDENT: March on the
Capitol?  HALDEMAN: F rom 12 noon until the People's Peace Treaty is signed; you
see, they 're demanding that the Congress sign this. This is this peace treaty
that they've signed with North Vietnam. (Laughs.)

PRESIDENT: Hmm. (tape noise) HALDEMAN: They've got no (tape noise) special
permit. Best estimate is 2,000 demonstrators. Trouble very likely.  PRESIDENT:
Good.  HALDEMAN: That's - in and out here today. There'll also be the students
of Shelton College ...  PRESIDENT: Where the hell is that?  HALDEMAN: ... on
the, on the sidewalk in front of the White House.  It's in New Jersey. They're
then demonstrating in favor of the war.  Heh. They're gonna, heh, they're gonna
be on our side of the street and the other people are gonna be in the park.

PRESIDENT: That's fine. Probably a new college of some sort.  HALDEMAN: It's -
I'm afraid it has somethin' to do with Carl McIntyre.  PRESIDENT: Oh, be
suspicious, yeah.

'Victory Thing' Planned

HALDEMAN: Yeah, McIntyre's having a victory thing next Saturday.  Sunday. This
coming Sunday. Victory by the Fourth of July. It's, it's a ...

PRESIDENT: Can we get in there with those Go vernment employees? Is there any
way to?  HALDEMAN: I guess you can't.  PRESIDENT: I'd sure get a lot of pictures
a nd everything.  HALDEMAN: Sure, are ...  PRESIDENT: You know, just get guys
with, wi th news cam - news things, so that they don't ...  HALDEMAN: No, they
have a plan to do anythi ng (tape noise).  PRESIDENT: We sure have good
intelligence, don't we?  HALDEMAN: Heh, heh.  PRESIDENT: One thing we, uh, one
thing I wa s gonna say, Pat went down to the Senate wives and (tape noise) ate
at a luncheon and she said they were all (tape noise) on our side, left and
right. She saidMrs. Ervin, Mrs. Stennis came through the lin e and she said,
''You know, the President has saved our country.''

HALDEMAN: (unintelligible)

'Overreaction' to Be Expected

PRESIDENT: They really think this is good. I mean, we may have more going for us
than we think here, Bob. Yeah. We shouldn't be frightened about it. That's my
point. Let me put it this way, let me put it this way: I know, I know what it is
that you're gonna run into on this. You're gonna run into people that - the
overreaction thing and all that sort of thing. My point, you're gonna get
accustomed to that. No way you're gonna avoid it.

HALDEMAN: That's right.  PRESIDENT: So therefore, play it hard. Play it
responsibly but play it hard and don't back off from it. Now, they can - you
see, they're all, they'll all think back to the San Jose thing, you know, and
forgetting that San Jose was fine except for the goddamned silly speech, you
know. Covering that getaway from it, we got out (unintelligible) home free. We
had it all on our side.

HALDEMAN: Nobody's raised that analogy and I think - there's been no ...
PRESIDENT: Well.  HALDEMAN: ... thought of backing off.  PRESIDENT: Don't back
...  HALDEMAN: It's been all, the whole line has been ...  PRESIDENT: ... firm.
HALDEMAN: Stay firm.  PRESIDENT: Stay firm and get credit for it. That's my
point. See, I don't want to make an accident out of it. I don't want to be doing
on the basis, well, we're sort of sitting here embattled and doing the best we
can. I think the idea here is to lead a noble - you see maybe, you, it may be
that we're setting an example, Bob, for, uh, for universities, for other cities,
and so forth and so on, right?  (tape noise) Let 'em look here. These people try
something, bust 'em. (unintelligible) general attitude of your people.

Oranges Sent to Veterans

HALDEMAN: Heh-heh. Damn Colson thing.  PRESIDENT: He do something else?
HALDEMAN: Yeah. Uh, Muskie sent those oranges down to the veterans in the, the
group on Saturday I mean.  PRESIDENT: Yeah.  HALDEMAN: He didn't, he didn't go
down himself, but he's sent oranges.  PRESIDENT: Colson ordered some oranges for
him?  HALDEMAN: Colson sent oranges down yesterday.  HALDEM AN: ( laughing) From
Muskie.  PRESIDENT: Is it out?  HALDEMAN: I don't know whether it's out yet or
not. They'll get it out.  PRESIDENT: (laughing) He just ordered 'em.  HALDEMAN:
( laughing) Yeah. He's got an awful lot of cases of oranges at th e - I don't
know how the hell he does that stuff, but he- it's good, you know, he's been
around the District here so long, hehas a lot of contacts and, he, he, as a
local guy he can get stuff done here, bu t - and he's got no - and he's - gonna
get caught at some of these things.

PRESIDENT: (unintelligible) admit it.  HALDEMAN: Well, he has, he has been
caught.  PRESIDENT: It's all right?  HALDEMAN: But, he's, he's got a lot done
that he hasn't been caught at and, uh, he, he gets those guys, you know,
something like that going (tape noise) of course this is uh - we got some stuff
that he doesn't know anything about too, through, uh ...

PRESIDENT: Huston?  HALDEMAN: No, through Chapin's crew and, and Ron Walker and
the advance men we got, we got, uh, - see our plant's in the ...  PRESIDENT:
What do you do?  HALDEMAN: ... in the (unintelligible) ...  PRESIDENT:
(unintelligible)

'A Real Conspirator-Type'

HALDEMAN: ... and some of our - guess you've gotta - what we've got is a, is a
guy that nobod y, none of us knows except Dwight - PRESIDENT: Um-hum. HALDEMAN:
Who is a, uh, an d, and, who is just completely removed. There's no contact at
all . Who has a mobilized a crew of about - I don't what it is. He's, he' s
starting to build it now. We're gonna use it for the campaign next year.

PRESIDENT: (unintelligible) HALDEMAN: Yeah.  PRESIDENT: Are they really any
good?  HALDEMAN: In fact this guy's a real conspirator type who, who can sort of
...  PRESIDENT: Like Huston, then?  HALDEMAN: Thug-type guy, no, his, he's a
stronger guy than Huston.  Huston is a, is a - stay in back room.  PRESIDENT:
Yeah.  HALDEMAN: This is the kinda guy can get out and tear things up.
PRESIDENT: What do they, what do they do with, uh, do they just, uh ...
HALDEMAN: They get in and -they were the ones that did the, the Nixon signs, for
instance, when Muskie was in New Hampshire.  PRESIDENT: Oh, did they?  HALDEMAN:
And, uh ...  PRESIDENT: Everybody thought that was great.

'Hard Hats and Legionnaires'

HALDEMAN: They, you know -things of that sort. They, there's some of that, and
then they're, they're, they're gonna stir up some of this Vietcong flag business
as Colson's gonna do it through hard hats and Legionnaires. What Colson's gonna
do on it, and what I suggested he do, and I think that they can get a, away with
this, do it with the teamsters. Just ask them to dig up those, their eight
thugs.

PRESIDENT: Yeah.  HALDEMAN: Just call, call, uh, what's his name.  PRESIDENT:
Fitzsimmons.  HALDEMAN: Is trying to get -play our game anyway. Is just, just
tell Fitzsimmons ...  PRESIDENT: They, they've got guys who'll go in and knock
their heads off.  HALDEMAN: Sure. Murderers. Guys that really, you know, that's
what they really do. Like the steelworkers have and - except we can't deal with
the steelworkers at the moment.

PRESIDENT: No.HALDEMAN: We can deal with the teamsters. And they, you know ...
PRESIDENT: Yeah.  HALDEMAN: ... it's the regular strikebuster-types and all that
and they (tape noise) uh, and hope they really hurt 'em. You know, I mean go in
with some real - and smash some noses (tape noise) some pretty good fights.

PRESIDENT: (tape noise) How did it handle it last night?
'Good Footage of the Big Mob'

HALDEMAN: (tape noise) had, had some good footage of the big mob out on the
Justice Department thing and, and ...  PRESIDENT: Some close-up?  HALDEMAN: ...
(tape noise, unintelligible) Fortunately, they're all just really bad-lookin'
people. There's no, there's no, uh, semblance of respectability.

PRESIDENT: (unintelligible) on this. There was some veterans either.  HALDEMAN:
N o. I didn't. There's not. Rennie Davis has, has been spokesman and , and he's
as good for us and he's a convicted conspirator a nd, uh, (tape noise)
discredited.

PRESIDENT: Hmm.  HALDEMAN: I think getting Abbie Hoffman and, and this John -
the other - they got . . .  PRESIDENT: (unintelligible) HALDEMAN: ... another of
the Chicago Seven guys. Uh, (tape noise) amounts to anybody, but they got him.
But that sorta takes ...

Jews and the Chicago Seven

PRESIDENT: Aren't the Chicago Seven all Jews? Davis's a Jew, you know.
HALDEMAN: I don't think Davis is.  PRESIDENT: Hoffman, Hoffman's a Jew.
HALDEMAN: Abbie Hoffman is and that's so.  PRESIDENT: (tape noise) John Luzens
or Leubens or ...  HALDEMAN: (unintelligible) PRESIDENT: ... the other one they
got.  HALDEMAN: (tape noise) is.  PRESIDENT: About half of these are Jews.
HALDEMAN: (tape noise) I think more now.  PRESIDENT: Does know anybody gonna be
around today. Did you look -I hope they're keeping the flags up (tape noise).
That ought to be a national - cause I suggested to the Legion and V.F.W. should
have that was a national project. Defend the flags, Anybody that would tear it
down -you know, that' s, that's part o f their drill anyway.  Wouldn't that be a
good idea? (tape noise; un intelligible) Just gonnabe the end. These people got
a flag upside do wn, you know, burning itand so forth. The hell with it. You let
'em s tart on that ...

HALDEMAN: Um-hum.  PRESIDENT: I wonder if the Congress, uh, today will really
get a bellyful of these people.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of antiwar demonstrators on Capitol Hill in 1971

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 316 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 25, 1981 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'SOUTHERN COMFORT'

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 614 words


WALTER HILL is a director who seems able to make only two kinds of films -quite
good ones like the lean, spare ''Hard Times'' and the elegiacal ''The Long
Riders,'' and films of an unbearably arty awfulness, like ''The Driver,'' ''The
Warriors'' and now ''Southern Comfort,'' which opens today at the Gotham Cinema
and other theaters.

No Walter Hill film - not even the good ones - is ever about what it seems to
be, and he never lets you forget it. Everything is a metaphor for something
else. On its surface, ''Southern Comfort'' is a ''Deliverance''-type melodrama
about a small group of Louisiana National Guardsm en who go into the bayous on a
routine weekend training exercise. They are such a suitably o dd lot you know
that they must be a cross-section of society, what with rich men, poor men,
beggarmen and thieves. The one professio nal soldier in the outfit is the
sergeant who, early on, is kill ed in an accidental confrontation with some
Cajun trappers.

Thereafter, ''Southern Comfort'' becomes a completely unbelievable story of a
fight for survival as the men, lost in a malignant landscape, quarrel among
themselves as they are relentlessly pursued by an enemy they can't see and don't
know or understand. The movie, I deeply fear, is meant to be the last word on
the United States involvement in Vietnam.

Though the film was photographed on what appear to have been extremely difficult
locations in Louisiana and Texas, it never once convinces you that it's anything
but pretentious moviemaking. The screenplay wouldn't be tolerated Off Off Off
Off Broadway. It's full of self-conscious ironies that hit you over the head
like pillows full of wet sand. ''There comes a time,'' says one guy at a crucial
moment, ''when you have to abandon your principles and do what's right.''

Further, Mr . Hill chooses to photograph his material so selfconscious ly and so
prettily, with lots of slow-motion stuff and superimpositi ons, that you
automatically reach for a bottle of aspirin. Not even the explicit violence -
scenes of men being impaled, shot to pieces, hanged or swallowed up by quicksand
- has any more mean ing than the test pattern on a color-television screen.

Because three of the actors look very much alike, it's difficult to follow the
first half of the film's simple-minded narrative. Among those who do stand out,
for one reason or another, are Keith Carradine and Powers Boothe, who play good
guys, and Lewis Smith, who plays the boobish guardsman whose foolish act at the
beginning of the film is responsible for the bloodshed that follows.

There's a sequence in a Cajun village near the end of the movie that contains
enough local color for two or three more pictures. Let's hope not, though.
Vincent Canby

Bayou Guardsmen

SOUTHERN COMFORT, directed by Walter Hill; written by Michael Kane, Mr. Hill and
David Giler; director of photography, Andrew Laszlo; edited by Freeman Davies;
music by Ry Cood- er; produced by Mr. Giler; released by 20th Century-Fox. At
the Gotham Cinema, Third Avenue and 58th Street; Criterion Center, Broadway and
West 45th Street, and other theaters. Running time: 101 minutes. This film is
rated R.

Spencer . . . . . Keith Carradine
Hardin . . . . . Powers Boothe
Reece . . . . . Fred Ward
Simms . . . . . T.K. Carter
Stuckey . . . . . Lewis Smith
Casper . . . . . Les Lannom
Poole . . . . . Peter Coyote
Bowden . . . . . Carlos Brown
Trapper . . . . . Brion James
Hunters . . . . . Sonny Landham, Allan Graf, Ned Dowd and Rob Ryder
Cajun Couple . . . . . Greg Guirard and June Borel
Cajun Dancers . . . . . Jeanne Louise Bulliard, Orel Borle and Jeannie Spector
Cajun Musicians . . . . . Marc Savoy, Frank Savoy, Dewey Balfa and John Stelly


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of Powers Boothe

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. WIDENS INQUIRY ON CHEMICAL ARMS

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 23


A United Nations panel of experts has decided it must visit four Asian countries
to determine the accuracy of American charges that the Soviet Union and its
allies are using chemical weapons, officials here said today.

The experts' decision to travel to Afghanistan, Laos, Thailand and Pakistan is
regarded here as crucial and politically charged. So far the panel has had to
rely on second-hand reports, mostly by the United States, and has tentatively
decided they are inconclusive.

Only a visit on the spot to interview possible victims and doctors who have
examined them can establish the veracity of Washington's accusations, officials
said. The panel, however, has received no replies to its month-old letters
asking permission to make an inquiry at the reported sites. Its efforts may be
frustrated by the refusal of some or all of the four countries to admit the
team.

Earlier this month Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  renewed and
intensified the charge about the use of chemical agents, asserting that analyses
of leaves and stems found near Thailand's border with Cambodia had revealed
mycotoxins, agents that cause nausea, vomiting, shock and death. The chief
American delegate to the United Nations, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, then urged the
experts to visit the site. The experts' decision to do so, however, had been
made weeks before Mrs. Kirkpatrick's request, officials said.
Soviet Opposes Inquiry

The Soviet Union and its allies of Vietnam, Laos and Afghanistan have strongly
opposed the inquiry. They voted last year against a General Assembly resolution,
inspired by the United States, directing Secretary General Kurt Waldheim ''to
carry out an impartial investigation with the assistance of qualified medical
and technical experts.''

The resolution contained a loophole that the panel's decision is attempting to
close. The document said Mr. Waldheim's team should collect evidence on the site
''with the consent of the countries concerned'' and ''to the extent relevant to
the purposes of the investigation.''

The panel could not ask the four Asian nations for permission to inspect on the
ground without Mr. Waldheim's approval. This might have placed him in an awkward
position. He needs United States and Soviet support to win an unprecedented
third term as Secretary General.

A combination of United Nations organizational arrangements and politics took
Mr. Waldheim off the spot. The experts' panel works under the United Nations
Center for Disarmament, and the center reports to the Department of Political
and Security Council Affairs, traditionally headed by a Soviet official. So the
current head, Vyacheslav A. Ustinov, had to approve the panel's decision before
it went to Mr. Waldheim.

The Soviet-led department has been accused by aides of not acting on
recommendations it does not like. But in this case Mr. Ustinov was in a
difficult position. Third-world nations have been pressing to free the
disarmament unit from its Soviet overseer and have it report directly to Mr.
Waldheim. So diplomats believe that Moscow told Mr. Ustinov to approve the
experts' plea to ease the pressure to separate the disarmament group from Soviet
direction. Mr. Ustinov's approval, in turn, relieved Mr. Waldheim of a hard
decision.

Question About 2 Nations

Moscow is apparently counting on the four nations to reject the panel's bid. A
refusal by Laos and Afghanistan is taken for granted.  Pakista n, on
Afghanistan's border, is a more complex case. But Islamabad has been trying to
settle its quarrel with the Soviet Unionover Moscow's intervention in
Afghanistan and might therefore keep the experts o ut. Similarly, Thailand is
uneasy about the Vietnamese troops fighti ng the deposed Pol Pot regime in
Cambodia nea r Thailand's border and might conclude that admitting the ex perts
wouldworsen a tense situation.

The experts have not yet decided to seek permission to visit Cambodia. Such a
request would go to the deposed Pol Pot forces, the only Cambodian group
recognized by the United Nations. The Pol Pot faction would almost certainly
invite the panel in, but the extent of its control is unknown and officials here
say they are concerned about the experts' safety in a disputed territory.

The panel's chairman is Maj. Gen. Esmat A. Ezz, an Egyptian doctor and expert in
chemical and radiological warfare. Other members are Dr. Edward E. Ambeva, a
Kenyan orthopedic surgeon; Lieut. Col. Nestor C. Castillo, a Philippine officer
in the ordnance and chemical services; and Dr. Humberto Guerra-Allison, a
microbiologist from Peru. Dr. Herbert Marcovich of France, a professor at the
Institut Pasteur in Paris, is their consultant.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Free Tests Demanded I n Agent Orange Case

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 278 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 24


An organization representing Vietnam veterans dema nded today that the
Government offer free medical examinations to former servicemen who might have
been exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam when their own planes dumped the spray
near United States bases.

The demand followed an announcement by Richard S. Schweiker, Secretary of Health
and Human Services, yesterday that newly discovered Defense Department records
showed that the herbicide had been jettisoned near large groups of servicemen by
planes trying to make emergency landings.

Lewis Milford, a lawyer for the National Veterans Task Force on Agent Orange,
representing 19 o rganizations o f veterans and environmental and religious
groups, asked the Government to identify people who had been exposed, to warn
them and to give them medical examinations at Government expense.

Meanwhile, the chairman of the House Veterans Affairs Committee charged that Mr.
Schweiker had caused needless alarm.The chairman, Representative G.V.
Montgomery, Democrat of Mississippi, said that the information was disclosed by
the Air Force on Sept. 16, 1980, at a hearing of a House subcommittee.

In a written statement, Representative Montgomery said: ''I regret that
Secretary Schweiker did not check with his staff. Such procedures at the highest
level of Government obviously cause much emotional upheaval for Vietnam veterans
and their families.''

But a spokesman for Mr. Schweiker said that the Secretary's disclosure was far
more detailed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Repaying the Hostage Debt

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 559 words


How much should the United States Government pay the Americans held as hostages
in Iran to compensate them for their ordeal? A Presidential commission says
$12.50 a day, and it is taking a lot of abuse.

One former hostage, Barry Rosen, says the idea is ''repugnant'' and suggests
that any compensation be in line with that given military prisoners of war.
Meanwhile, a Vietnam veterans' spokesman calls the offer a ''deliberate slap in
the face'' to those who received little in the way of appreciation for their
service in Vietnam.

The critics should read the commission report.  Th e commiss ion was set up in
the emotional aftermath of the hostages' ret urn to decide whether the
Government should pay financial com pensation to them, or make such payments to
possible future hostag es. It finds that benefits they receive under existing
laws are more than generous.

Those laws, including one passed last year specifically to benefit the hostages,
made sure they were paid their full salaries while in captivity - and exempt
from income tax. The Government will pay their Iran-related medical expenses and
college expenses incurred by their families while they were in captivity. Former
hostages may also claim up to $40,000 for property losses in Iran.

The commission recommended modest increases in these benefits; in addition, it
said that the former hostages should be considered eligible for the ''detention
benefits'' that were established in 1948 for World War II veterans who had been
locked up in enemy prison camps. In 1948, the benefit was $2.50 for each day in
prison.

Vietnam P.O.W.'s, too, received these benefits at an inflationadjusted rate of
$5 per day. For the hostages the commission adjusted the figure again, to
$12.50. But its report also points out that these somewhat curious benefits were
never intended as compensation for actual suffering, only symbolic
acknowledgment.

So the $12.50 figure is not capricious or stingy. It expresses the c ommission's
entirely reasonable belief that the hostages should be given only what existing
laws and policies al low, and a little more.

Are they also entitled to a lot more?  Lawyers for hostage groups argue that
since the agreement that freed the hostages also bars them from suing Iran for
damages, the United States should compensate them. It's a dubious argument:
which hostages or families complained about the settlement when it ended the
ordeal?

There is also the larger issue of gratitude. But that, it seems to us, has
already been powerfully expressed. As one hostage wrote to the commission: ''The
American people rose up in unison and in no uncertain terms made the message
clear to Iran that it would be very dangerous to their national health to harm
us. I see no reason to ask the taxpayer to 'compensate' us for doing our job.''

No payment of money beyond the traditional and purely symbolic $12.50 benefit
could or should do that, or reward their courage, or demonstrate national
relief. By deciding against any more significant sum, the commission brought the
issue to a sound conclusion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TRAIL OF CONVICT-AUTHOR ELUDED POLICE FOR MONTH

BYLINE: By WENDELL RAWLS Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words

DATELINE: MORGAN CITY, La., Sept. 24


For the better part of a month, Jack Henry Abbott stayed a step ahead of Federal
authorities, who were armed with information from the New York City police as
they traced his path.

They tracked him from flophouses in the French quarter of New Orleans to
bunkhouses in the South Louisiana oilfields before apprehending him yesterday
afternoon in a pipeline inspection yard a mile east of here.

Mr. Abbott, a convict and author who had been befriended and employed by Norman
Mailer, had been on the run since shortly after dawn on July 18, when Richard
Adan, a 22-year-old aspiring actor and playwright, was stabbed to death outside
the Bini-Bon restaurant at Second Avenue and East Fifth Street in Manhattan,
where he worked as a waiter.

Late this afternoon, Mr. Abbott, who had been seen arguing with Mr. Adan
immediately before his death, was charged by the Manhattan District Attorney's
office with murder, and a warrant for his arrest was issued by Judge Jeffrey N.
Atlas of Criminal Court.

Law enforcement officials said they expected Mr. Abbott to arrive in New York,
escorted by Federal marshals, late tomorrow afternoon.  He has retain ed Ivan
Fisher, a New York criminal defense lawyer.

Since July 18, Mr. Abbott, who is 37 years old, had been a fugitive. He had been
released to a halfway house near the restaurant a month earlier after spending
virtually all of the last 25 years in prison on a variety of charges, including
the murder of a fellow inmate.

He was scheduled for full parole on Aug. 25, but after he disappeared, his
parole date was rescinded.
A Book on Life Behind Bars

His book, ''In the Belly of the Beast: Letters from Prison,'' is a description
of his life behind bars in Utah State Prison and in a series of Federal
institutions.

According to police investigators here, his life on the run was not pleasant
either.  James Riley, an intelligence agent with the St. Mary Parish Sheriff's
Department, said Mr. Abbott told him that he had come to South Louisiana from
Mexico, to which he had fled when he left New York. Mr. Riley was one of the two
officers who apprehended the fugitive.

''He said he had gone to a town near the Mexican border with Guatemala, but that
he left after a few weeks because he couldn't speak Spanish,'' Mr. Riley said.
''He said he couldn't communicate and couldn't get a job.''

James Serio, a United States Marshal in New Orleans, which is about 100 miles
northeast of Morgan City, said Mr. Abbott told him he had been in the New
Orleans area for about a month before he was recaptured.

Information From Detective

According to Mr. Serio, Federal authorities had been told by Detective William
Majeski of the New York Cit y police that Mr. Abbottwas headed to New Orleans or
was already ther e trying to find work inthe offshore oil industry.

Federal marshals began to search for the fugitive and the trail led them to
Greek bars and restaurants along Decatur Street on the Mississippi River side of
the French quarter, and along Bourbon, St.  Louis and other streets in the Vieux
Carre.

Decatur Street is frequented by seamen, longshoremen and oilfield types, and it
has long served as a haven for prostitutes. Informants told investigating
officers that a man matching Mr. Abbott's description had been in some of the
establishments there. But the officers seemed always to just miss him.

One investigator said a prostitute in New Orleans recognized a photograph of Mr.
Abbott.  ''The girl said he was looking for a job somewhere in the oilfields,''
the investigator said, ''and we just took it from there.''

Mr. Abbott was tracked to the suburban areas of Harvey, Algiers and Marrero,
where offshore oil companies are situated and where itinerant workers usually
reside in bunkhouses.

When the officers arrived at these places, Mr. Abbott seemed always to have left
the day before. He stayed in one place only three or four days at a time before
fleeing again, the officers said.

During one stretch, he pushed a hot dog wagon in the French quarter, an
always-available, lowly occupation held by Ignatious Riley, the lead character
in ''A Confederacy of Dunces,'' the 1981 Pulitzer Prize-winning novel that is
set in the New Orleans areas frequented by Mr. Abbott, who was believed to be
well-read.
Did Not Report for Work

When Federal authorities visited the vending operation, Mr. Abbott had not
reported for work that day.  On Sept. 12, Detective Majeski alerted the marshals
that he had information that the fugitive was supposed to show up at a downtown
New Orleans business. Mr. Serio would not disclose the address or nature of the
business for fear of jeopardizing Detective Majeski's source, but he said it was
not a bar.

He would not say whether it was a hotel.  The authorities staked out the
location for 72 hours, but the wary Mr. Abbott did not appear there.  On Sept.
14, Mr. Abbott, using the alias ''Jack Eastman'' and a Social Security card in
that name, went to work as a roustabout, one of hundreds of itinerant day
laborers who are employed in this 1980's version of the Klondike.

Three days later - Sept. 17 - the marshal's office in New Orleans called the St.
Mary Parish Sheriff's office for help in locating Mr.  Abbott.

Waiting for Photograph

Local officers began combing the boat and oilfield operations and roustabout
bunkhouses for the fugitive.  On Sept. 20 , Detective Carl Parsiola found a man
who fit Mr.  Abbott's desc ription, but his name was Eastman. The detective was
waiting for a photograph in order to make a positive identification, although
East man was the name Detective Majeski had predicted his manwould be usin g.

Mr. Abbott had joined the Ramos Oil Company, which is one of several here that
provide labor for other oil-related operations. He was making $4 an hour,
working 12 to 16 hours a day and paying $12.50 a day for bed and board in the
bunkhouse at the Ramos campsite.

He played cards and chess with some of the other temporary workers, but for the
most part he remained pleasant and apart.  According to the local police, he
would have been one of scores of men running from the law, seeking anonymity and
landing in this oil boom town, which is a center for serving the offshore oil
industry.  Manual laborers are scarce here and, according to police, some of the
laborer-supply camps are filled with illegal aliens from Mexico and refugees
from Vietnam.

The roads here are filled with trucks, the bayous with tugs, the sky with
helicopters, the bars with girls and roughnecks, riggers and roustabouts.

One motel prohibits ''more than six to a bed,'' and at another the noontime
conversation at lunch is dominated by discussions of mineral leases, drilling
depths and Louisiana's answer to baseball - politics.

In this world, Jack Abbott could have disappeared.  But yesterday morning, his
picture arrived from New York and the owner of the Ramos Oil Company and his
manager of work crews identified the picture as Jack Eastman's.

He had been assigned that day to load and unload trucks in the 10-square-mile
field of oil pipe operated by the Patterson Pipe Company.
Hands Already Raised

Mr. Riley, the sheriff's agent, and Dan Dossett of the Morgan City Police
Department climbed into a company truck and were driven to Mr. Abbott's work
location.

The truck stopped 30 feet from the fugitive, who was dressed in oil-spattered
work boots, soiled blue jeans and a blue T-shirt. He was combing his hair, so
his hands already were above his head when the officers came at him with leveled
shotguns. Six other shotguns backed them up.

Mr. Abbott offered no resistance. He was unarmed. He had less than $5 in his
pocket.  And as he was driven to jail, he said that he was surprised to learn
how well his book had been doing. He had heard nothing about it since he left
New York, and he had been afraid to enter a bookstore and look at his work for
fear someone would recognize him from the picture of the author.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jack Henry Abbott

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Broadway;
An early contender for 1982-83: 'It's a Wonderful Life.'

BYLINE: By Carol Lawson

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words


THE new Broadway season is barely out of the starting gate, but it's not a
minute too early to start thinking about contenders for next season. That is
what Sheldon Harnick and Joseph Raposo are doing. They are working on a musical
adaptati on of ''It's a WonderfulLife,'' Frank Capra's 1946 film that starred
James Stewart as an amiable chap who is foiled in his attempt to break out of
his smalltown life. Mr. Harnick is writing the bo ok and lyrics, and Mr.
Raposo, the music. The producers are Mary Jo Slater and Eugene Wolsk.

Mr. Harnick, the lyricist for ''Fiddler on the Roof,'' reports that he and Mr.
Raposo have been working on ''It's a Wonderful Life'' for nearly two years, but
not solidly. ''In the midst of it,'' he says, ''I got an assignment from the
Houston Grand Opera to do 'Carmen.' It opened last January. And Joe did the
score for 'The Great Muppet Caper' movie.''

Mr. Harnick has also been working on another new musical, ''A Christmas Carol,''
which will open in Wilmington, Del., in November with Richard Kiley as Scrooge.
After that, he and Mr. Raposo will give their full attention to ''It's a
Wonderful Life.'' Theoretically, Mr. Harnick could have two shows on Broadway
next season, for ''A Christmas Carol'' is scheduled to tour the country for a
year and then open in New York.

''You hate to rely on just one show,'' he observes. ''In this business, things
tend to fall through.''

Bob Gunton, the original Juan Peron in ''Evita,'' is coming back to New York in
Amlin Gray's ''How I Got That Story,'' which deals with the Vietnam War. Last
season Mr. Gunton gave a tour de force performance in it, playing 21 different
roles in an Off Off Broadway production at the Second Stage. Don Scardino will
also be in the Obie award-winning play, which has a cast of two. Harold DeFelice
and Louis Scheeder, the producers, plan to open ''How I Got That Story'' Off
Broadway in early December. Carole Rothman, co-artistic director of the Second
Stage, will again direct the play.

Mr. Scardino is now in previews with Jeffrey Moss's new musical ''Double
Feature,'' due to open on Oct. 8 in the Theater at St.  Peter's. But according
to Miss Rothman, Mr. Scardino went into that show with the und erstanding that
he could leave to do ''How I Got That Story.''

Joseph Papp is giving David Henry Hwang the kind of support that most young
playwrights don't even dream of. Mr. Papp produced Mr.  Hwang's first play,
''F.O.B.'' Then, he produced his second, ''The Dance and the Railroad,'' which
is still running at the Public Theater. Both plays received excellent reviews.

And now he is producing Mr. Hwang's third play, ''Family Devotions,'' a comedy
about a Chinese Communist who visits his rich relatives in the posh Bel Air
section of Los Angeles. Robert Allan Ackerman is directing the production.
Performances begin on Oct. 6.

Mr. Papp and Mr. Ackerman had trouble casting ''Family Devotions'' in New York
and found seven of their nine actors in Los Angeles.  ''There are not enough
good Asian actors here,'' Mr. Papp says.  ''Parts are not written for them. They
have so little opportunity to act.''

Jill O'Hara says she is amazed by the timing of all this: She used to be a meek
person who sat by herself and never opened her mouth at meetings of her tenants'
association. Then, a year ago, she suddenly became the feisty ringleader of a
hard-fought rent strike. And now, as the leader of a women's assertiveness
training group in Barbara Schottenfeld's musical ''I Can't Keep Running in
Place,'' Miss O'Hara is encouraging other women to stand up for themselves.

''It's funny how my experience with the rent strike ties into the show,'' the
34-year-old Miss O'Hara says. ''The whole idea of fighting for your rights, and
not being intimidated by the big boys.  The first lawyers I talked to said we
didn't have a case. Then I got the name of Leonard Lerner, a lawyer who
specializes in tenants' rights. I call him the Legal Eagle. The landlord settled
with us for $27,000 out of court. What I have learned from that experience!''

Miss O'Hara went into ''I Can't Keep Running in Place'' at the Westside Arts
Theater three weeks ago as Marcia Rodd's replacement.  ''When I first heard
about the role, I didn't think I'd like it,'' she says. ''I don't think the
theater should be used to exploit political causes. So often you end up with a
pamphlet on the stage instead of the human condition. But then I went to see the
show, and was rocked by it. I didn't expect something that would move me so.''

She adds that she is surprised by the numbers of people who come up to her after
the show to tell her how much they enjoyed her performance in the Neil
Simon-Burt Bacharach musical ''Promises, Promises.'' That was in 1968, and Miss
O'Hara was the toast of New York in her first - and only - starring role on
Broadway. Previously she had been leading lady of the original production of
''Hair'' at the Public Theater.

''I was only 21 in 'Promises,' '' Miss O'Hara says. ''People forget how young I
was. I've done everything backward in my career.'' Since ''Promises,'' she has
worked mostly in regional theaters and summer stock.

''I've done several Broadway-bound shows th at folded and didn't come in,'' she
notes. ''There is a lot of luc k in this business.  Actually, I hate show
business, but I love my work. There are a lot of bad people in this business.

''Did you know that the song 'I'll Never Fall in Love Again' from 'Promises' was
written for me? Burt Bacharach wanted to record it with me. My manager said no.
I didn't know at the time that my manager was starting his own record company
and wanted me to record the song for him. Eventually, he went bankrupt. Dionne
Warwick recorded the song. I have a few other stories like that,
unfortunately.''

Suddenly, Miss O'Hara's frown turns into a big smile. ''I have a very rich
personal life,'' she reports. ''I'm engaged to Philip Jones, a painter, and I've
never been happier.'

Tonight ''Evita'' begins its third year at the Broadway Theater.  The cast is
currently headed by Derin Altay as Eva Peron, James Stein as Che Guevera and
David Cryer as Juan Peron. ... Casting notes from the Manhattan Theater Club:
Cleavon Little will make a rare New York stage appearance as the star of Oyama's
new play, ''The Resurrection of Lady Lester.'' He will portray Lester Young, the
jazz saxophonist. And Alvin Epstein has been signed to star in Alonso Alegria's
new play ''Crossing Niagara.'' Both productions begin performances on Oct. 20.
... Christopher Durang's one-act comedies, ''Sister Mary Ignatius Explains It
All for You'' and ''The Actor's Nightmare,'' will open on Oct. 22 at Playwrights
Horizons. Elizabeth Franz, Polly Draper, Robert Joy, Timothy Landfield, Mark
Stefan and Mary Catherine Wright will head the casts, and Jerry Zaks will
direct. ... Richard Horner has been named booking agent for a coalition of
theaters on West 42d Street's Theater Row. The theaters are seeking to book
outside attractions during their dark periods to generate much-needed income.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Hirshfeld drawing of Jill O'Hara

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 25, 1981, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 393 words


Books: As Saigon Fell By Richard F. Shepard
THE LAST AMBASSADOR. By Bernard Kalb and Marvin Kalb. 276 pages. Little, Brown.
$13.50.

REMEMBER the puzzler that wonders why, when we are struck by natural beauty, we
say it looks like a painting and when we are struck by a painting, we say it
looks so real? This comes to mind with ''The Last Ambassador,'' a first novel by
Bernard and Marvin Kalb, brothers who are not only crackerjack broadcast
journalists but who have also demonstrated what they can do in nonfiction books.
''The Last Ambassador'' is a novel that doesn't come off so much as fiction but
will keep you reading because of the real history it is drawn from and the
knowledge of the authors, who were there.

It is about Vietnam, the fall of Saigon in 1975. The American ambassador feels
that his country's honor demands sending aid to South Vietnam even after the end
is known to be inevitable. The other protagonist, a young C.I.A. agent in the
embassy who is in love with the ambassador's daughter, favors negotiation with
the north to forestall a complete Com munist takeover. The Kalbs give us the
feel of Saigon in its death throes, of the diploma tic community, of the
Vietnamese torn as much as their country was.

Challenge to Novelist

This is good reporting, writing that delivers the smell of defeat, the sweat of
despair. However, this does not carry through in the treatment of the main
characters, who come off as rather cardboard stereotypes. It is here that the
novelist faces the challenge that the newsman does not; he must create a
character with depth and personality who also may or may not be a type.

The historian and newsman must penetrate the character of the person they have
under scrutiny. The Kalbs are newsmen and they have a problem in fashioning a
full person from the ground up; dealing in fact can be a barrier when it comes
to creating a fiction. Still, ''The Last Ambassador'' is a good quick read, one
that has truth and action and a moral that we should never let dim in the
national memory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 26, 1981, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PATENTS

BYLINE: Lamp Switch Invented, By Vietnamese Refugee

SECTION: Section 2; Page 48, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 117 words


Tren V. Bui of Portland, Ore., came as a refugee from Vietnam six years ago, and
has worked since as a dimensional inspector for an industrial company. This week
he was granted patent 4,291,212 for an extension to a lamp socket switch. One
end is connected to the switch knob and the other end, hanging down two inches
below the lampshade, provides a turning handle.

Mr. Bui says his invention makes turning on and off a lamp a lot easier, and
also serves as decoration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
To get a copy of a patent, send the number and 50 cents to the Patent and
Trademark Office, Washington, D.C., 20231.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 316 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 27, 1981 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

FEMALE ALCOHOLICS AND BASIC TRAINEES

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 1; PT2; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Pg. 70

LENGTH: 931 words


Of the two fine documentaries on tod ay's ag enda at the New York Film Festival,
Bonnie Friedman's ''The Last t o Know'' is the briefer and more straightforward.
Miss Friedman's sub ject is the female alcoholic, and she approaches it from a
sympa thetic, personalized viewpoint by interviewing four women of varyi ng
backgrounds.

Her interviewees - a glamorous type with inch-long painted fingernails; a Jewish
matron; a poor, street-wise black woman, and a jovial, disheveled, very butch
drinker - have had differing degrees of success in licking their addictions to
both liquor and tranquilizers. But they all speak clearly and touchingly about
the problem.

In addition to her interviews, some filmed in the subjects' apartments and some
in a halfway house, Miss Friedman includes glimpses of drug and liquor
advertisements, from vintage ones offering elixirs that cure catarrh to
tranquilizer ads from modern medical journals. And the four women on screen
discuss such aspects of their addiction as middle-of-the-night drinking, growing
incompetence on the job, frightening blackouts and, of course, denial. As on e
of them puts it, ''it did not happen to upper-middlec lass Jewish ladies with
children, with clothes -no!''

''Soldier Girls'' is an extraordinary look at a platoon of women undergoing
basic training at Fort Gordon, Ga. The enormous strain the women are under, the
sadism of their superiors and the element of role-playing inherent in Army life
combine to create some tremendously dramatic moments, which have been recorded
most effectively by Nicholas Broomfield and Joan Churchill. Scene after scene in
''Soldier Girls'' shows the truth to be much, much stranger than fiction.
''Private Benjamin,'' indeed.

Sometimes the drill sergeants try to be soothing. ''We never lost a war, I don't
care what you heard about Vietnam,'' one says during a lecture on military
history. Another lecture, on ''The Friendly Use of Nuclear Weapons'': ''This
morning I'm going tell you the things you need to know to protect yourself from
nuclear and chemical weapons.''

One private is instructed to act the role of a soldier on guard duty who has
just noticed an enormous blinding explosion somewhere to her right. She is shown
how to fall to the floor and cover her head with her arms.

One sergeant, trying to calm a recruit who is frightened of her gun, insists:
''That weapon is not going to hurt you. That weapon has never hurt anybody!''
Another gives a demonstration of what to do if you are alone in the woods,
hungry and without a knife, should you happen to find a chicken. In full view of
the horrified recruits, and in view of the camera, he bites the chicken's head
off. One girl prays for the chicken's soul.

The sadism is stunning, expecially when demonstrated by white male sergeants
against black female recruits. The worst instance involves a small white woman
in glasses named Clara Alves, who gets into trouble when she is given a punitive
order to dig a ditch for hours and hours. After nightfall, she has had enough,
and she begins to scream. She is hauled off and browbeaten by two men and a
woman amazingly oblivious to the camera.

''You haven't functioned as a human being, I doubt, since you were about 15. You
stopped being a member of the human race,'' one of them tells Private Alves. And
that's just for openers. She is also pronounced ''despicable.'' And one of the
sergeants asks her to ''do me a favor - don't have any children.'' Private Alves
tries very hard not to register any emotion.

A black woman named Joann Johnson, who with Private Alves is one of the women
the film pays special attention to, is told: ''You are the type that irritates
people just by your entire presence, without even opening your mouth. Haven't
you ever noticed that throughout your entire life, Johnson?''

On the lighter side, there are glimpses of the women in their barracks, where
the black recruits burst into a joyous rap-style song and dance and where one
white woman spontaneously offers what is surely one of the most syrupy
renditions of ''The Sound of Music'' ever recorded.

Mr. Broomfield and Miss Churchill let the material speak for itself, presenting
it with an effective even-handedness - the nastiest of the sergeants makes an
unexpectedly touching speech late in the film - and without unnecessary
footnotes. The measure of their expertise is not just the skill with which their
film has been put together - although that is considerable - but also the
apparent ease with which they won their subjects' confidence and got to the
heart of the matter.

Joann Johnson, who doesn't finish basic training and is not alone in giving up
on an Army career, is seen leaving at the end of the movie. Before she goes, she
jumps toward the camera and kisses Mr. Broomfield goodbye.

''The Last to Know'' and ''Soldier Girls'' will be shown tonight at 7 o'clock as
part of the New York Film Festival.

The Casts

SOLDIER GIRLS, directed by Nicholas Broom- field and Joan Churchill; photography
by Miss Churchill; edited by Nicholas Broomfield; released by First Run
Features. Running time: 87 minutes.

WITH: Joann Johnson, Jackie Hall, Clara Alves, Sergeant Abing, Sergeant Bertling
and Sergeant Taylor.

THE LAST TO KNOW, directed by Bonnie Fried- man; photography by Miss Friedman
and Nancy Schreiber; edited by Julie Sloan and Lora Hays; production company,
Pandora Films; released by New Day Films. Running time: 45 minutes. This film is
not rated.

WITH: Lori Schmidt, Sandy Feil, Loretta Jaye and Sharon Bell. At Alice Tully
Hall, part of the 19th New York Fi lm Festival.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of Joanna Johnson, Jackie Hall, Carla Tuten

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET MIGHT: A U.S. VIEW;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Specia l to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 26


In a 99-page report plus a preface, including photographs and artists'
renditions of Soviet weapons, the Department of Defense paints a picture of a
huge and dynamic Soviet military machine. But there is no new information, no
conclusion, no systematic comparison with American forces, only the impression
of relentless and almost overwhelming Soviet military power.

The report stops short of saying what Defense Secretary Caspar W.  Weinberger
has said on many occasions - that the United States is now in ''a position of
dangerous imbalance with the Soviet Union.''

Consistent With Campaign Charge

But its con tent is fully consistent with that message and with Ronald Reagan 's
charge in the 1980 Presidential campaign that the Soviet Union had achieved
military superiority over the United States.

Among the very few challenges to this assumption are the annual studies of the
military balance prepared by the International Institute for Strategic Studies,
a research group based in London.

These studies have expressed concern about ''trends'' in the balance tipping
toward Moscow, noting particular areas of Soviet advantage, but have also called
attention to continued American military strength and to the great risks and
uncertainties attending any actual combat between the two superpowers.

Western military experts agr ee that over th e last 20 years, the Soviet Union
has made a major effort to redre ss the balance of forces, and that Soviet
forces today are bigg er and much better than they were in 1960 and 1970. Beyond
that, the experts are divided, some arguing that there is now an overall bal
ance, with the Soviet Union ahead in certain respects and the Unite d States in
other respects, and others saying that Moscow is no w superior. The new Pentagon
report provides data to support the view of Soviet superiority.

In those few instances where the Pentagon report compares Soviet and American
military efforts and weapons, the Russians are usually portrayed as superior,
but the evidence presented is incomplete.

For example, the report says that over the last 25 years the Soviet Union has
devoted an average of 12 to 14 percent of its gross national product to the
military. In the same period the American average was about 7 percent. But the
report does not point out that during this period the size of the American
economy averaged at least twice that of the Soviet Union. Thus, overall
expenditures on the military tend to even out.

Soviet Spends More Than U.S.

Although it is generally agreed that Moscow has been spending more for arms and
men than Washington over the last decade, this accounting does not include
allied expenditures. When the military spending of the United States and its
allies is compared with that of the Soviet Union and its allies, the picture is
quite different.  Spending by the United States, its NATO allies, Japan and
China has been and remains higher than military spending by the Soviet Union,
its Warsaw Pact allies, Cuba and Vietnam.

Although the report does not discuss these comparisons, it does point to their
effects on Soviet military deployments. It is publicly acknowledged for the
first time that the Russians put as many of their high-quality combat divisions
along the border with China as in Europe.

Of the 80 divisions in Europe, 5 percent are category 1 (the highest in
readiness, training and supplies), 20 percent are category 2 (the middle rating)
and 75 percent are category 3 (the least ready). Of the 45 divisions along the
border with China, 15 percent are category 1, 35 percent category 2 and 50
percent category 3.

Twenty-five divisions are in the central part of the Soviet Union and can be
used readily in either direction.

U.S. Technology Lead Challenged

The report also makes some general comparisons about technology, saying the
United States' ''lead in basic military technology is presently being
challenged.'' It implies that the United States can no longer rely on its
customary technological superiority to offset Soviet numerical superiority.

The report says, and it is generally agreed, that Moscow now leads in the
development of high-powered laser weapons and electrical power sources for
directed energy weapons. It adds that Washington still leads by two to seven
years in microelectronics, computers and jet engines.

The last complete comparison of Soviet and American military technologies was
made in February 1980 in testimony to Congress by Dr. William J. Perry, then
Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Development. In comparing 20 basic
technologies, he said the United States was ahead in 15, equal in 5 and behind
in none. These included areas such as computers, optics and nuclear warheads.

As for high-technology weapons actually deployed by 1980, Dr. Perry found that
of 30 systems, the United States was ahead in 14, behind in 7, and equal in 9.
These included weapons such as tanks and aircraft.

250 SS-20 Missiles

The new report says that the Russians have now deployed 250 SS-20 medium-range
missiles, mostly in Europe, with a total of 750 warheads, and that 65 more are
under construction. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization does not have any
comparable weapons and will not have them until new Pershing and cruise missiles
are deployed beginning abo ut 1983.

The future deployment of these American missiles has become a major political
issue in Europe, as has the United States decision to produce neutron weapons.
Moscow has conducted a major propaganda campaign against these weapons and
against the increase in American military spending generally.

Mr. Weinberger and his aides have said privately that they hope that this new
report on Soviet military power will turn some of the spotlight of world opinion
on new Soviet military increases.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Europe showing Soviet launching sites (page 38)

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT SAYS SPY SUSPECT TOLD OF SECRETS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 33, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 692 words

DATELINE: JACKSONVILLE, Fla., Sept. 26


Testifying as though reading from a spy thriller, an agent of the Federal Bureau
of Investigation said yesterday that Joseph G. Helmich Jr. admitted he had
slipped topsecret codes to agents of the Soviet Union in France in 1963.

The Federal agent, James K. Murphy, testified that Mr. Helmich told him of
high-speed automobile rides through the dark streets of Paris, secret meetings
in back-street cafes and clandestine trips to the Soviet Union's Embassy and
trade mission.

Mr. Helmich, 44 years old, is charged with selling the Russians ciphers, a
coding machine and maintenance instructions while stationed with the United
States Signal Corps in Paris and at Fort Bragg, N.C., in 1963 and 1964. The
Federal Government contends that the secrets he is accused of selling for
$131,000 could have enabled the Soviet Union to decipher and read American
messages ''scrambled'' for security reasons during the Vietnam War.

Testifying in Federal District Court here, the F.B.I. agent said Mr. Helmich
told about his dealings with a Russian agent named Viktor Lyubimov in interviews
last February at a hotel in Niagara Falls, N.Y.
Arrested in Florida

Mr. Helmich was then working for a hardware store there. He moved last June to
Jacksonville Beach, where he was arrested July 15 on a four-count in dictment
charging him with espionage.

Mr. Murphy said Mr. Helmich volunteered his story in the Niagara Falls
interviews. Defense attorneys had asked that information from the meetings be
suppressed because Mr. Helmich was not advised of his legal rights and did not
have an attorney present until the ninth interview.

Mr. Murphy quoted Mr. Helmich as saying he got into financial trouble in Paris
and was given 24 hours to settle his debts and bad checks or face discharge from
the Army. Mr. Helmich was quoted as saying he tried to borrow the money but
failed.

''He decided to contact the Russians and make some money that way,'' Mr. Murphy
said.

Visit to Russian Embassy

He said Mr. Helmich recalled looking up the address of the Russian Embassy in
Paris in a telephone book and going there in civilian clothes to avoid
suspicion. The agent quoted Mr. Helmich as telling a woman in the embassy that
he wanted to speak to a military attache.

Mr. Murphy said Mr. Helmich recalled bringing a teletype message that he had
retrieved from a ''burn bag'' at the Signal Corps center in a blockhouse in
Paris and offering it for $20,000, the agent said.

He said Mr. Helmich told him two Russians at the embassy did not think the
information was worth $20,000 but agreed to meet him privately later.

The next day Mr. Helmich was given 50,000 francs, or about $1,000 in United
States currency, which he used to pay his debts, the agent testified.

Plans for Tipoff

Mr. Helmich was quoted as saying Viktor wanted to know about American
communications and any military plans for the United States to invade or attack
the Soviet Union. Mr. Helmich was quoted as saying the Russians gave him an
address in Switzerland at which he could tip them off to any American attack by
ordering railroad ties.  The number of ties, say 1,230, would indicate the time
of attack.

Mr. Murphy said Mr. Helmich told of delivering photographs, manuals and a parts
list for a coding machine known as the KL-7. Mr. Helmich said that he received
initial cash payments o f $2,000 and $5,000 and that his pay from the Russians
went from $15, 000 to $20,000 for each delivery of classified materials, the
agent s aid.

Mr. Murphy said Mr. Helmich told of keeping contact with Viktor after returning
to the United States and of making four return visits to Paris.

Mr. Helmich was quoted as saying that he broke with the Russians after a meeting
in Mexico City in 1964, at which he was given $30,000, and that he did not try
to reach them until 1980 in Ottawa but was not successful.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FAULT IN AIR CRASH IN JERSEY DISPUTED

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 42, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: TETERBORO, N.J., Sept. 25


The midair collision Wednesday between two aircraft preparing to land at
Teterboro Airport has led to a dispute between Federal officials and striking
air traffic controllers over who was responsible for keeping the aircraft apart:
the pilots or the controller.

Federal investigators have barely begun their inquiry, and have reached no
conclusions. But after the collision, they emphasized that pilots are obligated
to keep clear of other aircraft, even when they are following the radio
instructions of the control tower in the vicinity of an airport.

However, striking controllers, employed by Teterboro until they were dismissed,
argued that the controllers who were replacing them in the tower at Teterboro -
New Jersey's busiest airfield - had the ultimate responsibility to prevent the
crash.

'Absolute Control'

''The highest priority is separation of aircraft, and the controller has
absolute control in an airport's traffic area,'' said a former controller,
Steven Grasso. Mr. Grasso lost his controller's job at New York Tracon - the
major radar control center for the New York area, on Long Island - in President
Reagan's mass dismissals of striking controllers in August.

Jack Young, the chief Federal investigator of the Teterboro crash, focused on
the pilots at a news briefing yesterday. ''They have a responsibility under the
rules to avoid contact with other aircraft,'' he said. Mr. Young is heading a
three-man team from the National Transportation Safety Board.

He said no judgment had been made on the pe rformance of the controller working
the two aircraft, Richard Kellenberger, tower chief at Teterboro.

Mr. Kellenberger, who declined to comment, joined the Federal Aviation
Administration as a controller in 1955. In January 1980, he was named tower
chief at Teterboro. According to crash investigators, he said he regularly
worked two hours each week at controlling arriving and departing flights at
Teterboro, in addition to his administrative chores, before the strike. His
controlling duties are now full time.

Crash Over Sports Complex

The collision, between a helicopter and a twin-engine light plane, occurred over
the Meadowlands Sports Complex, in an area of heavy air traffic, about two miles
south of Teterboro Airport and about eight miles north of Newark International
Airport.

Every day, Teterboro is abuzz with aircraft, not the big commercial jetliners,
but the sleek, smaller jets of executives, commuting helicopters, and
propeller-driven planes of pilots who fly for fun.

Last year, there were 231,074 takeoffs and landings at Teterboro, according to
the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which owns the field. Newark
Airport, which handles regularly scheduled commercial traffic, had 196,800
flights. Teterboro's busiest year recently was 1978, with 245,892 flights.
Newark had 192,700 that year.

After the collision about 8:47 A.M. Wednesday, the helicopter's tailboom came
off. The rest of the aircraft tumbled into the sports complex parking lot,
exploded and disintegrated in flames. The two crewmen died in the wreckage.

A transcript of the last two minutes of communications between the controller
and the two pilots, John Hewitt, a decorated combat pilot in Vietnam who flew
the helicopter, and Donald Kirby, in the Piper Seneca, disclosed that neither
pilot was advised of the location of the other aircraft, although both were
speaki ng with the tower on thesame radio fr equency.

F.A.A. Blames Pilots

The Federal investigators said the pilots were responsible for monitoring those
communications to keep informed of the presence of other aircraft; the union
controllers said the tower should have given each pilot a traffic advisory.

Shortly before the collision, the controller, Mr. Kellenberger, told Mr. Kirby
his plane was in sight and Mr. Hewitt that the helicopter was not. Both pilots
were told to continue on their paths toward the airport.

The paths of the two aircraft intersected above the complex, perhaps 200 to 300
yards northwest of Giants Stadium. None of the five controllers in the tower saw
the collision, according to Mr.  Young, the chief investigator.

Peter Hines, executive vice president of Ronson Aviation Inc., of Trenton, owner
of the helicopter, contends the Seneca flew into the helicopter as the Seneca
was descending.

''It's my opinion the aircraft approached our helicopter from the left rear
position in descending altitude,'' Mr. Hines said. ''It was at such an angle
that there was no way our two pilots could have seen that aircraft.''

Donald McCrory, a passenger in the Seneca who escaped with bruises as his pilot
was hospitalized, has said the plane was hit from below.  According to Mr.
Young's investigators, contact was made between the helicopter's main rotor
blade and the outermost eight feet of the plane's left wing and between the
rotor and the plane's right engine.

At the time of the crash, Mr. Kellenberger was in charge of controlling ''about
seven'' arriving and departing planes, according to Irving Moss, a spokesman for
the F.A.A. ''He was moderately busy,'' Mr. Moss said.

As to the issue of whether the controller has the responsibility to issue
traffic advisories to planes near each other while approaching an airport, Mr.
Moss said: ''As I understand it, there is no requirement that he do this. He
does this when he has time. If they see any kind of impending danger situation,
they will.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ASSEMBLY G.O.P. LEADER MULLS RACE FOR GOVERNOR;
New York Political Notes

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 62, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 835 words


Assemblyman James L. Emery, the minority leader of the Assembly, and seven of
his top aides will spend four days this week in the isolated and rustic
Letchworth State Park, south of Rochester, in what one aide described as ''a
retreat'' to plan Mr. Emery's governmental and political strategy for the coming
year.

The session will help Mr. Emery, who lives in nearby Geneseo, to make up his
mind on risking his Assembly post to seek the Republican gubernatorial
nomination like his predecessor, Perry B. Duryea did - unsuccessfully.

Mr. Emery and his staff will be meeting in a state residence known as ''the
commissioner's cabin.'' A aide at the State Parks Department said there would be
no charge for the meeting site. The Emery staff is also using a state plane to
travel from Albany to Letchworth.

Mr. Emery has certainly paved the way, if he decides to run. He hasat least five
Republican county leaders on his Assembly staff, including Anthony Colavita, the
Westchester chairman, and at least one Conservative county leader, Neil Greene
of Suffolk. The Suffolk chairman, Anthony J. Prudenti, is not on the Emery
payroll but has several allies on the staff. Their pay for at most part-time
jobs - and some even less time than that - ranges from about $35,000 down to
about $3,100 a year.

The minority leader has also dipped into the ranks of former campaign aides for
the late Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller. They include Craig Thorne, George
Humphreys, G. Collins Leyden and Joseph Persico, who was the Rockefeller speech
writer. Their state salaries range from $19,942 to $54,288.

Richard A. Bernstein, the Republican candidate for City Comptroller, says he
still resides in Westchester County, although he established a voting residence
on East 46th Street when he was designated by Republican county leaders last
June.

''I live in Harrison - I live there now but I spend all my waking hours in the
city,'' said Mr. Bernstein, who has already spent about $250,000 in advertising
to make himself known to voters. He said that he would make the city his
permanent residence if he were elected. The City Charter requires that the
comptroller be a city resident.

Alfred A. DelliBovi, the former Queens Assemblyman, has been appointed to a key
patronage job in the Reagan Administration - regional director of the Urban Mass
Transportation Administration, which dispenses Federal mass transit aid. The
post pays about $50,000. His most recent patronage post was on Assemblyman
Emery's staff.

Another Reagan supporter, Kieran O'Doherty, a founder of the Conservative Party,
has been named Republican counsel to the House Post Office and Civil Service
Committee at $51,000 a year. The post is viewed as a consolation prize for his
losing an appointment as chairman of the United States Postal Rate Commission.

President Reagan withdrew the nomination because of strong opposition within the
commission to Mr. O'Doherty.

Nassau County, which produced the largest vote of any county in the state last
year, has a new Democratic county leader. He's Martin L.  Mellman, a 62-year-old
businessman and Port Washington resident who became active in poltiics because
of his opposition to the Vietnam War. He was also affiliated with the liberal
New Democratic Coalition and as such, is likely to be a liberal influence in
state Democratic councils.

Add three more names to the growing list of Republicans and Democrats who are
tempted by Governor Carey's slump in the polls to run for Governor next year -
either in a Democratic primary, if the Governor seeks renomination, or in the
general election.

The latest Democrats talking tough are Howard J. Samuels, who was a perennial
candidate for Governor until he was defeated by Mr. Carey in the 1974 Democratic
primary, and John S. Dyson, the outspoken chairman of the State Power Authority,
who owes his job to the Governor.

On the Republican side, Paul J. Curran, the former United States Attorney in
Manhattan, said last week that he was ''considering getting involved.''

Lieut. Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, who is one of those Democrats who might challenge
Mr. Carey's renomination, said he is being scrupulous about an Oct. 21
fund-raising event at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel at which he hopes to net up to
$75,000, at $500 a head. ''I don't want it running out of my office,'' he said.
He added that he had set up an office at 330 West 42d Street and that Ell en
Conovitz, of his staff, had come off the state payroll to run the event.

Mr. Cuomo, who is known for fast speaking, said that he has also adopted a new
personal style. ''My tongue is going to be a lot slower than my brain,'' he
said. ''I've learned a lot. My opponents had an ally in the past - Cuomo. This
time Cuomo is with me.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Assemblyman James L. Emery

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Nation;
Fewer Berths for The Boat People

BYLINE: By Michael Wright and Caroline Rand Herron

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 293 words


Fewer people are said to be fleeing the political and economic turmoil of
Southeast Asia, but if the Administration has its way, that will not necessarily
ease the competition among them to get into the United States.

Attorney General William French Smith told the Senate Judiciary Committee last
week that Washington wants to reduce dramatically the number of Indochinese
refugees admitted in 1982.

Mr. Smith acknowledged that American involvement in the Indochinese war had
created a continuing need for a ''significant'' expatriate program. Under the
Refugee Act of 1980, more than 120,000 of a permissible 168,000 Indochinese have
been taken in this year.

Mr. Smith recommended that no more than 120,000 Indochinese be admitted next
year, and that new ways be found to discourage potential Asian refugees from
leaving their h omelands - except those who are suffering under what Mr. Smith
termed the repression and paranoia of the Communist regimes in the area .

The importance of that distinction was demonstrated again last week in the case
of the Caribbean's ''boat people,'' the Haitians who have come to Florida in the
tens of thousands in the last two years. Two more boats arrived near Miami, one
carrying 113 passengers who had been 21 days at sea; one voyager died of
dehydration as the boat gained the beach.

Those who survived will doubtless join the 1,062 Haitians held in a former
missile base with beds for 530 people on the edge of the Everglades, or at other
detention centers, before deportation back home. Under the 1980 Act, political
refugees are legitimate immigrants; economic migrants, including the Haitians,
are not.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Nation;
Symbolic Gesture Of $12.50 a Day

BYLINE: By Michael Wright and Caroline R and Herron

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 307 words


In spite of arguments that the uniqueness of their case entitled them to special
compensation, the Americans held hostage in Teheran were seen by a Presidential
commission last week as similar to prisoners of war in World War II, Korea and
Vietnam. The commission recommended that 51 former United States Embassy
personnel each be paid a tax-exempt benefit of $5,550, or $12.50 for each day
spent in captivity - a sum (adjusted for inflation) similar to that paid by the
Federal Government to captured military men as a ''symbolic gesture''
recognizing hardships endured.

Lawyers for the former hostages contended that in none of the precedents the
commission cited had the United States surrendered the right of individuals to
claim damages against a foreign government.  They argued that the commission
should consider what the hostages might have received through suits against
Iran, conceivably as much as $1,000 a day.

Even prior to the release of the hostages in Teheran on Jan. 20, their relatives
were informed that the Carter Administrat ion had beenforced to for feit the
hostages' rights to sue Iran to gain their release. Acco rding to Louisa
Kennedy, wife of a former hostage, Moorhead C. K ennedy Jr., ''We knew this was
coercion, but there was only one way and we wanted to get them out.''

Reactions of the former hostages and their families to the commission's
recommendations ranged from laughter to outrage. Mrs.  Kennedy herself regretted
that the memory of a crisis ''which involved a whole era for this country''
might be reduced to a sum such as $12.50. But she added that the American people
had already provided a kind of compensation with their joyous welcome home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Nation;
Another Day in The Oval Office

BYLINE: By Michael Wright and Caroline Rand Herron

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 500 words


Last week came a fresh reminder that the extraordinary plotting and scheming of
the Nixon Administration by no means began with Watergate. The transcript of a
newly disclosed White House tape, published in The New York Times, revealed
President Nixon and his chief of staff, H.R. Haldeman, discussing ways to punish
protestors against the Vietnam War. At one point, they paused briefly to
speculate whether the Chicago Seven conspiracy trial defendants were ''all
Jews,'' as Mr. Nixon at first wondered, or ''about half'' were, as he concluded.

May 5, 1971, as a voice-activated recorder preserved the conversation in the
Oval Office, Mr. Haldeman suggested secretly recruiting ''thugs'' who could be
unleashed on participants in an antiwar protest then under way in Washington. He
said they could probably be recruited with ease from the teamsters union.

PRESIDENT: They, they've got guys who'll go in and knock their heads off.
HALDEMAN: Sure. Murderers. Guys that really, you know, that's what they really
do. Like the steelworkers have and - except that we can't deal with the
steelworkers at the moment.

PRESIDENT: No.  HALDEMAN: We can deal with the teamsters. And they, you know ...
PRESIDENT: Yeah.  HALDEMAN: ...it's the regular strikebusters-types and all that
...  and then they're gonna beat the (obscenity) out of some of these people.
And, uh, and hope they really hurt 'em. You know, I mean go in with some real -
and smash some noses (tape noise) some pretty good fights.

A few second laters, according to the transcript, talk turned to the defendants
in the controversial conspiracy trial.  Wondering about religion isn't illegal;
authorizing an attack on demonstrators is. But it could not be determined that
the ''thugs'' had ever been hired. In any event, Mr. Nixon is beyond the reach
of the law because of the unconditional pardon he received from his successor.
And the statute of limitations has expired on possible criminal infractions by
Mr. Haldeman. But the tape could figure in legal action involving John N.
Mitchell, who was Attorney General under Mr. Nixon and who has been sued by many
of the 1,200 protestorsarrested on the steps of the Capitol. Federal courts
subsequently said that the arrests were unconstitutional.

A spokesman for Mr. Nixon said only that for The Times to have obtained the
transcript apparently meant that somebody had broken the law. Mr. Haldeman had
nothing to add. ''I really don't care much what's on the tapes,'' he said.
''They're 10 years old.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Michael Wright and Caroli ne Rand Herron

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Ideas & Trends;
A Battle for Access Persists

BYLINE: By Eva Hoffman and Margot Slade

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 277 words


''They thought it was going to be as simple as putting out the cat,'' Mason H.
Rose, chairman of the United States Architectural and Transportation Barriers
Compliance Board said last week, ''But we're not a cat, we're a tiger.'' Mr.
Rose, a former Marine Corps pilot confined to a wheelchair since his jet fighter
crashed in Vietnam, referred to the Reagan Administration's attempt to abolish
the agency, created in 1973 to set uniform guidelines for making Federally
supported and leased buildings accessible to the handicapped.

The agency, whose 22 members include 11 private citizens, nine of them
handicapped, probably has enough Congressional support to receive funding next
year, but last week it was engaged in another skirmish. At a meeting in which
private citizen members argued sharply with Federal official members, it voted
to extend its first set of guidelines, which the Administration proposed to
rescin d, for 45 days of public comment.

The guidelines, issued in January, come after several years of debate over
costly measures to make metropolitan public transportation systems accessible to
the handicapped and to assimilate handicapped students in public school
classrooms. Vice President Bush's Regulatory Review Task Force found the board's
regulations, which cover such facilities as bathrooms, telephone booths,
drinking fountains, doors and elevators and could cost more than $800 million,
rigid and burdensome.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE LONG ORDEAL OF JAMES BRADY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 27, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6657 words


Richard E. Cytowic, M.D., a neurologist in Washington, D.C., writes on medical
subjects. By Richard E. Cytowic It all began with a voice over the George
Washington University Hospital intercom system: ''All physicians in the trauma
team to the E.R. ... All physicians in the trauma team to the E.R.'' It was the
hospital's Code Orange disaster plan.

When a single hospital administrator drops his reptilian doze and shows signs of
life, it usually signals something extraordinary. When the Code Orange alert
brought three high-level supernumeraries charging out of the adminstration
building across the street and running through the rain puddles to the
hospital's 22d Street entrance, I knew that the disaster unfolding on this
gloomy afternoon in Washington, last March 30 was of unusual proportions.

It wasn't long before the dimensions of what had taken place minutes before and
blocks away outside the Washington Hilton Hotel became clear. Peering down the
north corridor of the hospital and through the glass doors of the Washington
Circle emergency entrance, I saw a long black limousine pull up. The
Presidential flags on the front bumper and the escort of men in three-piece
suits, with communications plugs in their ears, left little doubt as to whose
limousine it was.

Everyone old enough to remember that November day in l963 when John F. Kennedy
was assassinated knows where he was when he heard the first bulletin. My
elementary-school class in Trenton, N.J., was ready to leave for home when the
word came. Now, almost 17 1/2 years later, I was a chief neurology resident at
George Washington University Hospital, hurrying toward its emergency room to see
if I could lend assistance to a critically wounded President of the United
States and two members of his party.

The first clue the hospital received about the shooting of President Reagan;
James S. Brady, the White House press secretary; a Secret Service agent and a
Washington policeman had come through a local policeman who had accompanied a
cardiac-arrest victim to the emergency room. Listening to his walkie-talkie, he
heard police messages about the shooting at the Washington Hilton Hotel. Dr.
Joyce Mitchell, the emergency-room attending physician that day, reasoned that
victims of the shooting would probably be sent to the hospital because of its
proximity to the hotel. She instructed that the trauma team be summoned.

A moment later, the white Trimline phone that sits on the righthand corner of
the E.R. secretary's desk rang. That unobtrusive phone, usually buried under a
mountain of lab slips, is the White House hot line. Installed during President
Nixon's tenure on Pennsylvania Avenue, it rarely rings, and when it does, it is
usually a mistake. This time, when nurse Wendy Koenig answered it, she was told
that the Presidential motorcade was en route to the hospital.  E.R. nurses
quickly prepared resuscitation-bay beds 5A and 5B. A second message from the
White House that the motorcade was bringing two agents with g unshot wounds put
a surge of adrenaline into the system.

Patients in the waiting room outside were startled when an emergency-room
attending physician lost his composure in trying to empty the E.R. ''Get out!
Get out of here now!'' he yelled at them, without explaining why.

The treatment and the subsequent full recovery of the President from the gunshot
wound in the chest he suffered have been well documented. But the case of Jim
Brady, shot in the head and the most grievously wounded that day six months ago,
began in confusion almost immediately with the erronious report of his death,
and has continued through subsequent months to be misunderstood by a public for
whom the mysteries of the brain and its functions defy easy explanations.

It is a medical case that at once illuminates how far the skills of
neuros@cience have progressed in recent years, and how much we still have to
learn. It is a case in which no easy magical cures are available; it is also a
case where the ineffable, instinctive will for survival combines with medical
technology to produce recoveries that only a decade or so ago would have been
thought beyond the reach of science.  I first saw Mr. Brady on bed 5B. E.R.
nurses scissored away his blue business suit and stashed the pieces in a plastic
bag underneath the gurney. The press secretary was comotose and a quick look at
t he wound on the left-center of his forehead produced a neurological assessment
th at was straightforward and clearly catastrophic. His face was dist orted, his
forehead shattered open and his eyes swollen shut by the d issection of blood
beneath the skin. Part of his brain was visible.  When doctors tested his
reaction to a stimulus of pain, a standard di agnostic maneuver on comatose
patients, Mr. Brady had no movement o n his left side and his right side moved
only in response to t he deepest pain administered.

The routine things happened in quick succession: An intravenous line was
inserted in his left forearm, a Foley catheter into his urinary tract, arterial
blood was sampled for oxygen and carbondioxide concentrations and acid-base
balance, and venous blood was taken for typing and a multitude of base-line
laboratory studies. His blood pressure was tremendously elevated: 240 over 160.
His rapid, shallow breathing necessitated the insertion of an endotracheal tube,
a clear, soft plastic tube about the size of a felt-tip pen that goes down the
windpipe, or trachea. To completely seal off the lungs from saliva, blood and
vomit, the balloon ''cuff'' that encircles the tube was blown up until the tube
was firmly wedged in the trachea. Respiratory support equipment was attached to
the tube.

The average male brain, a mushy, ovoid mass composed of 90 percent water, weighs
1,500 grams (a little more than two and a quarter pounds). The brain and
cerebrospinal fluid form a closed system inside the skull, and there is little
spare room for anything else .  A common response of the brain to many kinds of
traumatic injury is swelling, and obviously one of the worst injuries is a
bullet wound.  The laws of physics dictate that the energy of a speeding bullet
be absorbed by its target. When that target is a human head, only part of the
energy can be absorbed by bone and cerebrospinal fluid. The brain tissue itself
must receive the remaining crushing shock of energy. While the shearing of nerve
fibers and tearing of blood vessels - and any hemorrhage that may result -
account for specific local damage, the shock-wave dissipation of a bullet's
energy causes additional widespread brain damage and the sudden loss of
consciousness. The brain reacts within seconds with tremendous swelling - a
no-win situation, since it is rapidly trapped and squeezed against the rigid
skull.

Unless it is stopped, this rapid swelling of the brain is uniformly fatal
because the brain stem, which contains the seat of cardiac, respiratory and
other automatic life-support functions, is pushed through the bottom of the
skull - literally ''squeezed to death.'' Mr. Brady's unresponsiveness and
tremendously elevated blood pressure were signs that this process was already
happening. Removing part of the skull and any ''extraneous'' matter in the head
are obvious ways to provide more room and prevent this fatal ''herniation.''

Neurosurgery resident Dr. Jeff Jacobson instructed that the drugs mannitol and
dexamethasone be given by vein. The sugar mannitol promotes a vigorous excretion
of water from body tissues. This water excretion, called diuresis, results in a
reduction of the volume and pressure of cerebrospinal fluid, thus gaining
precious time against the progressive brain swelling and its catastrophic
consequences. The adrenal steroid hormone dexamethasone is given to maintain
this reduction of pressure and swelling.

About 10 minutes after his arrival, the emergency team had stabilized Mr.
Brady's condition. Though those in attendance had little hope of his survival,
they moved on to the next step.  I was waiting in the hospital's CAT-scanner
room, assigned to the team that would take that next step.  The patter of feet
and the hissing of the respirator signaled Mr.  Brady's arrival at the
CAT-scanning suite. The press secretary was deeply comatose now. Four of us
lifted his dead weight onto the scanning couch. I cradled his head in my hands,
position ing it insidethe scanning gantry. Dr. Arthur Kobrine, the professor of
neurosurgery who would take charge of the exp anding medical team attending Mr.
Brady, walked in just as the fo urth picture was being completed. This is what
the scan showed:

Mr. Brady's left forehead and frontal sinus were shattered by the impact and
possible explosion of the ''devastator'' bullet fired by the assassin as the
press secretary strode at the President's side into the line of fire.The shock
waves of the impact had formed air bubbles inside both his eyes. The bullet,
whose track was marked by a train of bone fragments, metal and air, tunneled
through the tip of the left frontal lobe, severed the front part of the corpus
callosum (a major nerve structure connecting the right and left halves of the
brain), and passed through the fluid-filled lateral ventricle on its course to
the right frontal lobe. Brain swelling was evident, and a large blood clot was
present in the right temporal lobe. Fortunately, the hemorrhage was close enough
to the surface not to have destroyed the deep collections of nerve cells in the
midline of the brain, although the sheer size of this ''foreign'' mass was
causing distortion and compression of the brain stem. In short, Mr. Brady's
injury was grave, but not an automatic death sentence if he could be treated
quickly enough.

Convinced that he had seen enough and had to take immediate act ion,Dr. Kobrine
a borted the scan and had Mr. Brady immediately taken to the operating room.
Meanwhile, the hospital was filling up with reporters, one of whom,Ross Simpson,
from the Mutual Broadcasting System, had slipped into the hospital behind
Mr.Brady's wife, Sarah, and had managed to station himse lf outside the
CAT-scanner doorway where he could peer in on the act ion and later quote what
he overheard.

In any crisis situation like the one we had on our hands, knowledge - even rumor
- becomes power, and everybody seemed to want to get into the act. Outside, on
Washington Circle, where TV microwave antennas had blossomed among the spring
tulips, ''insiders'' and ''hospital sources'' gave their stories, ending always
with the disclaimer: ''Just don't use my name.''

The media watched us while the nation watched the media handle the raw events of
a story, with all its stops and false starts. In the papers and on the evening
news, unconfirmed reports revealed that Mr. Brady's CAT scan ''looked like a
disaster,'' that he had suffered ''extensive brain damage,'' that ''few people
survive such a wound'' and that ''his chances of survival aren't good.'' No one
quite knows the sequence of events that led up to it, but at 5:13 P.M., TK hours
after the shooting, Dan Rather on the CBS network told the nation: ''It is now
confirmed that Jim Brady has died.'' Moments after that announcement, a Secret
Service agent burst into the E.R. and wanted to know where Mr. Brady's body was.
Mrs. Brady was only a few feet away, sitting with a hospital-staff social
worker, Ann Gray.

By that time, reporters who had got inside the hospital had been evicted to
lecture room 101 in the medical school's Ross Hall, across the street from the
hospital. Lyn Nofziger, Mr. Reagan's former press secretary in California,
filled in for the wounded Jim Brady, and held briefings at the corner of 22d
Street and Washington Circle, relating the first of the President's jokes, made
before going into surgery to have the bullet removed from his lung. After word
reached the White House Situation Room that surgery on the President was
successfully completed at 5:20 P.M., it was decided that further word on the
President and Mr. Brady should come from the hospital's doctors. As the grim
afternoon turned into somber evening, many of the reporters and media crew quit
the rain for Ross Hall and waited for a medical briefing from Dr. Dennis
O'Leary, the dean of clinical affairs at George Washington, which came at 7:30.

Carrying books, George Washington medical students came in droves to see what
was happening. Though the students balked at the invasion of the press and their
own eviction (''Hey, this is our school. You get out!''), almost everyone else
seemed to enjoy the national attention. Even more, they seemed to enjoy the
Secret Service.

A mutual fascination sprang up quickly between the medical staff and the Secret
Service, the kind one might expect from exotic insects in bell jars placed next
to each other on a shelf. Agents from the Presidential detail are recognizable
not so much for their outward appearance as for the feeling of awe they induce
in mortals who cross their paths, and proximity did not abate that curiosity
about the Secret Service or their mystique. A consensus quickly formed that the
Presidential protection agents (the ones in suits) were the most enigmatic,
intimidating and the best looking. The countersnipers (SWAT team), who were
stationed on medical-center rooftops and rarely waved back to the curious
milling on the streets below, were the most theatrical. They each packed a small
arsenal, and outfitted in their high black boots, midnight-blue uniforms with
country-club ascots and baseball caps turned around with the peak in the back
(so as not to interfere with sighting, I guess), they were the essence of
imperial storm troopers. Finally, the Executive Protection Service (the
uniformed White House guards) turned out to be the most accessible and, in
retrospect, the most romantic - to judge from the number of liasons they have
made with the hospit al staff. To this day, they remain at the hospital,
guarding Mr . Brady's room and escorting his wife on hospital grounds.

The inner sanctum of medicine held a similar mystique for the agents. Standing
with an E.P.S. agent at the junction of the 22d Street entrance and the
operating wing on the first floor, I listened to him expound about his friend
who was one of those standing guard during Mr. Reagan's surgery. ''He just
finished the academy course a few weeks ago, and all of a sudden he finds
himself dressed in green and peeking through a mask. He said he thought he was
going to pass out when they started cutting the Chief open - but he just held
on.'' Because primitive neurosurgery was practiced before man first learned to
write, its beginnings are unrecorded. Skull fragments tell us that it was
widely, if not always wisely, applied during the neolithic period. The venting
of blood, evil spirits, bone fragments, pus and spearheads by trephination -
that simple act of boring a hole in a human skull - was one of the first
operations performed in mankind's early history.

The Babylonians knew of the brain's contralateral representation of the body
(i.e., the right and left hemispheres of the brain control functions and
movements on opposite sides of the body), and classified brain injuries in much
the same way we do, though there was little th ey could effect in the way of
cure. Prior to the 19th century, surg ical attack was limited to disease that
made its way to the skull sur face. For millenniums, the contents of the cranium
were inaccessible.  Surgical techniques for opening the head without killing the
p atient progressed at a slow pace. The first operation inwhich a surge on knew
where to look for disease inside the skull was performed in London in 1884.
Although both diagnostic and surgical neurologic te chniques progressed rapidly,
in 1905 the mortality rate for brain ope rations was still so high that
colleagues of the American neur osurgical pioneer Harvey Cushing, then at Johns
Hopkins, urge d him to reduce his efforts at the fledgling specialty of
neurosurge ry. With the arrogance of a traditional neurosurgeon, Cushing refus
ed, and he explored every avenue of technique until, by 1931, his sur gical
mortality rate had fallen to only 8.7 percent, a rate not much higher than
today's.

Since then, modern neuroscience has made incredible strides, especially with the
techniques developed in treating traumatic head wounds suffered on the
battlefields of World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War. With each
succeeding war, military doctors became increasingly successful at treating
wounds that in the past inevitably would have been fatal. The sheer number of
severe head wounds doctors saw increased dramatically, and in Vietnam in
particular, with helicopter evacuations of the wounded within minutes to teams
of neurosurgeons in field hospitals, successful surgical procedures were
developed and refined. The lessons of war were transferred to American hospitals
that had to deal with casualties of a violent civil society. Time, it was
discovered, was one of the most important factors in determining survivability:
Those soldiers who were transported immediately to medical facilities had the
best outcomes. Had James Brady's injury not occurred in the daytime, when full
services and personnel were available, and had circumstances of the
assassination attempt not permitted rapid transportation to a nearby hospital
for highly advanced medical treatment within four minutes of the shooting, Mr.
Brady might not have survived his wound.

Dr. Kobrine's surgical team began operating on Mr. Brady with a procedure called
craniotomy, the opening of the skull. Because even the slightest movement could
be devastating, Mr. Brady's head, which by this time had been shaved, was
rigidly stabilized by screwing into it a three-point headrest, the sharp spikes
of which penetrate the skin and lodge in the skull. The skin was incised across
the top of the skull from ear to ear, pulled back, and bleeding was controlled
along the edges with metal spring clips and hemostats.

With the skull bone at last exposed, quarter-inch burr holes were drilled into
the skull around the operating site with a sterile handcranked brace and bit.
Invented at the turn of the century by an Alabama surgeon named Hudson, the burr
bit remains as much a part of modern neurosurgery as the Gigli wire saw that is
threaded from one burr hole to another to saw the bone away from the inside out.
Leonardo Gigli, an Italian gynecologist of the 19th century, originally invented
his wire chain saw for cutting the middle of the pelvic bone for certain
obstetrical operations. The notion of putting the bone ''flap'' back instead of
throwing it away was introduced only in 1899 and practice today varies. In a
situation such as Mr.Brady's, with extreme brain swelling and an acute need for
more room, the tendency might be to discard the bone. Dr. Kobrine's decision to
replace it was influenced by other factors, including cosmetic ones.

Once the surgeon is inside, with the brain exposed, more modern techniques take
over, though it might be difficult for a lay observer to believe that the
various suckers, scrapers and doodads are anything but barbaric. A scalpel - the
prop of the standard Hollywood model of a brain surgeon - is rarely used.
Instead, a pencil-sized vacuum apparatus sucks away damaged brain tissue, which
is 90 percent water, into a glass jar. Steady hands are a good asset here, as
thousands of nerve cells are lost with each fragment of tissue remov ed. Dr.
Kobrine estimates that Mr . Brady lost about 20 percent of his frontal brain
tissue, most of it from the right side. The right-hemisphere blood clot
spontaneously burst to the surface and was sucked away, arterial bleeding contro
lled by silver clips, electrified cautery forceps and gelatin spong es. All four
members of the operating team either wore magnifying gla sses, similar to
jewelers' loupes, or used an actual microscop e during the repair of two small
arteries in Mr. Brady's brain. The flattened bullet itself was retrieved from
the side of the head near his right ear. His blood pressure returned to normal
range durin g the course of the operation.

At the end of the six and a half hours in surgery, Mr. Brady was taken to the
intensive-care unit. The first part of his ordeal was over.  By all accounts,
Mr. Brady's was a strong, forceful and aggressive personality and his colleagues
regarded him with respect and affection, a privilege few press secretaries have
enjoyed. They admired his humor, often irreverent and devil-may-care, his
ability to enjoy a life apart from the driven politics of Washington and the
fact that he never seemed to take himself too seriously. Six months have now
passed since he walked into the line of fire of an assassin and since the team
of neurosurgeons at George Washington University Hospital used all the skills of
modern surgery to limit the damage ofthe high-powe red bullet that slammed into
his brain. It has been a slow, painful and often courageous period of recovery
for a man who was only just beginning to emerge as a respected and jovial member
of the new Re agan Administration.

James Brady has largely ceased to be a surgical patient, and his story now
focuses more and more on the drama of his struggle to recover as much of his
former physical and mental self as is humanly and medically possible. Any
prognosis for recovery must be measured within the framework of his injury and
the uncertainty of how much compensation for the irreplacably lost cells can
occur. It is a recovery clouded not so much by the physical complications - such
as the seizures and paralysis Mr. Brady has suffered - as by the question of how
much an injured brain can regain its ability to integrate psychmotor functions,
abstract reasoning and personality.

At the moment, physical and occupational therapy take up a good part of Mr.
Brady's day. He undergoes physical therapy twice a day, at times in his hospital
room, but more and more frequently in the physical-therapy department. In
addition to paralysis of Mr. Brady's left arm and leg, he developed spasticity -
the stiffening of muscle that leads to jerky and awkward movement and follows
the loss of cerebral tissue. The more frontal the injury, the more severe
spasticity is. The aim of therapy is to reduce spasticity so that whatever
normal movement remains or returns will be as useful as possible.

Mr. Brady's therapy regime is a rather involved program that consists of a
combination of passive and active maneuvers designed to ''fool'' the body's
monitoring of proprioception, that kinetic awareness of where the body parts are
and what they are doing from moment to moment, and thus reduce the abnormal
spasticity.  Rotational exercises, weight bearing, standing and walking are some
examples of these maneuvers. Mr. Brady took his first steps on July 22, tk days
after the wounding, which was a tremendous psychological boost. A long leg brace
provided stability to his left knee and ankle joints, and assistants helped him
walk between narrowly spaced parallel bars. He quickly graduated from this
contrived situation to a point where he can now walk short distances with the
aid of his brace and Lofstrand crutches (the kind that wrap around the
forearms), and with an assistant at his side.

Mr. Brady's sense of time is sometimes fuzzy. His day-night cycles get reversed
now and then, and he sleeps a lot. Simple physical activity, such as moving from
the bed to a chair, is still difficult and fatiguing, but it represents a degree
of freedom and self-control that was formerly impossible. Mr. Brady has made a
few outings so far: The first was on the Fourth of July, when he watched the
fireworks over the Washington Monument from a hotel window and later made a
brief appearance at a White House party. Later that month, the Bradys celebrated
their eighth wedding anniversary by going to an Asian restaurant with close
friends. He also went to dinner on Aug.  18, two days before his fourth
operation.

Food continues to give Mr. Brady much enjoyment. He has a standing order for
fancy food from the hospital kitchen, which is served on White House service,
and he consumes prodigious quantities of it - he has gained about 20 pounds in
the past two months. Spontaneous parties sometimes occur when friends come to
visit him, and Mr. Brady seems to enjoy them, joining in the joking, singing old
Illinois college songs. Another link to the outside world and his old profession
is a squawk box in his room that lets him keep abreast of activities in the
White House pressroom.

His ability to participate in this range of activities has raised the question
of when Mr. Brady will be able to go home. Initially, doctors anticipated he
could take weekend leaves in July and gradually stay at home for longer and
longer periods, though he would continue to return to the hospital daily for
outpatient physical therapy. With his recent seizures and surgery to seal off
his leakingsinus, however, that date was moved ahead to Labor Day weekend. He
left the hospital at noon on Saturday, Sept.  5, and came back at 10:30 P.M.
after spending the day at his home in Arlington, Va.

Mr. Brady still has some medical problems, which have come in quick succession.
While these were seen as disapointing setbacks, they were not unexpected, given
the nature of his illness and the added risk factors of obesity and prolonged
confinement in bed. He experienced fever, rash and elevation of his
white-blood-cell count as untoward reactions to phenytoin and phenobarbital,
drugs given at separate times to prevent seizures, a predictable sequel to his
brain injury. The leak of outside air into the normally fluid-filled ventricles,
on April 22, followed by more air and a leak of cerebrospinal fluid from his
nose, on April 27, both demanded quick interventions because of the danger of
infection and brain abscess.  The first of those interventions was surgical, but
both caused periods of forced inactivity that interfered with Mr. Brady's
progress.

Next were the pulmonary emboli. His shortness of breath was initially tak en to
be psychological ''air hunger,'' but Mr. Brady's medical docto rs insisted on
pursuing the symptom and established thatblood clots w ere trapped in his lungs.
He went back to surgery for the third tim e.

Then a flurry of seizures occurred on Aug. 3, causing a mild aspiration
pneumonia. A seizure represents a failure of brain inhibition, a sudden
electrical discharge of a network containing about 100,000 cells. Where this
discharge occurs and how widely it spreads determines the seizure's clinical
manifestations. Uninhibited spread throughout the brain is a grand-mal seizure,
which is what Mr. Brady had early that morning. The majority of his convulsions
during the next nine hours, however, did not spread, but emanated from a small
region of his damaged right hemisphere. They were manifested clinically by
twitching of his left thigh and knee. Each convulsion caused a paroxysmal rise
in intracranial pressure, which again opened up a tract between his brain and
one of his sinuses. The copious leak of cerebrospinal fluid from his nose
required a fourth operation to obliterate and seal off the sinus.

One of the lesser complications was a case of pneumonia. It was a fluke because,
for all appearances, it was a garden-variety pneumonia. And it was something of
a relief because pneumonia is something you can quantify. You can see it on an
X-ray, you can hear it through a stethoscope, and you can usually make it go
away. The complex mental effects of brain injury are less familiar and even more
difficult to measure.

The brain is the one organ system that is irreplaceable, not transplantable and
does not repair itself. Billions of nerve cells are arranged to receive,
transmit, integrate and respond to stimuli from both the body and its internal
milieu, as well as our external environment. We are provided with various neural
mechanisms for sampling many of the physical properties of the world, forming a
holistic concept of it in our minds and reacting to it in ways that are termed
characteristically ''personal.'' This personal concept can be altered in several
ways: The sense organs themselves may be faulty, the brain areas to which these
sensory signals are first transmitted may fail, or the ability to appreciate the
signals in terms of time and space and then integrate them with memory and
intention and thus achieve a ''conscious experience'' may no longer be possible.
It is this integrating ability that is most commonly affected by cerebral
disease.

The quality of change depends on which cerebral hemisphere and what area of it
is involved. What significance this has for the patient whose ability to
integrate fails him depends on many factors, including the patient's underlying
personality before the injury.

In James Brady's case, while it is technically correct that he has had a
bilateral frontal lobotomy, it is incorrect automatically to equate that state
with mental apathy, marked paucity of speech and loss of the underlying
personality. The ''frontal lobes,'' so named only because of their location
toward the front of the brain, are not homogenous anatomical brain structures,
but a collection of nervous subsystems with widespread connections among
themselves and to all other parts of the brain. The general action of the
frontal lobes is to insert attention and emotion between the perception of an
event and one's response to it. This principle applies to simple and complex
levels of stimuli and a broad range of responses: from planning how to cross the
street without getting hit, to the best way of achieving a desired social
position, to evading a touchy question. Both motivational relevance and memory
are also involved - i.e., planning and acting based on past experience and
future goals.

Damage to the frontal lobes is not manifested by a single syndrome, and signs
and symptoms of their dysfunction are not easily quantified. They are more
readily appreciated as changes in quality - a problem of what to measure and
how.

While each case is unique, patients with extensive frontal-lobe damage tend to
exhibit similar problems. The most characteristic behavioral changes are those
of goal-o riented behavior. For example, one former patient, whom I'll call Mr.
Jones, had his right frontal lobe destroyed by a tumor. Mr. Jones had diff
iculty with voluntary tasks that were verbally requested, despite t he fact that
he understood what was wanted of him. When asked to pick up his water glass, for
example, he made no response. ''Do you understand what I want you to do,
Mr.Jones?'' I asked. ''Yes. Y ou want me to pick up the glass.'' ''Have you done
that?'' ''No.'' ''Can you?'' ''Yes.'' ''Go ahead and pick it up then,'' I urged
him . No response. If he wasthirsty, however, he would pick up the glass and
drink from it spontaneously. This same patient had another typically ''frontal''
symptom: He was easily distracted by irreleva nt stimuli, and could not suppress
his tendency to turn in the dire ction of a noise or someone walking by, and in
fact responded bet ter to comments aimed athis roommate than to direct
questioning. Many of Mr. Jones's intellectual processes remained potentially i
ntact, but neither his own nor another's speech could ''get them goi ng,'' and
his attention to irrelevant stimuli led to impulsiveness an d fragmentation of
his actions.

Mrs. Smith is another patient who sustained frontal damage from a bullet follow
ing an unsuccessful suicide attempt. She remained able to play bridg e as long
as she was not distracted, and could comment appropriately about news items, but
she also demonstrated what is called Witzel sucht, a pathological compulsion to
make jokes and puns,sometimes at the expense of others. In contrast to her
personality before the sh ooting, Mrs. Smith became shallow, voiced uncensored
opinions, and behaved crudely in social settings. Any departure from her routine
o r failure at a requested task was extremely frustrating, a reaction she
assuaged through her newly found voracious app etite. But when Mrs. Smith was in
a familiar, nonthreatenin g situation, she had charming manners, was polite and
restrained, a nd would joke with her visitors, who would then be unable to det
ect any abnormality after even lengthy visits.

Subtle changes in alertness, emotional response, control of regulatory
behaviors, high-level problem solving and the ability to plan one's actions
appropriately may all be signs, at one time or another, of frontal-lobe damage.
But few signs ever remain as permanent features. As the hospital's spokesman,
Dr. Dennis O'Leary, has stated about Mr. Brady: ''He may not be precisely the
way he was before, and undoubtedly there will be some subtle changes. But they
may be so subtle that even people who are very close to him are going to have
trouble identifying these.''

One of the first signs of hope for Mr. Brady's mental recovery was that he began
talking a few days after he was shot. Inarticulate grumbles, one-word sentences
and counting to three soon gave way to short phrases. This initial observation
was important for everyone's morale - physician, patient, press and public - and
led to an early optimism.

That optimism was purposely guarded, but making the translation of guarded
optimism to the press is difficult. Lay expectation, assumption and experience
are vastly different from those of a medical mind thinking in clinical
paradigms. The average intelligent person lacks the experience to weigh the
gravity of each potential complication and the probability of its occurrence, as
well as the significance of medical gain. What doctors regarded as pragmatic
caution concerning possible, if not inevitable, complications, the press and the
public experienced as fear. When the hospital announced favorable signs, the
press translated that as ''nothing short of a miracle.''

What one can say now is that Jim Brady has gradually attained a level of
awareness of what has happened to him. He has also experienced a range of
emotions that appear in appropriate situations, has clear personal preferences
and maintains a determined attitude.

Mr. Brady's role as both a source and consumer of news is unusual.  He
frequently reads The Washington Post and The New York Times, both of which
include articles and reports about himself. He seems to handle this hall of
mirrors well. He has a sharp, caustic wit, likes putting people on and may be
heard chuckling after they leave the room. Mr. Brady's sense of humor is the
first thing most of those who have worked with him closely in the hospital
comment on. But then, he has always been known for his wit.

Mr. Brady made his first public appearance on Friday, June 12. A truck bearing a
get-well banner came to the hospital and Mr. Brady wanted very much to respond
to it. Sporting a tam-o'-shanter golf cap to hide his scarred head, and
supported on his left side by Kathy Wynne, his physical therapist, Mr. Brady
appeared at his hospital window to give the thumbs up sign to his well-wishers
and the media.  He obviously did not look like Jim Brady before his injury, but
many were surprised that he looked better than they expected.

Mr. Brady is doing better than many patients with similar injuries, and one
reason may be that his personality before the shooting was a strong one. The
same qualities that got him to the top are the qualities that have permitted him
to cope well with his current situation. While the machinery for manipulating
his analytic skills fully has been damaged, he has retained those skills, and
his ability to use them is returning. Though he is technical ly a different
personfrom the one he was before the shooting, he h as retained enough of his
characteristically ''personal'' repertory that most people recognize him as Jim
Brady.

While the final extent of Jim Brady's abilities is not known, one can predict
what is not likely, based on knowledge of his brain damage and his general
functioning so far. It is probable that Mr.  Brady's overall I.Q., as measured
by standard intelligence tests, will remain normal. Similarly, language and
allied analytic skills should be relatively normal, as should verbal - though
not necessarily visual - memory.

In many ways, Jim Brady approaches the ideal patient. He has a positive frame of
mind, a well-structured personality to begin with, and a strong desire to move
ahead. A certain political shrewdness has not left him. Two medical residents
who had not seen him for some time visited him recently and were surprised that
Mr. Brady had apparently remembered their names after a long absence. It took
them some time to realize that he had read their name tags but pretended,
nonetheless, not to have forgotten them.

The return to his job as White House press secretary - a job President Reagan is
holding open indefinitely - is obviously a driving force for Jim Brady. It is a
goal shared by his press colleagues and the White House. All of this enthusiasm
is supportive, but there is a danger that at some future date the good
intentions may take the decision out of the patient's own hands. And while it is
conceivable that he will one day be able to resume some of his former duties at
the White House, one hopes that outside considerations and sentiment will not
determine James Brady's future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Washington University Hospital photo of
James Brady greeting friends and family drawing photo of James Brady

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 1981, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VARIEGATED TUCHMAN

BYLINE: By PETER STANSKY; Peter Stansky, a historian who teaches at Stanford
University, is the co-author of ''The Unknown Orwell.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1486 words


PRACTICING HISTORY Selected Essays.  By Barbara W. Tuchman.  306 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $16.50.

THIS is a book to celebrate. It brings together some 33 pieces written over 35
years, but mostly in the 1960's and 70's. Many are deliberately occasional
pieces and come from the period of Barbara Tuchman's greatest prominence, since
the publication of her first Pulitzer Prize-winning book, ''The Guns of
August,'' in 1962. (Her ''Stilwell and the American Experience in China'' won
the Prize againin 1972.)

Generally publishers run for the woods at the mention of publishing a
miscellaneous collection, so there is no doubt that this book exists because of
the eminence of its author. Most of the essays are a delight to read, affording
glimpses into Mrs. Tuchman's interests, writings and life. Here is the
variegated Tuchman, in practice clothes, so to speak, less imposing perhaps than
the full-dress historian of her major works, but just as persuasive.

There is some autobiography in these pages - one wishes there were more - and a
picture emerges of the historian herself, a commonsensical if somewhat
disillusioned liberal. Although she believes in the old idea that the ''I''
should be kept out of historical writing, in most of these essays one has a firm
awareness of the author being present, giving us something of a progress through
her life: the making of a historian and woman of letters.  (She says in passing
that she has been attacked by some feminists but isn't specific as to why. It is
not surprising, however, as she is highly traditional in her use of ''man'' in
its abstract sense and in her commitment to study power rather than the lack of
it. She appears to hold to the notion -which I suspect is fairly dubious - that
women are less militant than men. Margaret Thatcher, for one, doesn't impress me
as particularly pacific.)

A sense of her background emerges in the fascinating essay on her grandfather,
Henry Morgenthau Sr., Woodrow Wilson's Ambassador to Turkey - a post he almost
refused, as it was the one saved for a Jew who needed to be politically
rewarded. He had hoped to be Secretary of the Treasury, the post his son would
hold for nine years under Franklin Roosevelt. Grandfather Morgenthau was firmly
anti-Zionist, and yet for humanitarian reasons he arranged for $50,000 in gold
bullion to assist the Jews in Palestine in August 1914. (The sum was carried
there by Maurice Wertheim, Mrs. Tuchman's father.) Morgenthau would have been
happier if world history had not made a refuge for Jews necessary. Similarly,
Mrs. Tuchman would like the American dream to work, yet she sees all the
difficulties in its way, difficulties shaped by history. One feels that she
would prefer to write an objective record of happy accomplishments, but she
knows that life is not like that.

She herself has continued in the public tradition of her grandfather - and of
her father, who was a rather eccentric banker, buying The Nation magazine from
the Villards when it was on the verge of bankruptcy. She was a child of the
30's, educated at Radcliffe, most particularly in the stacks of Widener Library,
submitting a thesis - she is careful to state that it was an undergraduate one -
full of enthusiasm and bad writing. She agreed with the judgment ''Style
undistinguished,'' and holds firmly that ''One must ... know how to use the
languag e.'' She learned that skillon her first jobs, working in Tokyo for the
American Council of the Institute of Pacific Relations and writing for The
Nation and the publication W ar in Spain.

The defeat of the Loyalists in the Spanish Civil War seemed to her the end of
the liberal world. (She later turned this into a nice argument demonstrating the
fallacy of overdependence on the lessons of history. She had believed that the
past proved the danger to peace if a European power, such as Germany, were to
gain control of Spain. Contrary to all expectations, Franco maintained a great
degree of independence vis-a-vis Hitler; and Gibraltar, even in the most
vulnerable days of World War II, never stopped being British.) It was at this
time - 1938 - that she published her first book, ''The Lost British Policy.''
Two years later she married and began to raise a family, not publishing another
book until ''Bible and Sword'' in 1956. ''The Zimmermann Telegram'' came out in
1958, ''The Guns of August'' in 1962. The rest is history.

She devotes the first part of the collection to eight essays on ''The Craft.''
Her message is clear: ''I believe that the material must precede the thesis,
that chronological narrative is the spine and the blood stream that bring
history closer to 'how it really was.''' The historian is a narrator, a
storyteller; the point is made somewhat repetitiously in the first section. She
recognizes that point of view, and explanations are essential to historical
narrative. She may be overly optimistic about the degree to which they emerge
from the material and not from preconceptions.

The first essay, ''In Search of History,'' should be read by any historian,
aspiring or practicing. As she tells us, historians must plunge into primary
material, and in due course they must also know when to stop -universities are
littered with historians who are doing that last bit of research before they
embark on the terror of writing, of making their work available to others. Mrs.
Tuchman says about writing: ''It is laborious, slow, often painful, sometimes
agony . It means rearrangement, revision, addi ng, cutting, rewriting. But it
brings a sense of excitement, almost o f rapture; a moment on Olympus. In short,
it is an act of creation.' ' This is a rapture she would deny to most
historians, usually within the academy, who she feels are more interested in
history than in writing it. This leads her - falsely to my mind, but I'm
prejudiced - to divide historians from writers. ''There is of course another eq
ually important and valid form of history which is written for th e purpose of
putting thematerial and the author's conclusions on the record. Such an author
is less concerned with communicating than wit h establishing the facts. He is
historian first and writer secon d, if at all, whereas I am a writer first whose
subject is history, a nd whose purpose is communication.'' In fact, that is or
should b e the definition of all historians.

I fear that Mrs. Tuchman may undervalue the contributions of less traditional
historians, particularly the new social historians. In her legitimate emphasis
on the story, she may neglect ways in which her discussion of history might have
been made even more interesting, insightful and complex.

The second group of 13 essays demonstrate ''The Practice.'' Some, such as
''Israel: Land of Unlimited Impossibilities'' and ''Mankind's Better Moments,''
are a little too determined to be optimistic, but most demonstrate the
historian's intelligence, ''accurate, investigative, and synthesizing,'' She
bravely tells audiences what they may not wish to hear. In her third section,
''Learning from History,'' she informs the 1972 graduating class at Williams
that other Vietnams can be prevented only by the presence of the
college-educated in the Army. ''We should face the military element rather than
turn our backs on it, learn about it, even participate in it through ROTC.'' At
the Army War College that same year she told the officers that much too much was
being spent on defense, and that it is a disaster for the Government to be a
prisoner of the Pentagon.

The pragmatic, sensible view has been much betrayed in this country, yet here
Mrs. Tuchman believes it has the best chance to work. Problems should be faced,
as when she argued in favor of impeaching Richard Nixon. ''Nor should we be
paralyzed by fear of exacerbating divisions within this country. We are divided
anyway and always have been, as any independently minded people should be. Talk
of unity is a pious fraud and a politician's cliche. No people worth its salt is
politically united. A nation in consensus is a nation ready for the grave.''

Her grandfather recognized that one's aims might not be achieved, but that it
was necessary to pursue the course of enlightenment. His granddaughter still,
and perhaps a little naively, sees this country as the great land of opportunity
''between Gulag Archipelago and the featherbed of cradle-to-the-grave welfare.
... If the great question, whether it is still possible to reconcile democracy
with social order and individual liberty, is to find a positive answer, it will
be here.''

But hers is an optimism tempered by an unflinching acceptance of the realities
of history. Many of Mrs. Tuchman's books have dealt with war, violence and
suffering. These, rather than peace, are likely to de f ine the human condition,
which she has explored with a sympathy and understanding that define her
achievements as historian and writer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 28, 1981, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE SALVADOR CALDRON: REAGAN KEEPS HIS DISTANCE;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 27


For an Administration that made the guerrilla war in El Salvador its first, most
heralded anti-Communist cause, the Reagan Administration provided a decidedly
low-key public reception last week for President Jose Napoleon Duarte, the
Salvadoran leader.

In terms of access, the sturdy, dark-haired veteran Salvadoran politician had an
open door. He saw President Reagan, Vice President Bush and Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger, and is scheduled to have a parting visit with Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr. at the United Nations.

But the White House deliberately refrained from staging a warm official embrace.
There were no formal dinners with toasts ringing with political endorsements, no
Honor Guard welcome on the south lawn, no joint appearance of President Reagan
and Mr. Duarte for informal pictures and answering questions from the White
House press corps. Many other leaders have enjoyed such courtesies but the
plucky little Salvadoran politician was left to speak for himself in his
encounters with reporters.

Officially, the explanation is that this was a private visit, not an official
one, because President Reagan lacked the time for all the protocol and flourish
of a formal diplomatic call and also because Mr. Duarte himself had sought the
informal approach, believing that his mission should concentrate on presenting
his political case to the American people on television talk shows, at the
National Press Club, or in Congress.

Keeping Their Distance

But privately senior Administration officials acknowledge that the White House,
confronted by a new surge of political troubles over the budget and arms sales
to Saudia Arabia, wanted to keep a decent distance from Mr. Duarte in public.
The President's inner circle uneasily recalled the uncomfortable echoes of
Vietnam touched off last spring by the loudly proclaimed dispatch of a modest
new group of American military instructors to help El Salvador combat the
leftist guerrillas.

Moreover, the Reagan Administration has lost its early eagerness for scoring a
resounding military victory over the Salvadoran leftists. Gradually the emphasis
of American policy is shifting toward what Mr. Duarte himself calls ''a
political solution.'' As a Christian Democrat, he faces an extremely delicate
task of pulling the military-civilian junta that he heads toward elections or
some kind of negotiations with the other side. Despite his own public assurances
that leftist forces in his country are weak ening, many top American officials
are nervous about the trends in El Salvador.

The most favorable official Administration assessment is that the situation has
been ''mixed'' since the Reagan team increased American involvement in El
Salvador. Some high officials assert that politically Mr. Duarte has become a
bit stronger, that the big guerrilla offensives have failed, that international
opinion is now split, that the military situation seesaws, and that a long,
trying struggle lies ahead but it can be won. ''Duarte is all we have,'' said
one official, ''but he's tough and he's making progress.''

But a more pervasive view is that the situation is bad, especially in the wake
of a wave of terrorist attacks by guerrillas in August.  Roughly 25 percent of
the nation's power grid was knocked out last month, though most of those power
lines have since been restored. At one point, Mr. Duarte was able to make a
speech in a hotel only by taking a portable generator along with him to insure
there would be no blackout.

Rightist Takeover Feared

''The terrorism has put Duarte in more of a hole,'' commented a senior official.
''It's harder to contain and it's disrupting the economy and demoralizing
people. They've b een blowing up bridges and power generators. Our real concern
is that th e right, in frustration,may try to take over.''

One rightist leader, Maj. Roberto d'Aubisson, recently proclaimed a new
political group, undeterred by repeated messages from the Reagan Administration
that it will not, and probably cannot, sustain a policy of support if the
rightists take over.

Another fear in Washington is that Mr. Duarte, whom the Administration regards
as a genuine ''third force'' between the right and the leftist guerrillas, may
himself be assassinated. He is known as tough and brave, the survivor of torture
by the military several years ago and more recently of shots fired into his den,
narrowly missing him. His son was wounded during the August violence, though
later Mr. Duarte held a large outdoor political rally.

By far the most disconcerting episode to Washington, however, was the seizure of
the town of Perquin, in eastern El Salvador, for nine days by a guerrilla force
estimated to number 400 to 500. But the army recaptured the town and some senior
American officials contend that Government strength has gained while the general
level of violence has gradually abated over the past year.

Economic Aid Is Stressed

The Administration has taken comfort from the fact that nine Latin American
countries, led by Venezuela and Colombia, denounced the move by France and
Mexico to accord a form of political recognition to the leftist Democratic
Revolutionary Front.

Some State Department officials have chafed over the slowness with which the
Administration's national security machinery has moved to develop a new ''action
proposal'' for El Salvador. Senior White House aides, evidently eager to prevent
El Salvador from once again becoming a front-page story, were reported to be
letting it slip off the National Security Council agenda. Nor is any part of the
Administration eager to deepen the involvement of the American military. The
stress now is on economic aid.

The political reaction to Mr. Duarte's visit pointed to one reason for the
general White House skittishness: the President's political advisers still
regard El Salvador as a domestic political liability.

For despite all Mr. Duarte's efforts to persuade the press and the American
public that he has disciplined the security forces to prevent violations of
human rights by Government troops, the police or National Guard, Congress
remains sharply skeptical.

In the midst of his visit, the Senate rejected an Administrationbacked effort to
remove the requirement that a $114 million aid package for El Salvador must be
accompanied by certification from President Reagan twice a year that El Salvador
is making progress in human rights, economic development and political
liberalization. Administration officials acknowledge that as a sign of the
delicacy with which they must now handle the Salvadoran issue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of police and protesters

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 29, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 855 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
PRACTICING HISTORY. Selected Essays.  By Barbara W. Tuchman. 306 pages.  Knopf.
$16.50.

THERE are a number of high points in this collection of 33 essays by the
historian Barbara W. Tuchman. Among the brightest spots are two exemplary book
reviews - one of Henry A. Kissinger' s ''White House Years,' ' written for The
New York Times Book Review, that fairly crackl es with wit and indignation; the
other an analysis for The Atlantic of the Freud-Bullitt study of Woodrow Wilson
that puts psychohistory in its place for the duration - as well as a courageous
an d sensible commencement address delivered at Williams College in 19 72 on why
it is irresponsible for young people opposed to war to tur n their backs on
military service; and an absorbing essay, a litt le too brief and scant on
personal details, on why the career of the author's grandfather, Henry
Morgenthau Sr., embodied the dilemma o f the Jewish assimilationist.

Animating the Obvious

Also diverting are some of the pieces that the author includes under the heading
she calls ''The Craft - in Search of History,'' a Phi Beta Kappa address
delivered at Radcliffe College in 1963; and ''The Historian as Artist'' (New
York Herald Tribune Book Week, 1966) - if only because they bubble over with the
sort of tips on technique that any craftsman must store up during a career of
writing successful books.

Elsewhere, at her best, Mrs. Tuchman shows why she is a first-rate popular
historian - by practicing what one might call (without intending any derision)
the art of animating the obvious: for instance, what it must have been like to
live in an age that still believed in the divinity of man (''Historical Clues to
Present Discontents,'' a 1969 address delivered at Pomona), or what unimaginable
courage it must have taken to explore the wilderness of the New World
(''Mankind's Better Moments,'' her April 1980 Jefferson Lecture, which
subsequently was published in American Scholar).

And in a couple of other places she goads a reader awake simply by raising
curious intellectual conundrums -such as when she sums up the argument of the
English historian E.H. Carr that ''historical facts'' do not exist
''independently of the interpretation of the history,'' and then rejects it on
the grounds that, for example, even ''if Domesday Book and all the other records
of the time had been burned, the transfer of land ownership from the Saxons to
the Normans would be no less a fact of British history'' (''When Does History
Happen?'' New York Times Book Review, 1964). Or when she criticizes Freud for
naming the Oedipus and Elektra Complexes after people whose problems were
actually peculiar to their royal status (''Is History a Guide to the Future,''
an address to the Chicago Historical Society, October 1966).

But too often while reading these essays, I felt the sort of discomfort one used
to feel in school when something important was being said that made one sleepy
despite its worthiness.

Part of the reason for this unpleasant torpor is that Mrs. Tuchman has a rather
bland way of putting things. Only rarely, as in the Kissinger review, does her
prose effervesce. Mostly, it lacks fizz.  At one point, she cites as her idea of
''a well-made phrase'' the following sentence she had to throw out of ''The
Proud Tower'' for its lack of substance: ''Then occurred the intervention which
irretrievably bent the twig of events.'' But that isn't a good example because
it rather startles one by its ineptness. More representative of her blandness
would be her statement that ''Communication, after all, is what language was
invented for.'' One can't argue with that as one begins to snore.

Conviction Dated

The obviousness of this last suggests another problem with many of these essays.
They simply don't surprise us anymore. We know that in 1973 the American
Presidency was growing too big for the Constitution's britches, and that
Congress should trim President Nixon's sails by proceeding with his impeachment.
But Congress did proceed, and though we credit Mrs. Tuchman for taking such a
strong position as well as predicting that President Nixon would resign, the
fact remains that her conviction, and Mr. Nixon's lack of one, are dated. As for
a number of the other essays, which are essentially spin-offs of such books by
Mrs. Tuchman as ''The Zimmerman Telegram,'' ''The Guns of August,'' ''The Proud
Tower'' and ''Stilwell and the American Experience in China'': they lack the
punch of freshness because we happen to have read the books.

The most painful thing about one's torpor is that Mrs. Tuchman's heart and mind
are so often i n the right plac e, especially in her essays on Vietnam. But when
she writes a sent ence like the following one, paraphrasing Wordsworth's
graceful defin ition of poetry as ''emotion recollected in tranquillity'' - ''H
istory, one might say, is emotion plus action recollected or, in the case of
latterday historians, reflected on in tranquillity afte r a close and honest
examination of the records'' - what can one d o to protect oneself butgo to
sleep a little?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Barbara W. Tuchman

TYPE: Revie

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 316 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             September 30, 1981, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FROM NIXON AIDE TO KURALT'S CO-ANCHOR

BYLINE: By TONY SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1462 words


Tall, blond and undeniably glamorous, Diane Sawyer is 35 years old and has been
at CBS News two years. During the previous eight, she had worked for Richard M.
Nixon, first in the White House Press Office during his second Presidential term
and then in San Clemente, Calif., assisting in the writing of his memoirs.

Baldish, portly and faintly rumpled, Charles Kuralt is one of television's most
familiar faces. Now 47, he has spent the last 24 years reporting for CBS from
all 50 states as part of his ''On the Road'' series and from abroad, including
Africa and Vietnam.

On Monday, Miss Sawyer joined Mr. Kuralt as co-anchor of CBS's expanded version
of its morning newscast - now 90 minutes instead of 60 and retitled ''Morning
With Charles Kuralt and Diane Sawyer.''
Compatible Style

But if the addition of Miss Sawyer suggests an attempt to lighten up one of
television's more serious and straightforward news programs, then appearances
are deceiving. Although ''Morning'' has continued to attract half the audience
of ABC's ''Good Morning America'' or NBC's ''Today'' - both of which lace news
segments with celebrity interviews, consumer tips and soft features - CBS seems
committed to traveling the high road.

Miss Sawyer won her job precisely because her style and sensibility seemed so
compatible with the tone of the program. She is a person who reads voraciously
for relaxation but avoids modern novels because ''they seem like an indulgence
when you haven't done George Eliot justice.''

Right now, she says, she is rer eading Shake speare's collected plays, having
temporarily shelved plans to co nduct her own multidisciplinary
world-civilization course.

At the same time, Miss Sawyer can mix it up in the more practical arena of
politics. Her first interview as co-anchor was with James A. Baker 3d, President
Reagan's chief of staff, and she came out swinging, albeit decorously. She began
by suggesting that Mr. Reagan was headed ''for a smashing Congressional defeat''
on selling the Airborne Warning and Control System to Saudi Arabia and asked
whether he agreed that ''the Administration really bungled this one.'' Mr. Baker
ended up gamely insisting the Administration ought not to be counted out yet.

Covered Iranian Hostage Story

It was during the Iranian hostage crisis that Miss Sawyer put herself in the
running for the morning news job. As CBS's State Department correspondent in
Washington, she provided regular reports for the morning news and frequently
discussed them extemporaneously with Mr. Kuralt on the air. Their conversations,
sprinkled with historical and literary references, were regarded as a
distinctive counterpoint to the glib superficiality that so often characterizes
television news.

This improm ptu bantering on issues is what Shad Northshield, executive pro
ducer of ''Morning,'' hopes will become the classy signature of the expanded
program. Indeed, if Mr. Northshield's instinct is r ight, Mr. Kuralt and Miss
Sawyer might evolve into the ''Huntley and Brinkley of the 80's.''

2 Years in Louisville

For Miss Sawyer, the job represents the latest step in an astonishingly rapid
rise at CBS. The daughter of a Kentucky judge, she graduated from Wellesley
College and returned to Louisville, where she talked her way into a job as a
weather forecaster and correspondent at a television station. She had never done
any reporting previously.

She spent two years at the job, graduating to full-time reporter, and getting in
a semester of law school at night, and decided to move on. ''I felt sort of
nonspecifically undernourished,'' she remembers.

In 1970, at 24, Miss Sawyer got on a plane to Washington. She called a friend of
her father - Lamar Alexander, who worked in the Nixon Administration and is now
Governor of Tennessee - and he helped her get an interview. She was hired by Ron
Ziegler, Presidential press secretary, to write press releases.

'The Smart Girl'

She had no clearly defined ideology. ''I was catholic in my politics,'' she
said. ''I had also been interviewed on Capitol Hill, and if someone like George
McGovern had offered me a job, I'd almost certainly have taken it.''

She quickly developed loyalty to the White House. Her work - notably the draft
of a statement written for Mr. Nixon about his mother - caught his eye so that
when he wanted to see her, he asked for ''the smart girl.''

''You can't work in that kind of crucible and not become attached to the
people,'' Miss Sawyer said. ''You see the goals, the good goals people are
working toward. There were a lot of people there I liked and initiatives I
admired. For example, I think that the notion of giving states greater authority
to decide on how to spend Federal funds - revenue sharing - was a wonderful idea
at the time.''

By 1973, Watergate became the consuming subject at the White House. In the early
stages, it was not clear to Miss Sawyer that the Administration had clearly
committed any misdeeds. ''If you took each story individually, which I did in my
job for the Press Office,'' she said, ''and then asked the subjects about them,
it was possible to believe that there was a lot of distortion.''

Unswerving Loyalties

Dan Rather, the CBS newsman who was covering the White House, found Miss Sawyer
helpful but exceptionally discreet. ''She was a total nonsource, close to the
cuff,'' he says. ''But she was very competent at her job, and if you needed a
statistic or a spelling at the last minute, she was always the one you went
to.''

Even as the full Watergate story emerged, Miss Sawyer's loyalties remained
unswerving: ''At the time, I was very tormented by it all, but I don't know that
I was able objectively to stand back and render verdicts. I had developed this
notion that maybe if I worked longer hours, I could figure out what this was all
about. So I would get in at 5:45 in the morning and stay until 10:30 at night.
You have to remember the successive bruising, enervating waves that one went
through. By the end, I was numb from fatigue.''

When Mr. Nixon resigned and asked her to come along and work in San Clemente,
she accepted. ''I was really unhesitating,'' she says.  ''In a sense, I felt I
owed him that. I went to China with him, to Russia, and I was working at the
White House at the end of the war inVietnam. I was part of some very fine
moments . I can't imagine how people can look at themselves if they don't s tand
by other people when they are down or vulnerable.''

Retains Nixon Friendship

Miss Sawyer spent the next four years working on Mr. Nixon's memoirs, and still
retains a friendship with him:

''I spent a lot of time with him and I learned a great deal about
self-discipline and self-renewal during those years. I also really came to
appreciate the way in which experience hones perceptions. I wouldn't exchange
those years for anything.''

Miss Sawyer turned down network television offers around the end of the Nixon
Presidency, but in the middle of 1978, after she was approached again by CBS and
ABC, she accepted a job with CBS as a general-assignment reporter in Washington.

''I advised against hiring her,'' Mr. Rather said. ''I felt she had no
credibility, that she'd been discredited. But she was hired anyway and sh e
proved me wrong. She was a team player, taking the badassignments, working
weekends without complaining. And she was clearly a goo d reporter.''

''I don't think the transition I made is an easy one, and it has to be done very
conscientiously,'' Miss Sawyer said. ''But I felt I could be objective, fair and
tough, even on Nixon Administration stories. In the end, we agreed I wouldn't do
them, but I think I could have.''

Miss Sawyer calls herself ''a dreary believer in selfimprovement,'' and the
''Morning'' anchor job provides yet another opportunity for just that. ''Unlike
a lot of reporters, I've never been an anchor,'' she said, un-self-conscious
about the fact that she has been working on network television for two years.
''So for me, anchoring is an unexercised muscle, and working on a live program
is a way to round out one of the disciplines of being a television journalist.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Diane Sawyer

                   Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
