
                               1 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MANY AGENCIES JOINED IN RETRIEVING VIETNAM CHILDREN

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


A group of private American aid agencies accustomed to working together on
humanitarian undertakings arranged for the first substantial group of children
of American and Vietnamese parentage to leave Vietnam for this country.

The leading roles in the venture were shared by the Pearl S. Buck Foundation, an
organization created 18 years ago by Miss Buck, the novelist and Nobel Prize
winner, and Church World Service, the relief arm of the National Council of
Churches. For at least 15 years the council has sought American reconciliation
with the Vietnamese.

U.N. Commissioner Helped

Others helped significantly, among them the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, and Vietnam Veterans of America, with a membership of 10,000 former
servicemen.

The initial contact was made by a group from Church World Service, which held a
meeting on Aug. 23 in Ho Chi Minh City with Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach.
The group had a list of more than 60 names of Amerasian children whom they were
eager to bring to the United States, most or all the offspring of Americans.

They had a detailed file on one child, Jean Marie Tanous, the 15-year-old
daughter of Gary Tanous of Camus, Wash., and on the rest they had only names.
The Foreign Minister told the American group that the Tanous child and the 60
others could leave, according to Larry Hollon, a communications officer for
Church World Service.

Meanwhile, parallel negotiating efforts were being made by the Buck Foundation,
which has headquarters in Perkasie, Pa., through its office in Bangkok,
Thailand. Miss Buck, who was reared in China and whose greatest fame came from
novels set in China, created the foundation to help children in Korea with
American fathers. Over the years, it has extended help to 15,000 children.

Arrangements for the American group to go to Bangkok for the children were
pursued in Manhattan by the American Council of Voluntary Agencies for Foreign
Service, an umbrella organization for 47 independent private groups. This
council, which has headquarters at 200 Park Avenue South, maintains a data bank
on 350,000 Indochinese refugees in the United States and has for years been
filing away scraps of information about children of servicemen.

According to Leon O. Marion, the council's executive director, the Buck
Foundation and its director, John A. Shade Jr., recently assured the council
that a breakthrough was impending.

Arrangements Made in a Week

In less than a week, the arrangements were made for a delegation of the aid
agencies to fly to Asia to pick up the children. Free transportation from
Oakland, Calif., was obtained from the Intergovernmental Committee for
Migration, an organization supported by contributions from 29 governments that
has moved three million refugees.

As plans were made, a number of other organizations joined. One was the American
Friends Service Committee, a Quaker organization that has been seeking normal
relations with Vietnam. The others were Holt International Children's Services,
Americans for International Aid and Operation California.

The reason so many agencies were involved in flying to Ho Chi Minh City for a
visit of only a few hours was to demonstrate that ''there was a solid, working
cooperation,'' according to Greg Kane, director of the Vietnam Veterans.

Richard Walden, executive director of Operation California, was a pilot with the
Flying Tigers, the airline that operated after World War II in the Far East, and
is remembered by the aid agencies for filling a supply plane with relief goods
and flying it to Cambodia some years ago.

Airline Employees Involved

The Holt agency, based in Eugene, Ore., has brought many Asian children to this
country for adoption. Americans for International Aid is a small group formed by
airline personnel who volunteer escort service to get the newly arrived children
to their destination.

The group agreed that Dow Spencer, a member of Mr. Marion's umbrella group,
would play the key part in the arrangements because she was Vietnamese-born and,
as one official put it, ''didn't have an ax to grind.'' She was asked by the
agencies to be the representative for all when the team flew to Bangok and on to
Vietnam. Mrs. Spencer, who is married to an American psychiatrist, was educated
in the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

11 CHILDREN OF VIETNAM WAR HEAD 'HOME' TO U.S.

BYLINE: By STEVE LOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Sept. 30


Eleven children of mixed Vietnamese and American parentage arrived here today on
their way to the United States.

The children, aged 7 to 15, are headed for reunions with their fathers, whom
they have not seen in years. It is the largest group of so-called Amerasian
children to leave since the end of the Vietnam War in 1975.

United States officials and representatives of humanitarian organizations here
are cautiously hopeful this group is evidence that, after years of pressure, the
Vietnamese Government will allow more American-Vietnamese children to move to
America.

Indeed, Vietnamese officials in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, made the
surprise announcement today that 26 more Amerasians, with proper documentation,
were scheduled to be sent out on Oct. 7, followed by another sizable group on
Nov. 15.

U.S. Must Check Documentation

The documentation for the other groups must be checked by the American side,
government and private officials caution. ''But if those dates hold, we are
seeing more than a symbolic gesture,'' said John A. Shade Jr., director of the
Pearl S. Buck Foundation.

The American Embassy in Bangkok has files on 3,740 Amerasians who want to leave
Vietnam and it estimates that the total number who want to get out is between
8,000 and 10,000. Private agencies estimate the total number of Amerasians in
Vietnam at 25,000 or more.

The Vietnamese Government has repeatedly stated that it has no policy of
discrimination against children of American-Vietnamese parentage. American
Government officials generally say they believe the Vietnamese claims.

The children suffer from discrimination nonetheless, according to American and
European officials. They sometimes end up as street peddlers, selling peanuts,
candy or movie tickets.

Life Can Be 'Pretty Grim'

''These are kids who look different,'' said Donald I. Colin, director of the
United States Orderly Departure Program, which is part of the American Embassy
in Bangkok.  ''That hurts them and their mothers too, as the former consorts of
the enemy. Their life can be pretty grim.''

For the seven girls and four boys who flew to Bangkok, it was a day of subdued
joy, the anticipation of adventure and a few tears at the thought of friends and
relatives left behind. A couple of the children had blondish hair, but most were
dark, though their eyes tended to be more rounded than those of Asians.  They
spoke Vietnamese and just a few words of English, if any. On the subject of
their futures, the most frequent reply, in Vietnamese, was, ''I have American
blood and I am going where I belong.''

Reunion Is a Big Hug

Gary Tanous of Vancouver, Wash., was the only father who made the trip; the
other reunions will take place in the United States. Mr.  Tanous had not seen
his daughter, Jean Marie, in 14 years. The touching if anxious reunion in Ho Chi
Minh City was a big hug.

''At first she was very nervous, as I was,'' Mr. Tanous said in Bangkok tonight.
''But she loosened up a lot and so have I. It will be fine.''

The children will be going to homes in the District of Columbia, Georgia, Texas,
Arizona, Oregon, California and Washington. All but one of the children will
live with their fathers. In one case, the father has died and the child will
live with the father's family.

Among Amerasians, the children in the group were the fortunate ones. Most were
accompanied by relatives, and they were all moving into established family
environments in households that want them.

''These kids are golden,'' said Robert W. Eaton, an official of the American
Friends Service Committee.  It is the other children, whose fathers have not
stepped forward to claim their paternity, that are the much more difficult
problem, given the documentation requirements of American law.

Because of these requirements, an opening up by the Vietnamese Government may
not bring many more Amerasians out. The United States may not be able to accept
them. ''The pressures could well now be on America on the Amerasian issue,'' Mr.
Shade noted.

To be documented as an American citizen, a child born overseas out of wedlock
must be legitimized by the father. In 22 states, the father can do this by
declaring his paternity and sponsoring the child in America, without marrying
the mother.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of father and daughter photo of Amerasian children
(Page A1)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

'SHARON, KING OF ISRAEL,' SEPHARDIC TOWN CHANTS

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1119 words

DATELINE: KIRYAT MALACHI, Israel, Sept. 30


The banner across the stage Wednesday night read, ''Kiryat Malachi Welcomes the
Volunteers'' - Americans who had come to Israel to help the war effort -but the
shouting, foot-stamping and applause in the packed community hall was for
someone else, Ariel Sharon.

Mr. Sharon, Israel's Defense Minister, arrived not to expressions of disapproval
for the army's role in the Beirut massacre but to ''Arik, Melech Israel,'' a
chant substituting the familiar form of his first name for the name David in the
Hebrew song, ''David, King of Israel.'' He left to the same approbation.

Kiryat Malachi, 10 miles from Israel's port of Ashkelon, was set up as a
development town 30 years ago, when Jews from Middle Eastern countries were
arriving in large numbers. The Sephardic residents still have strong views about
Arabs, and have long represented firm support for Prime Minister Menahem Begin's
Herut Party.

That was clear at the rally, with speaker after speaker using the welcoming
ceremony to reject criticism of Israel for permitting Christian militiamen into
Palestinian refugees camps. Hundreds of men, women and children were killed at
the camps.

'We Didn't Kill'

''Because of one incident we forget why we went to war,'' said Meir Shitrit, a
Member of Parliament and Mayor of Yavneh, a kibbutz near Tel Aviv. ''We didn't
kill. The Lebanese killed.''

Others said Israel was a victim of prejudice, oil interests or unfair criticism
by the opposition Labor Party. Moshe Katziv, a former Mayor of this town, said
the Labor Party ''doesn't know how to act.''

There were more than 500 residents in the steamy hall. Many of the men were
bearded and wore skullcaps. It was a Sephardic audience, and possibly their
biggest night in years. They applauded the Americans, sat patiently through the
tributes and waited for Arik.

There were the traditional gifts -flowers and a framed photograph of the town -
and one especially popular moment when Haviv Alon, the director of the community
hall, came to the microphone with his 2-year-old son folded into an arm.

'No Hero Like Ariel'

''Since Judah Maccabee, there has been no hero like Ariel Sharon,'' he said.
''And so two years ago, when my son was born, I named him Sharon.'' There were
cheers, and later, there was a similar announcement: a child born that evening
in Kiryat Malachi had been named Ariel.

With each tribute, the Defense Minister half stood and bowed, his heavy frame
looming over the speakers' table. And, finally, it was his turn to speak. He did
so in English, for the volunteers, and then in Hebrew.

''I don't know which is worse - laboring in the workshops or listening to long
speeches,'' he told the Americans, who wore khaki uniforms and filled several
front rows.

The audience, which had shown no impatience, laughed. At one point, when the
master of ceremonies stood in an apparent move to cut short a long speech by the
local rabbi, there were boos, whistles and catcalls. The master of ceremonies
sat down.

'That Terrible Tragedy'

Mr. Sharon welcomed the volunteers, saying they would be followed by ''thousands
of Jewish volunteers because we need you.'' He said the heart of the Jewish
people was in Israel, ''but the body is still spread around the world.''

Then he spoke of Israel's ''defensive war'' in Lebanon as a ''tremendous
achievement,'' marred only by the Beirut killings. ''Not one of our soldiers or
officers participated in that terrible tragedy,'' he said. The hall was silent.

''The Israeli Government decided to investigate, and within a week an
investigation committee has been formed,'' he said.  There was no mention of the
days after the massacre when Israeli leaders were silent, and only a hint of why
Mr. Begin first rejected an inquiry and then agreed to one.

''We are establishing a committee of inquiry, not under pressure of this person
or that person, or of public opinion,'' he said. The mention of pressure was an
allusion to calls by opposition members of Parliament for an inquiry.

A Slap at the Opposition

Switching to Hebrew, he said, ''I insisted that the political echelon be
investigated and the military echelons be investigated and I, as a Defense
Minister, feel - unlike what was previously accepted - ministerial
responsibility for what is happening in the army.''

The comment about ministerial responsibility was an allusion to the inquiry into
the 1973 war by a Labor Party Government. That investigation exonerated Moshe
Dayan, who was then the Defense Minister, while blaming army leaders for
setbacks early in the conflict.

This time, Mr. Sharon said, ''if the army is found guilty I shall assume
responsibility upon myself.'' The audience applauded, and Mr. Sharon responded:
''No one on earth can teach us about attitudes toward human life. We know the
meaning of life better than anyone in the world.''

'It Is Character Massacre'

''What is being done to Israel around the world is character assassination -it
is character massacre!'' he shouted. There was a roar of approval.

''How long did it take to investigate Watergate, or what happened in Vietnam?''
he asked, again criticizing the ''wild attacks'' on Israel.

The meeting hall, which resembled the site of an election rally, echoed again
and again with political thrusts at the Labor Party and attacks against what Mr.
Sharon said were efforts from the outside to divide Israel.

The criticism by outsiders, he said, is aimed at preparing ''the ground for
plans, such as Mr. Reagan's, which threaten out security.''

Anger Over News Accounts

The volunteers seemed angered by news accounts of the Beirut massacre,
indicating that they felt much of the criticism against Israel was a product of
distorted reporting.

Bernie Needelman, a volunteer from Jamaica Estates, Queens, suggested that
''reporters talk to Government officials instead of the opposition if they want
information.'' He also asked ''why an investigation did not take place in
Hama,'' a Syrian city where more than 5,000 civilians died at the hands of the
Syrian Army.

Outside, Mr. Sharon said a few words to more than 100 residents who had not been
able to join the 500 to 600 inside. The crowd pressed in, and the police
responded aggressively, slamming people away from his car. Finally, it roared
away, to a rhythmic, ''Arik, Melech Israel.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a crowd at Beirut International Airport

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW QUESTIONS ARISE OVER WAR ACT

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 663 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30


The death of a United States marine in Lebanon today has focused new attention
on President Reagan's decision to send troops to Lebanon and has led to new
questions about the authority of the War Powers Act.

The act was passed in November 1973 over President Nixon's veto and, as the
Vietnam era closed, took on symbolic importance as a signal of the determination
of Congress to have a greater voice in foreign policy issues. The act requires
the President to notify Congress within 48 hours if he commits American troops
to combat and to withdraw those troops within 60 days unless Congess authorizes
the commitment.

President Reagan took note of the act Wednesday when he told Congress that
Americans would be included in a temporary multinational force, ''which will
facilitate the restoration of Lebanese Government sovereignty and authority.''
He said his report was ''consistent with the War Powers Resolution,'' but he did
not put his decision under the terms of the act.

That subtle difference emerged at the heart of discussions today over the
involvement of American troops in Lebanon and, ultimately, over the question of
Mr. Reagan's responsibilities under the act.

Reagan's Pledge Is Restated

Under the act the President is required, ''in every possible instance,'' to
consult with Congress before American forces, without a declaration of war, are
introduced ''into hostilities or into situations where imminent involvement in
hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstaces.''

Mr. Reagan has persistently said that there was no intention that American
forces be exposed to combat during their Middle East mission. Rush Taylor, a
State Department spokesman, repeated the pledge today, saying that ''there is no
intention or expectation that these forces will become involved in
hostilities.''

Two major architects of the act expressed concern, however, that American troops
had in fact been placed in hostile circumstances.  They said that they believed
that the act applied to situations like the one facing the marines in the Middle
East.

''It's such a chaotic siutuation,'' said former Senator Jacob K.  Javits of New
York. ''How can you pretend for a minute that there is no imminent danger when
you put marines in Lebanon?''

Representative Clement J. Zablocki, Democrat of Wisconsin, said the death of the
American marine, which has been characterized as accidental, ''only reinforces
the question of whether there may be imminent hostilities.''

'You're Bound to Get Cut'

Mr. Zablocki likened the Lebanon situation to a man walking barefoot in a glass
factory. ''You're bound to get cut,'' he said.  He said that any further
incidents would put Mr. Reagan in the position of putting himself under the
strictures of the act. ''If there should be further casualties, and if they are
in an area of imminent hostilities, I believe the President must report to us
under the resolution,'' he said. ''I believe he will have no alternative.''

The law, enacted after a three-year struggle, was regarded as a landmark effort
by Congress to delineate the war-making powers of the legislative and executive
branches of the Government. It represented the response of Congress to
Presidents Johnson and Nixon, who conducted a military engagement in Vietnam
without a Congressional declaration of war.

Mr. Nixon regarded the law as ''clearly unconstitutional'' and vetoed it. The
Congressional override of his veto was one of his worst legislative defeats
outside of the Watergate scandal.

Under the law, a President's report must set forth the circumstances requiring
the involvement of American troops, the authority under which the troops are to
be introduced and the estimated scope and duration of the hostilities of
involvement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Maps and locations of troops in Lebanon (Page A8)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SIHANOUK APPEALS TO U.N. TO RETAIN CAMBODIA'S SEAT

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Sept. 30


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former ruler of Cambodia who now heads a coalition
of forces opposed to the occupation of that country, told the United Nations
General Assembly today that his government was not a government in exile.

He said the government actually in Phnom Penh ''had no real existence'' and was
under the control of Vietnamese occupying authorities.

His followers inside Cambodia, Prince Sihanouk said, had liberated and held
large parts of the occupied nation despite the efforts of the Soviet-backed
Vietnamese Army. In July, he said, he visited his followers in three liberated
zones in Cambodia, traveling by car, on foot and on elephants, deep in the
Cambodian interior.

Hanoi Will Not Negotiate

He said that despite his efforts to seek a peaceful solution to the Cambodian
problem, he had been informed by the Vietnamese leaders that they would not
negotiate with a man who, in their words, ''no longer represented anything'' and
was ''politically finished.''

He said that since it was now clear that Vietnam planned to occupy Cambodia
indefinitely, ''I find myself compelled to commit myself to a tripartite
coalition and to join, pacifist though I am, the armed struggle so that our
country may one day become, yet once more, master of its destiny.''

The 60-year-old Prince, who lives mostly in Peking and Pyongyang, North Korea,
said: ''I feel no hatred towards Vietnam. I have never ceased to recognize that
the geographical position of our two countries makes them neighbors to the end
of time.''

Principal members of the coalition which the Prince now heads are the remnants
of the leftist Pol Pot regime.  The former Cambodian leader is at the General
Assembly to try to prevent it from declaring Cambodia's seat open. This, he
said, is Vietnam's chief goal at the current session. The General Assembly has
backed away from such a declaration in three previous sessions, and diplomats
here predict that the anti-Vietnamese group may even pick up several extra votes
this session.

Opposes International Conference

Prince Sihanouk, who was deposed as Cambodia's head of state by Lon Nol in the
late 1960's, said he would oppose any international conference on Cambodia
arranged by Vietnam with the support of the Soviet Union. Such a meeting, he
said, would be to push for de facto recognition of the regime of Heng Samrin,
the current leader of Cambodia.

The President of the General Assembly, Imre Hollai of Hungary, was absent from
the session today for both Prince Sihanouk's speech as well as the speech by
Foreign Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel.

Bhaskar P. Menon, a spokesman for the Assembly President, said Mr.  Hollai had
to keep previous appointments - meetings with the Foreign Ministers of Poland
and China and the Prime Minster of Portugal.

France Criticizes U.S. and Soviet

In other speeches at today's session, Prime Minister Pierre Mauroy of France
accused the United States and the Soviet Union of ''blindness'' to the needs of
other nations in seeking their own goals.

The United States, Mr. Mauroy said, is wrecking the international monetary
system to pursue its own interests. ''It sets,'' he said, ''its budgetary and
monetary policy without taking into account the possible consequences to other
states.''

''In the East,'' he continued, ''the other superpower continues, directly or
indirectly, to make use of military force to oppose peoples' wishes to determine
their own future.

''This blindness on the part of the two superpowers,'' Mr. Mauroy said, ''is
without doubt one of the principal causes of the world's present disorders.''

The Foreign Minister of Greece, Ioannis Haralambopoulos, called for support for
a proposal advanced several months ago by his Prime Minister, Andreas
Papandreou, tht all foreign troops be withdrawn from Cyprus and replaced by an
enlarged United Nations peacekeeping force.

The Greek official compared the Cyprus problem to the crises in Cambodia and
Afghanistan. ''Greece has consistently and firmly condemned all acts of invasion
and foreign occupation, regardless of who is the aggressor,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WAIFS OF GUATEMALA FIND A RESPITE FROM RAVAGES OF POVERTY AND WAR

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words

DATELINE: GUATEMALA


He is a quiet little boy, even for this orphanage where many children have much
to be silent about. And until now Domingo Caal had never talked about the day,
four months ago, when he saw his parents murdered.

He looks about 8 years old - he does not know his age - although he seemed older
when he arrived here May 13 wearing a little green military uniform and oversize
black boots.

''The army brought him in,'' said John Wetterer, whose home is in Massapequa,
L.I. ''They said he was the only survivor in his village. That's all I know
about him.''

Domingo now wanders the halls of Mi Casa, a home for 226 Guatemalan orphans and
homeless boys started by Mr. Wetterer, a 34-year-old Vietnam veteran who
previously ran an orphanage in Saigon.

Many Die in Massacres

Now that the guerrilla war in Guatemala and the military counteroffensive are
reaching a pitch not seen before in this country's long history of violence,
thousands of children are inevitably affected. Many die with their families in
massacres.  Others lose their parents in the turmoil, and refugees arriving in
Mexico frequently bring young children covered with burns or machete wounds.

No one knows the number of young victims or orphans, above all because in this
Indian culture the extended family absorbs many waifs.

The past lives of the boys at Mi Casa, however, testify to more than the
violence of war. Aged 5 to 16, they make up a collage of the many sorrows that
have pursued this beautiful and mysterious Central American country.

Some arrived soon after Feb. 4, 1976, the day when earthquakes brought roofs
crashing down in some 6,000 Indian villages. About 23,000 people were killed and
many of the boys here lost their whole families.

Infant Mortality Is High

For some of the tough little youngsters, life had always been a disaster on the
streets of a nation where 50 percent of the workforce is unemployed and over
half the deaths in any given year are of children under 5 years of age. There
are boys like Jorge, for example, who arrived completely bald and with stomach
swollen from the malnutrition that affects 80 percent of the country's children.

Some urchins, like Fernando, used to tramp the streets of the capital with
matted hair and in rags. And as the street waifs here still do, they slept under
buses and in doorways, covered with newspapers. In the daytime they scrambled
for food or shined shoes.

Other boys have been in jail and were brought to Mi Casa by the police. Jose
Luis still has a mother but her eight children all live in one room. ''There was
no more space for me,'' Jose Luis whispered.

But newcomers like Nelson, whose mother was shot in front of him, are from the
highlands where the Indians, long subjugated by whites and mestizos, began to
give support to the leftist-led guerrillas and often joined them. In the army's
counterinsurgency drive, many Indian families are being killed.

Home Is a Former Hospital

Mr. Wetterer had originally planned an open house for only 30 boys in 1975, but
he slowly resigned himself to accepting most boys that came his way. In Vietnam
he tended to 600 children, from newborn babies to 6-year-olds, but that
experience taught him that the need for a home is greatest among older boys.

''People easily take in babies or abandoned little girls because they seem less
trouble or are looked on as a future source of help in the house,'' Mr. Wetterer
said. ''Ten-year-old boys are less appealing. They're troublesome. So here also
they're the ones that need a home.''

Pressure eased somewhat last year when he moved with 173 boys from a
three-bedroom house into an abandoned private hospital. He turned sickrooms into
classrooms because most of the boys who arrive are illiterate. And with the help
of volunteer teachers he now runs a school up to eighth grade.

The older boys have helped build the bunk beds and simple, sturdy tables and
chairs, while Mr. Wetterer had his own small above-ground swimming pool shipped
down from New York. A cook runs the kitchen - 800 tortillas alone are gobbled up
at each meal - but the boys wash the dishes and keep the place clean.

Friends in U.S. Help Out

But Mr. Wetterer, who began adult life in the personnel office of the Chase
Manhattan Bank before being sent to Vietnam, alone bears the responsibility for
keeping the boys fed and clothed. He says that the bare minimum of $40 needed
per boy a month ''comes from friends and acquaintances in the United States,
many of whom send small donations.'' American manufacturers at times also donate
toothpaste, soap or shoes.

Many of the boys have been forced to learn rudimentary English because Mr.
Wetterer's Spanish is still poor and, in any event, he prefers to address them
as ''gentlemen.'' In the evening, when Tio Juan, as he is called, is the only
adult to keep order, a bevy of little boys crawl in front of the only television
set. At bedtime there is a special room for the children whose various traumas
keep them bed-wetting.

There are no social workers, psychologists or other experts to turn to for
advice. ''I give the boys a sense they belong here and peer pressure keeps them
moving,'' Mr. Wetterer said. ''But there isn't time to find out what goes on in
their minds. No doubt many have deep emotional scars.''

Domingo Caal, for example, had not talked about the day when he saw his parents
killed in an unknown village in the province of Baja Verapaz. In front of a
recent visitor to the orphanage, he only smiled and plucked at his shirt.

Brutal Truth Comes Out

Then suddenly the words came. He was in bed when two men ran into his house,
shouting ''Hands up!'' he remembered. ''One has a red shirt, one a yellow
shirt,'' said Domingo, who speaks little Spanish and uses only the present
tense.

Domingo jumped up, imitating the posture of gunmen and the sound of shots.
''Three times they shoot my father, two times my mama,'' he said. And
demonstrating how his sister's hands were tied behind her back, he added, ''They
take away my sister.''

When the gunmen left, Domingo came out of hiding. ''I touch my father and
mother,'' he went on. ''I say many times papa, mama, but they don't hear. Then a
fire starts and I throw water on it.''

As Domingo tells the story, he cried that night until he fell asleep by his
parents' side. The next day he found that five houses next to his own had been
burned down. ''All the friends of my father and my friends are dead,'' Domingo
said, nervously swinging his legs.

A few hours later soldiers found Domingo hiding in the village.  They took him
first to the military base at Coban and later they left him here, Mr. Wetterer
said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dimingo Caal photo of orphanage

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Accepts U.S. Aid In Identifying Remains

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


Vietnam has agreed for the first time to allow United States technicians to
visit and give training in the identification of human remains in the search for
Americans missing since the Vietnam War, the State Department said today.

''We appreciate this response to our longstanding proposals for such visits,''
said Alan Romberg, a State Department spokesman.  ''The Vietnamese have agreed
to four visits annually, the first of which could take place before the end of
this year,'' he said.  Americans have trained Vietnamese in identification
procedures before, most recently in Hawaii in August, on an irregular basis.
Hanoi's acceptance of the proposal means American technicans may now visit
Vietnam on a regular basis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LULL IN ISRAELI DEBATE;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1289 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Oct. 1


For the moment, the establishment of a judicial commission to investigate the
Beirut massacre appears to have stabilized Prime Minister Menachem Begin's
political coalition.

It has taken the edge off the charges of a Government cover-up and has blunted
some of the debate over the degree of Israeli responsibility for the killings,
which were carried out by Lebanese Christian militiamen in Palestinian refugee
camps.

Officials who were forced to react to daily disclosures in the Israeli press
have now taken refuge behind the propriety of saying nothing during the course
of the inquiry. Restive politicians in Mr.  Begin's Government have suspended
their pressure for the ouster of Defense Minister Ariel Sharon pending the
outcome of the investigation.

This could take some months. The three members of the panel - two Supreme Court
judges and a retired general - were named today, and they are to start work only
after the Succoth holiday, which ends next Friday. An investigative and clerical
staff of about 20 people, probably headed by another judge, will gradually be
assembled to examine documents and arrange for witnesses to testify in closed
hearings.

The Commission Members

The chairman is Yitzhak Kahan, the 69-year-old Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court. He appointed another judge, Aharon Barak, a former Attorney General who
was Prime Minister Begin's legal adviser at Camp David and one of those who
drafted the framework for peace with Egypt. The third member is a major general
in the army reserves, Yona Efrat, 56, who commanded the Golani Brigade in the
1967 war and was later commander of the central front. He now heads a fuel
transport company.

The commission, originally opposed by Prime Minister Begin, was decided upon by
the Cabinet on Tuesday after intense political pressure from inside and outside
the Government. Paradoxically, it seems to have given Mr. Sharon a confident
demeanor, for he has now lost his hunted look as he smilingly fends off
questions about what he knew and when he knew it, why he sent the Christians
into the refugee camps in the first place and other crucial matters, saying he
cannot interfere with the investigation by answering.

In addition, a backlash has developed in favor of Mr. Begin and Mr. Sharon among
the masses of their lower-class supporters, many of whom are angry at the
outside world's tendency to blame Israel for the killings.

Last Sunday, a few toughs in a Jerusalem marketplace attacked a mobile Israel
radio van and its crew, shouting that the station had smeared the name of
Israel. Wednesday evening in Kiryat Malachi, a development town with a heavy
population of Jews from Middle East and North African countries, Mr. Sharon was
greeted by a foot-stomping, cheering crowd chanting his nickname, Arik, in a
cadence of ''Arik, Melech Israel!'' (''Arik, King of Israel!'')

Erosion in Support

The first public-opinion polls since the massacre have shown an erosion in
support for Mr. Begin's Government, but not to a politically fatal extent. A
survey done by the Modiin Ezrahi research institute just before and just after
the massacre found that according to those questioned, Mr. Begin's Likud bloc
would receive 60 seats, exactly half those in Parliament, if elections were held
now, as opposed to 64 seats just before the massacre. It won 48 seats in the
1981 elections, and governs with four other parties in a coalition that now
commands 62 seats.

The survey, published today in The Jerusalem Post, found the opposition Labor
Party picking up support, moving from 34 seats just before the massacre to 39
just afterward. It won 47 seats in last year's elections, and has since been
joined by three more legislators from other parties, for a total of 50. Support
for the small parties was scarcely affected by the massacre, the poll found,
with only the Orthodox party Agudath Israel and the right-wing Tehiya Party
dropping by one seat each.

To maintain popular support, Mr. Begin and Mr. Sharon have relied heavily on
Israel's siege mentality, whipping up a furor over what they have called
attempts by the Reagan Administration to replace their Government with a
coalition led by the Labor Party. These arguments, begun after President Reagan
put forth a peace plan similar to the positions of the Labor leader, Shimon
Peres, have been pursued now and expanded into an outpouring of virulent
anti-American propaganda unlike anything seen in Israel in years.

'Jerusalem Is Not Saigon!'

''Jerusalem is not Saigon!'' Mr. Sharon shouted at the rally Wednesday, an
allusion to the American role in overthrowing Ngo Dinh Diem, Prime Minister of
South Vietnam. More dramatically, the weekly magazine of Mr. Begin's Likud bloc
published a cover and two articles this week containing accusations about the
United States similar to those often published in the Soviet press.

The cover of the magazine, titled Yoman Ha-Shavua (Weekly Diary), showed a
hapless Mr. Begin standing at the end of a huge American flag, whose red stripes
became large red fingers as they ran off the edge of the flag and wrapped
themselves around the Prime Minister.

''The Americans are trying to overthrow the Government,'' read the main
headline. ''Thus Operates the C.I.A. in Israel,'' read the one beneath.

Inside, the stories criticized ''The Arabist Secretary of State George Schultz''
for the Reagan peace plan. They insinuated that the American Embassy in Tel Aviv
had tried to woo the National Religious Party away from the governing coalition.
They accused the Reagan Administration of distributing ''disinformation'' and
''anti-Israeli news'' and of trying ''with all its might to weaken the
Government of Israel and thereby to bring about its fall.''

Assertions of C.I.A. Role

The Likud magazine also published a photograph of the roof of the United States
Embassy in Tel Aviv, with a spherical antenna highlighted. ''Revelation,'' the
headline said. ''Security official tells Yoman Ha-Shavua: The Americans (C.I.A.)
are gathering intelligence data on every senior Israeli official.'' The caption
read: ''From the outside it is difficult to tell what goes on inside the
building. A picture of the roof of the building from above reveals the
sophisticated network of antennas leading to the intelligencegathering command,
which is located within the building.''

The article quoted from a 1979 embassy cable analyzing the Begin Government's
political strength. The cable concluded, ''There are three causes that could
lead to the fall of the Government: religion, the economy and foreign policy.''

''This sentence,'' the magazine said, ''raises the idea that perhaps the United
States is operating behind the scenes to bring the Israeli Government to an end.
The embassy in Tel Aviv is an intelligence-gathering station, explains a high
official. Everything that happens in Israel falls under its hands. It collects,
with great detail, every security or political detail and files it away.''

Such emotional appeals to patriotism may have an impact. But the ultimate fate
of the coalition is likely to rest on decisions by politicians, especially

National Religious Party members, who have begun to express distress with Mr.
Sharon and the current Government. Their shifting attitudes may take some time
to play themselves out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 685 words


How High Is High?

D emocrats have long been envious of the Republicans' Midas touch in raising big
money for their campaign coffers, but in at least one fund-raising field the
Democrats have one-upped the Grand Old Party.

After Republicans won control of the Senate in 1980, Senator Alan Cranston,
Democrat of California, concluded that one reason for the opposition's success
was fund-raising sophistication. The Senator was particularly impressed with the
exclusive Republican Eagles Club, so he asked one of his Republican colleagues
how much Eagles pay for their membership and was told $20,000 a year.

Mr. Cranston, thinking Democrats could never soar up there with the Eagles,
began trying to sell memberships in the Senate Democratic Leadership Circle,
which he organized in 1981, for $15,000 a year, and worried that even that was
asking too much.

''Then I found out the Eagles only contributed $10,000 a year,'' said the
Senator, who decided to go ahead and see if anyone would sign up at the higher
fee.

He and some party colleagues soon discovered that fat-cat contributors weren't
all on the Republican side. So far, Mr. Cranston said, the Circle has raised
more than $2.8 million.
New Era, New Image

T he Albert Einstein Peace Prize Foundation is presenting its annual Peace
Laureate awards this year to McGeorge Bundy, Robert S.  McNamara and Gerard C.
Smith. Mr. Bundy, a foreign policy adviser to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson,
and Mr. McNamara, who served as Secretary of Defense to the same Presidents,
became controversial figures in the 1960's because they supported American
military involvement in Vietnam. Mr. Smith, a former director of the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency, was President Carter's Special Representative
for Nonproliferation Matters.
'Zone of Protection'

U nder legislation passed by the House and now making way through the Senate,
Amy Carter would be entitled to the same Secret Service ''zone of protection''
that is currently provided only to the President of the United States. That's
not the purpose of the proposed law, but if its provisions were applied
strictly, getting too close to the children of a former President, as long as
they remained under Secret Service protection, would carry the same penalty as
violating the security space around President Reagan.

Senator Jeremiah Denton, Republican of Alabama, who is one of the bill's
sponsors, contends that the Secret Service should have the authority to extend
the same ''zone of protection'' to any person under its shield. The zone concept
means that protected individuals are kept within a secure space, the size of
which varies, to which only authorized persons are admitted.

Under current law, the Senator said, violation of a Secret Service security zone
is a criminal offense only when it involves the President.
Outlet for Publicity

W ashington probably has the greatest concentration of reporters and television
cameras of any world capital, but apparently it is not enough to satisfy the
city's publicity addicts. Earlier this year The Washingtonian magazine, which
says it reaches ''the people who count,'' began running full-page promotion
advertisements showing some prominent residents explaining why they are loyal
readers of the magazine.

Among the stars of the glossy ads have been Senators Paul Laxalt and David
Pryor, Murray L. Weidenbaum, former chairman of the President Reagan's Council
of Economic Advisers, and Representative Millicent Fenwick. Stars scheduled for
future issues include Senator Strom Thurmond and Nancy Reynolds, Bendix
Corporation vice president and friend of Nancy Reagan.

The ads have become so popular, according to the magazine's editors, that a
number of Washington V.I.P.s have volunteered to appear in them.  Phil Gailey

Warren Weaver Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 54, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 540 words


Questions appear on page 20.  1. To rebuild its depleted reserves of foreign
exchange, Poland will market abroad gold and silver coins depicting the face of
Pope John Paul II.

2. In Israel, protesters demanded the ouster of Prime Minister Menachem Begin
over the Beirut massacre. Mr. Begin, bowing to pressure, agreed to establish a
full-fledged judicial commission to investigate the incident.

3. Mrs. Phipps, whose great-great-great-great grandmother was black, is suing to
have herself declared white. Louisiana, the only state with an equation for
determining race, considers any person with one thirty-second of Negro blood as
being black.

4. It was the first day of fiscal year 1983.  5. Marriott Hotels Inc. was hiring
296 people, a complete staff for a new hotel.  6. ''Silent Spring'' by Rachel
Carson.  7. Many of the executives are assigned to examine Federal agencies that
regulate their corporations.  8. The Chrysler Corporation. A puzzle aimed at
college students that contains riddles woven into what appears to be a child's
story about a fallen star.

9. He is an American.  10. West Germany. Since it won 9 seats in an election in
Hesse state, the Green Party will hold the balance between the Christian
Democrats, with 52 seats, and the Social Democrats, with 49 seats.

11. Houston. As a result of the overpumping of its subterranean water, the city
has sunk four feet in the past eight decades and is continuing to sink.

12. Illegal.  13. The slow deaths by nuclear radiation of a slightly bumbling
middle-aged couple in their home in the English countryside.  14. The Siberian
pipeline sanction imposed by the United States.  15. They are children of
American servicemen and civilians who served in the Vietnam War.  16. $70
million.  17. The Reagan Administration would be sympathetic to a trade-in of
Westway funds for mass transit.  18. The Clinch River breeder reactor project,
the nation's first plutonium-fueled nuclear breeder reactor.  19. Marionettes
mimed the actions depicted in the music while the roles were narrated.  20. The
acquisition of the Fidelity Savings and Loan Association of California enables a
New York bank for the first time to collect consumer deposits in California.

21. Mr. Marin, a Republican from North Carolina, is seeking a seat in the House
of Representatives. $70 million.  22. Pamela Harriman.  23. In Teaneck, N.J., 83
teachers and other school employees were held under sheriff's guard at a school
for defying a court order to end their 14-day strike.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHILDREN CONTINUE TRIP TO AMERICA

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Children of mixed American and Vietnamese parentage, preparing to board
a plane in Bangkok for Hong Kong. Sunday they will fly to Los Angeles and from
there they will travel to the homes of their fathers. They were accompanied by
Gary Tasnous, rear, the father of one of them. The children, aged 7 to 15, are
the first of a sizeable number who will be allowed to make the trip. Associated
Press

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WILLIAM BERNBACH, ADVOCATE OF THE SOFT SELL IN ADVERTISING, DIES AT 71

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 45, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words


William Bernbach, the founder and former chairman of the Doyle Dane Bernbach
advertising agency, died of leukemia yesterday at New York Hospital. He was 71
years old, and lived in Manhattan.

Perhaps more than any other person of his time, Mr. Bernbach changed the face of
advertising in the United States, steering it away from the old clangorous,
often vulgar, hard sell toward low-key, provocative and usually believable sales
messages.

With campaigns for Volkswagen, Avis Rent A Car, Polaroid, Levy's Jewish Rye
Bread, American Airlines, Colombian coffee and Ohrbach's department store, Mr.
Bernbach and his agency relied on uncluttered, often irreverent, humor and a
warmth that was not maudlin.

Successful Slogans

''Think Small'' were the only words on a full-page ad for Volkswagen, which
pictured the tiny Beetle somewhere on a sea of blank space. Another version said
simply: ''Lemon.''

''We Try Harder Because We're Number 2,'' was the slogan for Avis.  ''You don't
have to be Jewish to love Levy's,'' proclaimed the copy under a smiling Oriental
or black face eating a rye-bread sandwich.  The success of the campaigns, as
measured in soaring sales revenue for the advertisers, turned much of Madison
Avenue into fertile ground for what came to be known as creative agencies and
people in the 1960's and 1970's, and it spelled prosperity for Doyle Dane
Bernbach.

The agency founded by Mr. Bernbach, Ned Doyle and Maxwell Dane in 1949 with less
than $500,000 in billings is today the nation's 10thlargest agency, with $1.2
billion in annual billings, 2,900 employees and 27 subsidiary offices in 16
countries of Europe, Asia, Australia and North and Central America.

Conscience and Creativity

Mr. Bernbach, a small, mild-mannered man with blue-gray eyes, was regarded by
colleagues as a voice of conscience as well as creativity in his agency. He
wrote many of the advertisements himself, edited all the major work of others
and taught scores of young people. His agency over the years was regularly
raided for personnel by other agencies.

''Creativity can be something talked about, like the weather or sin,'' Mr.
Bernbach once told an interviewer. ''We really sweat at it here. We believe that
good taste can be good selling. The whole history of art and literature is the
effort of a people to try and say or create something in a fresh, imaginative
way.''

He saw the role of advertising as not merely to sell a product or service, but
if possible to improve it. In taking over the Avis account in 1960, for example,
Mr. Bernbach formulated the ''we try harder'' idea, and then sent
representatives out to Avis offices to sell employees on it.

Mr. Bernbach consistently broke rules followed by other agencies.  He regarded
research with skepticism and often followed his own instincts even when research
data indicated another course. His agency did not rely on elaborate marketing
plans, and its writers and artists did not hold lengthy brainstorming sessions.

He Wanted 'Deep Insights'

His method was to sit at a large circular table and quietly discuss ideas with
his staff, and he tried to insulate ''creative'' personnel from the pressures of
account executives and advertising clients.  ''Artistry, by and large, is having
deep insights into human nature and then expressing it in a very, very fresh way
- an original way,'' he explained.

Besides his agency work, Mr. Bernbach devoted considerable effort to a variety
of cultural and social organizations, including the Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, the International Eye Foundation, the Municipal Art Society
of New York, Lincoln Center and the Brooklyn Academy of Music.

He also got his agency behind clean air campaigns in New York and various
citizens committees promoting nuclear test bans. During the Vietnam War, he was
a major supporter of Advertising People Against the War. He was a member of the
Board of Overseers of New York University's Graduate School of Business
Administration and lectured at N.Y.U., Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.

William Bernbach was born in New York City on Aug. 13, 1911, the son of Jacob
and Rebecca Reiter Bernbach. He attended public schools and graduated from New
York University, where he majored in English, in 1933.

Worked for World's Fair

In the 1930's, he worked for the World's Fair as a writer and researcher and got
his first advertising experience in 1940 with William H. Weintraub Inc. After
World War II, in which he served two years in the Army, Mr. Bernbach became
director of postwar planning for Coty Inc.

From 1945 to 1949, he was with Grey Advertising, rising to vice president in
charge of art and copy. He worked closely there with Mr. Doyle, a vice president
and account supervisor. On June 1, 1949, they and Mr. Dane, who had been running
a small advertising agency of his own, established Doyle Dane Bernbach.

Mr. Bernbach was chosen to be president, and kept the title for nearly 20 years.
In 1968, he was named chairman and chief executive officer and in 1976 he became
chairman of the executive committee, the post he held until his death.

Ohrbach's store was the new agency's major client, and its early advertising
became the prototype for the agency's later work. ''High is the word for
Ohrbach's fashions,'' read the copy over a picture of a fashionably clad young
woman. And beneath it: ''Low is the word for Ohrbach's prices.''

Honored by His Industry

Mr. Bernbach received many awards and was elected to the Advertising Hall of
Fame of the American Advertising Federation in 1976.

During their years together, Mr. Bernbach and his partners, Mr.  Doyle and Mr.
Dane, who are now retired, had lunch together regularly at the Algonquin Hotel.
Once, an observer asked who picked up the check. ''Well,'' Mr. Bernbach said,
''we are pretty good friends, in addition to being partners, so we take turns.''

Though Mr. Bernbach had no hobbies, he was a voracious reader of literary
criticism, sociology and philosophy.  He is survived by his wife, the former
Evelyn Carbone; two sons, John, of London, and Paul, of New York City; a
brother, Graham, of White Plains, and seven grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE RECOVERY THAT WON'T START

BYLINE: By KAREN W. ARENSON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2519 words


WHEN President Reagan came to Washington, he had a dream that the s luggish,
inflated United States economy could be rescued quickly and painlessly from its
problems. In public at least, Mr. Reagan still clings to the dream, despite a
continuing barrage of bad economic news. And, with November's Congressional
elections pressing upon him and his party, the President is intent on convincing
the nation to share his faith.

Last week, he strained to make his case in a televised news conference, relying
on sketchy economic information and, even, misinformation. He has increasingly
taken the offensive in other speeches too, citing sharply lower inflation and
interest rates as harbingers of recovery just ahead.

Notwithstanding such oratory, the prospect that the recovery may amount to
nothing more than a few quarters of paltry growth - and possibly not even that -
is gaining credence both among economists and the public at large. Opinion polls
have begun to show such doubts, a shift that would threaten Republican chances
in the November elections. Some analysts think they could wash out the party's
hopes in 1984 as well - unless the Administration recognizes the magnitude of
the economic problem soon and begins to deal with it.

The Reagan recession, in fact, has begun to shatter the almost blind faith among
economists and many others that this recession, like its forebears, will
inevitably be followed by recovery. Despite official data showing two quarters
of modest growth -not the four quarters President Reagan heralded Tuesday night
- the economy has failed to spurt ahead as many had anticipated it would by now.

Furthermore, there has been a relentless stream of negative economic indicators
in recent weeks -from ballooning auto inventories to rising initial claims for
unemployment insurance to the disappointing decline in the Government's index of
leading indicators for August, which reversed a four-month climb. And it is
widely expected that, within days, the Labor Department will report that
unemployment has risen to 10 percent - a mark unequaled since the Great
Depression.

Even more ominous to some are the growing doubts about whether the mechanisms of
economic recovery will - or can - operate as they have in other postwar business
cycles. Some economists fear that financial illiquidity, both in the United
States and around the world, and the Administration's continued determination to
stick to its current economic policies, could hinder, or even prevent, recovery
from taking place.

''What's different this time from other postwar business cycles is that usually
Government policies are aimed at supporting recovery, and this time they are
not,'' said Jeffrey Sachs, an assistant professor of economics at Harvard
University.

And George Perry, an economist at the Brookings Institution, adds: ''The Fed's
intentions are always cloaked in a lot of obscurity, but I don't think the
monetary dials are set for robust expansion.''

Of course, some economists remain optimistic, although even they concede some
disappointment. ''I forecast that there would be a recovery in June, July and
August,'' said Rudolph G. Penner, an economist at the American Enterprise
Institute. ''I now think there is a good chance it will be September.''

The Administration, too, has put off repeatedly its target date for a
turnaround. Now, according to Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige, it should
come sometime in the fourth quarter, which began Friday.

But to other observers, today's economy bears an ominous resemblance to earlier
periods of dashed expectations. Robert Gordon, a Northwestern University
economics professor, for example, says the current situation reminds him a bit
of 1931, when there were constant predictions that prosperity was just around
the corner. This is a theme, he points out, repeatedly echoed in Treasury
Secretary Donald Regan's remarks. ''After a while,'' Mr. Gordon says, ''people
stop listening to the predictions.''

Stanford University economics professor Robert Hall says the current situation
reminds him of a somewhat more recent historic parallel: the late 1950's and
early 1960's, when the economy experienced a severe recession, limped into a
weak recovery and then plunged back into another recession.

''T here was a similar feeling of pessimism then too,'' said Mr.  Hall, who
heads the the committee that dates the turning points of the business cycle
recoveries for the National Bureau of Economic Research, a private group that is
the quasi-official arbiter of such matters. ''There was a feeling then, too,
that it was going to take a Government policy move to get the economy going
again.''

There is still much debate, Mr. Hall notes, about what finally did revive the
economy in the early 1960's -whether it was tax cuts, expansionary monetary
policy or the Vietnam War. ''Everyone has a different view,'' he said.

Whatever the explanation for the turnaround 20 years ago, what most economists
have counted on to revive the economy this year is falling interest rates and
the sizable tax cuts put in place by the Reagan Administation last year. The
consensus forecast among the analysts last spring was that lower interest rates
and the 10 percent personal tax cut July 1 would stimulate a surge in consumer
buying, and that consumers would spend the economy out of recession.

Interest rates have fallen. In fact, they have fallen farther and faster than
most economists had predicted. Rates on six-month Treasury bills, for example,
had plunged to 8.7 percent last week from 13.4 percent in early July. And the 10
percent reduction in personal tax rates took effect in July as scheduled - atop
a 5 percent income tax rate cut last October.

But the rows of unsold cars, lined up like so many tenpins in dealers' lots, the
spectacular rise in initial unemployment claims in August and announcements of
additional production cutbacks throughout industry, are all clear evidence that
consumer buying has not surged forth as hoped.

''At this point the economy is still going down,'' says Sam Nakagama, chief
economist for Kidder, Peabody & Company. ''Recovery has not happened. New home
sales are still falling, and auto sales have been horrendous. What we are seeing
is the continued decline not only of the American economy, but also of the world
economy.''

Economists offer a number of reasons for the continued weakness of consumer
spending. They note that most important consumer spending - for homes,
automobiles, appliances -is done on credit. And while interest rates generally
have declined sharply since spring, this has not yet translated into consumer
buying. They offer several reasons:

* The decline in rates has not significantly reduced the real cost of borrowing,
since inflation has been falling too. Real interest rates, measured after
inflation, are still at near-record levels, so borrowing is still quite
expensive.

* Rates on Treasury bills and many fixed-income investments have declined, but
rates charged on installment loans and other forms of consumer borrowing have
not fallen commensurately. ''Credit card rates, if anything, are still rising,''
said John Paulus, chief economist at Morgan Stanley. ''The decline in rates has
not yet been passed through to households.''

* The decline in mortgage rates has still not brought monthly costs within the
reach of many potential homebuyers. The lack of home buying is also holding down
purchases of durable goods, since purchases of appliances and home furnishings
often follow the purchase of a new home.

* Some consumers expect rates to drop lower still and are therefore holding off
on buying or borrowing.

* Some fear the worst is yet to come and therefore are saving rather than
spending.  Most economists anticipate that continued weakness in the economy
will eventually result in lower interest rates for consumers. But some are less
sanguine.

Mr. Nakagama, for example, sees little chance for a further rate drop in the
consumer sector. What usually forces consumer interest rates down at the end of
a recession, he says, is a decline in credit demands from businesses and other
borrowers, allowing credit to flow to the consumer sector. Today, he says, with
strained liquidity in the business sector and the serious financial problems of
developing countries, credit demands from these sources will not decline as they
usually do.

''Businesses and countries are very powerful borrowers,'' he said.  ''How are
consumers going to compete with the U.S. Treasury, Brazil, Mexico and I.B.M.?''

If consumers continue to balk, no other sector of the economy appears ready to
fill the spending gap. In the business sector, for example, spending on plant
and equipment is still declining, in part because capacity utilization is at 69
percent, one of the lowest rates since the end of World War II. Until the rate
rises, companies are under no pressure to expand capacity. Furthermore,
businesses burdened by high levels of debt, and particularly short-term debt,
are not eager to take on additional costs even for new equipment that might
improve productivity.

Nor are state and local Governments, with budget problems of their own, in any
shape to help the economy spend its way out of recession. The Federal budget,
given the nation's apparent concern over rising deficits and the President's
commitment to reduce the size of Government, is also in check. The buildup of
military spending will not provide much impetus soon either.

Nevertheless, Lyle Gramley, a Governor of the Federal Reserve System, outlines a
possible way out of the woods. He contends that recovery will be helped along by
the continuing downward pressure on wages from the economy's weakness. This, he
says will allow for increased productivity and higher corporate profits. And, he
adds, ''lower real long-term interest rates would help enormously, although that
is heavily dependent on making continued progress on the Federal budget.''

Whether the Federal Government could do anything further to encourage recovery
is a matter of some controversy. Many economists point out that fiscal policy is
already quite expansionary. But, in the face of restrictive monetary policies,
last year's tax cuts appear to have collided with tight monetary policy and may
have done more to increase interest rates than to boost the economy.

Many economists contend that it is the Federal Reserve's monetary policy that
must be loosened to pave the way for a more vigorous recovery. But others argue
that that would reignite inflation fears, sending interest rates up again.
Moreover, it is not clear that the Fed would be willing to pursue such a
strategy.

''We are determined to follow a policy over the long run that will produce slow
growth of money and credit,'' Mr. Gramley said in a recent interview.

How fast recovery will be, if and when it arrives, no one knows for sure. Some
economists are predicting that real G.N.P. is likely to grow by no more than 3.5
percent in the early stages of recovery - somewhat lower than the
Administration's forecast and only half the 7 percent rate typical of the early
stages of most postwar recoveries.  Others say even that may be overly
optimistic, particularly if the Fed clings to its targets for the money supply.

''Anything greater than 3 percent growth in real G.N.P. would take a significant
overshooting of the Fed's targets, and I doubt the Fed would tolerate that,''
said Mr. Paulus of Morgan Stanley, a former senior vice president and director
of research at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

If there is no agreement on how fast the economy might grow in a recovery, there
is also no agreement on how fast the economy should grow. Some analysts fear
that too fast a rebound would set off a new inflationary spiral - but they
disagree about what ''too fast'' may mean.

''It is extremely important to avoid overstimulating the economy as we enter
recession,'' Martin Feldstein, the Harvard professor who is chairman-designate
of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, warned recently. ''The use of
expansionary policies to accelerate recovery has frequently been the cause of
renewed inflation.''

But many economists say that, at this time, such worries are misplaced. They
argue that there is so much slack in the economy - with industry only utilizing
some 70 percent of its productive capacity - that there is no peril of
reigniting inflation. What concerns many of them, however, is that recovery, if
and when it comes, may not be substantial enough to bring down double-digit
unemployment rates or to revive the fortunes of many depressed industries.

''What could scare you is if you believe we will have a couple of quarters of
very slow growth, too slow to reduce the unemployment rate,'' said Robert Solow,
an economics professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. ''An awful
prospect would be if we were to go along with G.N.P. growth in the 2 percent
range, and then fall off the end again.''

And to a growing number of analysts, this grim prospect appears all too likely.

WASHINGTON'S MISLEADING INDICATORS

The most widely used measure of total economic activity, the gross national
product, may be sending misleading signals, economists are cautioning.

The Commerce Department recently reported a 2.1 percent increase in real G.N.P.
in the second quarter of 1982 and a preliminary estimate of a 1.5 percent
increase in the third quarter. Ordinarily, most economists would be heartened by
reports of two quarters of back-toback growth. But many of them are discounting
these figures, saying they do not accurately reflect what is happening in the
economy.

''With these numbers, you have really got to stand on your head to say this is
not an economic recovery, but it looks as if that is what ought to be done,''
said Donald Ratajczak, director or the economic forecasting project at Georgia
State University.

Mr. Ratajczak, for one, claims that ''the pluses we are getting are really funny
pluses.'' The two quarters of rising automobile inventories, he points out, are
recorded as economic growth, even though they reflect involuntary accumulation
resulting from sluggish sales. He also notes that the G.N.P. figures showing
increased purchases of financial services reflect the sharp rise in brokerage
commissions from the stock market's August explosion - a one-time increase for
the economy rather than a reliable source of steady, future growth.

''After you filter these things out, there isn't really any growth,'' the
Georgia economist says.  Another problem with the G.N.P. figures is that they
are in part preliminary - based on information that is quickly available - and,
therefore, likely to change somewhat as more information rolls in.

''There's an awful lot of pure extrapolation in the numbers,'' warns Robert
Hall, an economics professor at Stanford University and head of the business
cycle dating committee for the National Bureau of Economic Research. ''It takes
about two years for the national income accounts to settle,'' Mr. Hall notes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: caricature of Reagan on economic horse w sacks of
economic woe photo of Martin Feldstein w graph of growth

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
The Children of War Come 'Home'

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim and Henry Giniger

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 186 words


Forgetting Vietnam was harder last week. Seven girls and four boys, the children
of American fathers once stationed in Vietnam, were finally coming ''home'' to
the United States.

The children represented the largest group of Amerasians to leave Vietnam under
the Orderly Departure Program, operated by the United States Embassy in Bangkok,
Thailand. A more remarkable development - considering both governments' historic
lack of interest in Amerasians - was the announcement last week by the
Vietnamese Government that they were prepared to permit 26 more children to
leave the country.

In Vietnam, Amerasians are often the victims of discrimination. And while
cooperation with the Vietnamese Government has been difficult, the United States
will not admit these children until a father claims paternity. The American
Embassy in Bangkok has a list of 77 other children who are eligible to leave.
Private aid agencies, who played a cental role in getting the children out of
Vietnam, believe there are as many as 25,000 Amerasians in the country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHOSE SIDE IS TIME ON THIS TIME?;
PESHAWAR, PAKISTAN

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 833 words


AT the entrance to the Khyber Pass, the gateway to Afghanistan that lies just
west of Peshawar, there is a series of tablets telling of all the conquerors who
have subjugated, or tried to subugate, this part of the world: the ancient
Aryans, the Persians, Alexander's Greeks, Genghis Khan and Tamerlane, the Mogul
sons of Islam, and finally the British. ''According to the British,'' says one
tablet, ''it was here that they met their equals and looked them straight in the
face and fought against them up to the last day of their rule.''

The ''equals'' were the fierce Afghan tribesmen whose descendants are now
fighting the Soviet Union in Afghanistan in a jihad, or holy war, against what
the orthodox Moslem Afghans consider the abomination of atheism. Nearly three
years after the Soviet invasion and after an apparently failed summer offensive,
all the reports received from the other side of the Khyber point to a stalemate.

The firepower of the Soviets and their Afghan allies enables them to go anywhere
they want, any time, according to the reports. But the guerrillas simply melt
away, and when the Soviet advance stops, the Soviet troops, according to Western
reports, ''are left just sitting there and the initiative passes to the other
side.'' The guerrillas then carry out counter-raids and the Soviet troops
retaliate, in some cases by bombing to rubble villages suspected of harboring
rebels, and badly damaging food crops in the process.

In this ebb and flow, neither side gains much; the estimated 100,000 Soviet
troops are not enough to achieve dominance and the Moslem guerrillas do not have
the firepower or the organization to drive them out. The Soviet Union, Western
diplomatic analysts say, consequently finds itself in a dilemma. It cannot win
militarily in the foreseeable future unless it vastly increases its commitment
of troops and sharply escalates the fighting. But if it does that, the cost is
likely to prove unacceptable. As things are, according to this line of analysis,
the situation has settled down to the point where the Soviet presence has in a
sense become part of the normal state of affairs in a region that is seen by
both Moscow and Washington as vital to their interests. In such a situation,
these analysts say, the Russians can afford to be patient.

But they continue to have their hands full with the mujahedeen guerrillas who
are also in it for the long haul. Religious fervor infuses them with an unusual
tenacity. ''The atheist forces invaded our country, destroyed our mosques,
killed our children and started teaching communism in the schools,'' a
square-bearded leader shouted in a speech at the sprawling, 140,000-person
Barakai refugee camp east of here.

''For the sake of our religion we migrated. We now swear that we will fight
until we eliminate the very germ of communism from our country.'' The rhetoric
is rooted in an age-old code of behavior followed by the Pathan tribesmen who
account for a major portion of the Afghan rebels and refugees.

In some of the camps, residents say, children at 9 or 10 begin preparing to
fight the Russians through indoctrination and weapons training. By contrast, the
Soviet-backed regime in Afghanistan is reported to be having great difficulty in
finding recruits for its army. This is seen as one example of the Soviet
inability to shore up the Communist regime headed by Babrak Karmal.

Meanwhile, the war goes on. The Soviet summer offensive, according to Western
reports, failed for the fourth time to clear the mujahedeen from the strategic
Panjshir valley, whose mouth lies near the main highway between Kabul and the
Soviet Union.

With Soviet forces ruling the cities and the guerrillas the countryside where
most of the population lives, it all sounds like a replay of Vietnam. But
diplomats point out that the Russians are not burdened by long supply lines, or
restrained by a rebellious public that sees its soldiers killed on television
every night, as the United States was. ''They apparently think that if they hold
onto what they have now,'' said one diplomat, ''time is on their side. The
situation doesn't please them, but it doesn't seem to panic them.''

While the West sees a Soviet presence in Afghanistan as a potential threat to
the Persian Gulf region, Moscow appears nothing short of obsessive about
security on its borders and views an unfriendly Afghanistan as a threat. The
Pakistanis, who have opened indirect talks with Moscow under United Nations
auspices to settle the Afghan issue, see withdrawal of Soviet troops as a
pre-condition of such a settlement. But the troops are unlikely to be withdrawn
unless the Karmal regime becomes more stable and secure. Given the implacable
hostility of the Afghan tribesmen, that seems a long way off.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Afghan mujahedden regrouping in Pakistan

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 350 words


To the Editor:

I wish to take exception to Robert Goldmann's letter (Sept. 28), in which he
asserts the existence of a consensus among American Jews regarding the basic
issues of Middle East politics. With the exception of the right of Israel to
exist in peace and to be recognized by its Arab neighbors, there is no
consensus.First, Mr. Goldmann claims that a West Bank Palestinian state is
unacceptable to American Jews because it threatens the security of Israel. It is
not obvious, however, that a Palestinian state that recognizes Israel's right to
exist is a greater threat to Israel's security than several million Palestinian
refugees displaced throughout the region, destabilizing neighboring nations and
conducting unending attacks on Israel.

Second, Mr. Goldmann rejects the P.L.O. as a legitimate negotiating partner
because it does not recognize Israel. He fails to comprehend that recognition is
Arafat's last card. Between Israel and the P.L.O., recognition must be mutual
and simultaneous.

Third, Mr. Goldmann argues that Israel cannot return to its 1967 borders because
they are indefensible. ''Defensible borders'' are a relic from an earlier era.

Israel is not the only small state with hostile neighbors. Even the United
States in this age of intercontinental missiles does not have ''defensible
borders.'' Israel's borders will be secure only when it achieves a political
settlement with its neighbors.

Further, Mr. Goldmann's claim that Israel must retain the lands conquered in
1967 is in blatant contradiction of the United Nations Charter and represents a
threat to minimum world order. Acquisition of territory by force, whether the
aggressor is the Soviet Union, Vietnam, Argentina or Israel, must be opposed by
the United States and the world community.

Finally, Mr. Goldmann has no authority to speak on behalf of the American Jewish
community. Judaism is a decentralized religion, and asserting authority to
represent such a heterogeneous, contentious and troubled community is as
dangerous as it is illegitimate.
ANDREW E. SHACKNOVE, New Haven, Sept. 28, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NEW SOVIET ARMS BUILDUP IN SPACE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4737 words


Robert Jastrow is the founder of the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies
and served as its director until his retirement last year. He is now a professor
of earth science at Columbia University and Dartmouth College.  On Oct. 4, 1957,
the Soviet Union launched a 184-pound ball of machinery 560 miles above the
earth. Called Sputnik I, this first artificial satellite circled the planet once
every hour and 35 minutes and sent a steady stream of radio beeps back to earth.

The impact of Sputnik went far beyond its modest objectives as a scientific
instrument. For the Soviet Union, the launching was a tremendous source of pride
and propaganda - Soviet superiority in space, Moscow proclaimed, was proof of
Soviet superiority on earth.  An editorial in Pravda, the newspaper of the
Soviet Communist Party, made the point explicitly: ''The launching of the
Sputnik is a victory of Soviet man who, with Bolshevist boldness and clearness
of purpose, determination and energy knows how to move forward... It has again
been proved convincingly and vividly that the Soviet Socialist system is the
best form for the organization of workers free of the shackles of
exploitation.''

What that editorial neglected to say, the Soviet leader Nikita S.  Khruschev was
quick to add. Khrushchev noted that any rocket capable of launching a Sputnik
was also capable of launching an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). All
that was necessary, he said, was to attach ''a hydrogen warhead.'' Clearly,
Moscow wanted the Sputnik to be seen as a military threat to the United States.

For the United States, the news of Sputnik hit like a sharp blow to the solar
plexus. Newspapers abroad ran headlines saying: ''America Beaten.'' Others
talked of a ''Pearl Harbor in space'' and ''the technology gap.'' Americans
began to seriously question their technological prowess, their educational
system, from kindergarten to graduate schools - their whole way of life. Social
psychologists spoke of a growing anxiety throughout the country.

But as a consequence of all this, Washington began to construct, and the public
began to rally behind, an ambitious and expensive program to regain the lead in
space - with all that implied in terms of self-image, international influence
and military potential. The results were impressive: In July 1969, almost a
dozen years after Sputnik I first broke free of the earth's gravity, the United
States successfully landed men on the moon, capturing the imagination of the
world and helping to restore America's reputation as the leading scientific and
engineering power on earth.

Recalling the Soviet-American space race is of more than incidental interest
now, on the 25th anniversary of the Sputnik launching, because it appears that
history is poised to repeat itself: Persuasive evidence has begun to emerge
convincing me that the Soviet Union is once again gaining the lead in what may
well turn out to be the most critical area of space activity: its utilization
for military purposes.  The concept of using space as a battleground sounds as
if it belongs to the realm of science fiction, but it is actually very much a
component of contemporary reality. In recent years, space has become an arena of
unparalleled strategic importance to the United States and the Soviet Union.

Both countries now use space to communicate with their forces abroad (75 percent
of all American long-haul military communications are now conducted via
satellite) and to monitor the movement of foreign troops, naval vessels and
ballistic-missile submarines.  Early-warning satellites mounted in stationary
orbits far above the earth keep watch for the telltale flashes of heat that
would indicate a missile launch from either a submarine or a land-based silo.
The movements of mobile land-based missiles are monitored by reconnaissance
satellites so powerful they could photograph the palm of a hand from hundreds of
miles above the earth. Other electronic intelligence satellites, or ''ELINTS,''
intercept radio signals from missiles as well as the microwaves emitted by
military radar and other electronic communications. These developments promote
international stability by making it virtually impossible for any nation to
conceal its military preparations for long.

Over the last decade, however, the Soviet Union has been developing a military
space capability of a very different and far more ominous character. For
example, some experts believe Moscow has begun testing satellites as a way of
delivering nuclear weapons. Almost as disturbing, the Soviet Union has begun to
deploy the world's first operational system of ''killer satellites'' -
satellites whose sole purpose is to destroy other satellites. Such devices
threaten American military communications as well as the entire system of
international monitoring and verification that the reconnaissance satellites
provide.  he Soviet space program has other disturbing elements. Moscow has
mounted a major space-station program with a substantial military emphasis. Of
the seven space sta-tions launched by the Soviet Union since 1971, at least two
were designed for military purposes.  Aviation Week and Space Technology
reported not long ago that military objectives ''are expected to dominate''
future Soviet space stations as well. And the Russians are reported to be
spending three to five times as much as the United States on the development of
laser weapons for use in space.

These activities amount to a massive program for the testing and operation of
weapons systems in space. In my opinion, the United States must respond in kind.
In another and better world it would have been preferable to keep space free
from military operations.  Many people have expressed a longing for that better
world, but it is not the world in which we live. Recently, the Reagan
Administration has increased the scale of our military space effort. It remains
to be seen whether the current effort is minimally adequate and whether our
response comes too late. This is not the first time that the American space
effort has lagged behind the Soviet program. In 1957, I was a physicist working
for the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, tracking the orbit of Sputnik
I. On Dec. 6, I happened to be with John P. Hagen, director of the Navy's
Project Vanguard, America's first attempt to launch a satellite. I can still see
the ravaged look on his face when the call came in from Cape Canaveral saying
that the Vanguard rocket had risen four feet off the pad, fallen back and
collapsed in a sea of fire.

Once more, newspaper headlines around the world derided the United States,
describing the Vanguard effort as ''Flopnik'' and ''Kaputnik.'' At the time, it
seemed that we could do nothing right and that the Russians were invincible. In
the Vanguard Control Center, someone said that the Soviet Union was going to hit
the moon and mark it with a splotch of red powder. Another scientist joked that
we could add a patch of blue to make the moon appear red, white and blue. Nobody
laughed.

Two months later, the United States did manage to get a satellite into orbit -
not the Navy's Vanguard but the Army's Explorer I, developed under Wernher von
Braun, the brilliant German rocket scientist who came to the United States
following World War II, along with his entire team of engineers. In March 1958,
a Vanguard satellite finally made it into orbit as well. The Vanguard was a tiny
sphere weighing only three pounds, and Khrushchev disdainfully dismissed it,
saying that the United States would need many more satellites ''the size of
oranges'' to catch up with the Soviet Union.

But America was finally starting to move. Lyndon B. Johnson, then the Senate
majority leader, was the driving force behind this effort. Congress and the
Eisenhower Administration gathered together the bits and pieces of space
expertise that were scattered around the country - the Vanguard team from the
Navy, the old NACA (the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics) and
Caltech's Jet Propulsion Laboratory - and in October 1958 established the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Wernher von Braun's team
from the Army came on board later. It was an exciting time for the country and I
found myself caught up in the fervor. In November 1958, I joined NASA as a
fledgling space scientist.

The NASA budget climbed quickly to the billion dollar level, just the entry fee
in the space competition. For that amount of money, the United States might no
longer fall behind the Soviet Union, but it couldn't be expected to gain any
ground either. By the spring of 1961 everything looked black again. In rapid
succession the Russians launched the first man into space and sent two
interplanetary ships to Venus. The cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin spent only 108
minutes in orbit, but all mankind identified with his extraordinary experience.
The Gagarin flight electrified the world almost as much as the first Sputnik
launch.

John F. Kennedy, who had become President a year earlier, decided that something
had to be done to rectify the situation. Space, Kennedy said, is ''the new
ocean. And we must sail on it.'' Kennedy asked his advisers what we could do to
catch up with the Russians. A manned lunar landing was the answer. To achieve
that feat would require overcoming so many new obstacles that the early Soviet
lead would provide little advantage to Moscow. remlin leaders set their sights
on the same goal. Soviet prospects for winning the race improved following a
serious American setback on Jan. 27, 1967, when a fire broke out in the Apollo 1
capsule, killing the three American astronauts aboard, who were conducting a
practice launch. (Experts have never conclusively determined the cause of that
fire, but most believe that the insulation was somehow stripped from an
electrical wire which ignited flammable material within the oxygen-filled
capsule.) ''I can positively state that the Soviet Union will not be beaten by
the United States in the race to the moon,'' the cosmonaut Vladimir M. Komarov
said after the American tragedy.

To prepare for a lunar landing, the Soviet Union sent two unmanned ships on test
flights around the moon in September and November of 1968. Both flights went
well and the expectation was that Moscow would quickly follow up with a ''lunar
flyby,'' a manned flight to the moon, around it and back to earth. But for some
reason, the Soviet flyby didn't take place as expected. The United States,
meanwhile, was readying a lunar flyby of its own. On Dec. 21, 1968, three
astronauts blasted off. On Christmas Eve they were circling the moon, reading to
the world from the Book of Genesis.

NASA then moved on to Apollo 11: the lunar landing. That rocket lifted off in
July 1969. A few days before, the Russians had launched Luna 15, another
unmanned robot ship. The purpose was probably to upstage the United States by
bringing back a sample of lunar soil. The Russians could then announce to the
world that they had accomplished the scientific objective of Apollo at less cost
and without the risk to life. Luna 15 was already circling in orbit as the
American astronauts arrived. It descended toward a landing in the moon's Sea of
Crisis - and crashed there. The Americans landed smoothly in the Sea of
Tranquillity. After that, the Russians said that they never intended to land men
on the moon anyway.  Moscow's defeat in the race to reach the moon was not the
only Soviet failure in space. One of the most serious occurred in October 1960
when Field Marshal Mitrofan Nedelin, then commander of the Soviet Strategic
Rocket Forces, was directing preparations for an unmanned flight to Mars.
According to the scenario pieced together by Dr. James E. Oberg - a NASA
specialist on the Soviet space program and author of ''Red Star in Orbit,'' a
history of Soviet efforts in space -three rockets were set aside for this
important mission. Two failed. And when the countdown on the third reached zero,
that rocket's engines failed to ignite as well. At this point, caution dictated
that the rocket's tanks, which were loaded with a million pounds of highly
explosive fuel, should be emptied before technicians began hunting for the
source of the problem. But Nedelin was so impatient to try again that he ordered
inspection of the rocket fully fueled. According to Oberg, the explosion that
followed killed Nedelin and as many as 200 Soviet space scientists and
officials.

Another tragedy occurred in 1971, when three cosmonauts returned to earth after
paying a visit to Salyut, the first Soviet space station. The recovery team that
opened their Soyuz 11 capsule found all three cosmonauts dead -the first men to
die in space. The cause appears to have been simple carelessness on the part of
Soviet scientists on the ground. Oberg believes that the cosmonauts suffocated
on the way down to earth when air leaked out of their capsule through a
defective valve. They had tried desperately to close the valve, but two minutes
were required to complete that task; it took only half that long for all the air
to escape from the capsule. Space suits would have saved the cosmonauts, of
course. The ship did not carry any.

The Soyuz 11 episode came as a great shock to the Soviet public. It was
symptomatic of a general deterioration of the Soviet space program, one that may
have begun with the death of the great Russian rocket genius Sergeyev Korolev in
1966. (It was Korolev who masterminded Soviet ICBM development and the Sputnik
launch.) As the Soviet program faltered, the American program continued to
gather strength. Five more manned American ships went to the moon in the two
years following Apollo 11. Their crews brought back 800 pounds of rocks and
several hundred miles of scientific records that scientists are still poring
over today.

But then America lost interest in space. The Vietnam War was on everyone's mind
and President Johnson's Great Society programs were costing more than had been
expected. The economy began to falter. As a percentage of the gross national
product, Federal expenditures for science declined; NASA's budget slipped from
$5.25 billion in 1965 to roughly $3 billion in 1974, and the Apollo project was
dismantled.  One Saturn V rocket left over from the Apollo program was used on
Skylab, the first American space station, which was launched in 1973 and
occupied by three teams of astronauts. (Skylab disintegrated and crashed in July
1979.) Notable scientific successes were scored with the unmanned Pioneer
missions to Jupiter in 1972 and 1973; with the Viking missions to Mars - man's
first attempt to search for extraterrestial life - which landed in 1976, and
with the Voyager missions to Saturn in 1977.

We also developed a large family of satellites devoted to commercial
exploitation of the new space technology in such areas as communications,
weather forecasting and surveillance of the earth's resources. But as far as
manned flights were concerned, we dropped out of the race for more than six
years. It was a long hiatus.  The Russians, in the meantime, continued to plug
away at both their manned and unmanned projects. After the American lunar
landing, they gave up the attempt to put a cosmonaut on the moon; from the
standpoint of propaganda they had little to gain by coming in second. They
gradually recovered from their years of difficulty; they got better and better
and their program became bigger and bigger. Last year alone, despite severe
problems in its domestic industry and agriculture, the Soviet Union devoted an
estimated $18 billion to its space program. In proportion to the size of the
Soviet economy, that is five times the size of NASA's current budget. In
absolute terms, the Soviet space budget is three times the size of NASA's and
about 30 percent more than the combined space budgets of NASA and the Department
of Defense.

The results of this massive Soviet activity are highly visible. The Soviet Union
has launched seven Salyut space stations. Soviet cosmonauts have been able to
stay in space for up to six months at a time - a world record. Recently,
cosmonauts have been ferrying up to the stations and down again as frequently as
six times a year. At times, five cosmonauts have been on board simultaneously.
By the end of last year, cosmonauts had spent more than twice as much time in
orbit as have American astronauts.

More important, while the United States last year launched a total of 18
satellites, the Soviet Union put a staggering 125 satellites into orbit. In the
first six months of this year, they launched another 79 satellites. In June,
they established a new world record by placing 15 satellites into orbit in a
single month, about the same number the United States launched in all of 1981.
While it is true that Soviet satellites do not last as long as American
satellites, that fact alone is not sufficient to account for the enormous
disparity in the number of satellite launchings carried out by the two
countries.

What do the Russians do with all these satellites? Sixty-nine percent are
designed for military purposes, according to Charles Sheldon and Marcia Smith,
Library of Congress specialists on the Soviet space program. Roughly another 15
percent are for dual military-civilian purposes. In the last two or three years,
Moscow has launched approximately 10 times as many military satellites as
Washington. Some Soviet military satellites perform relatively benign tasks such
as global communications, mapping or reconnaissance.  Others have far more
sinister purposes.

For example, the Soviet Union has carried out numerous tests on the use of
satellites as carriers for nuclear weapons. The tests involve putting a
satellite into orbit and bringing it down again before the completion of its
first revolution. In this technique - called the Fractional Orbit Bombardment
System, or FOBS - the satellite is used as a very long-range ICBM. It can take
the long way around the globe to reach its American targets, avoiding the
Ballistic Missile Early Warning System, or BMEWS - the radar picket line - by
heading over the South Pole. Since 1966, the Russians have carried out about 20
tests of this system for delivering nuclear bombs. Although these tests do not
violate the letter of the 1967 treaty against the deployment of nuclear weapons
in space, they appear to contradict its spirit.

The Soviet Union has also been working hard on the development of killer
satellites. Moscow started testing these devices about 15 years ago, and since
then they have flown and tested 20 killer satellites as part of an ongoing
program. The most recent test of a killer satellite took place on June 18 of
this year. In 10 of the 20 flights involved in this test, the distance between
the killer satellite and its target was a thousand yards or less - sufficiently
close to insure the destruction or disabling of the American space shuttle or
any satellite the United States now has in orbit.

In a typical test a Soviet killer satellite maneuvered close to its dummy target
and then exploded into many pieces. Deployed against reconnaissance and
early-warning satellites, such killer satellites can pose a serious threat to
America's ability to observe Soviet military actions. In addition, they can
interfere with American military communications by knocking out satellites used
to relay messages from commanders.

For several years, the Russians have also been working on fast setup and fueling
for the launch rockets on their killer satellites, polishing their techniques to
the point where they can get a rocket in position and loaded with fuel, ready to
launch in only 90 minutes. This quick reaction system permits an attack on an
enemy satellite without a lengthy pursuit in orbit. In some tests, a Soviet
killer satellite has also been seen to come up from below and make its ''kill''
in a matter of minutes, before it has even orbited the earth. The quick-kill
method confers an important advantage. It diminishes the chances of the attack
being seen by observers on the ground, who could subsequently take defensive
measures or initiate a counterattack against the killer satellite.

If one of our satellites suddenly disintegrated, we might suspect a Soviet
killer satellite, but proving it would be difficult. Several thousand large
pieces of debris from previous launches now orbit the earth as well as many more
bits too small to be tracked by radar.  Each one hurtles through space at 25,000
miles per hour, faster than an artillery projectile. A collision with one of
these fragments would probably disable a satellite and it might be difficult to
distinguish such a collision from an attack by a killer satellite.

The problem is compounded by the possibility that the Soviet Union has deployed
''space mines,'' killer satellites that can lurk in orbit for long periods of
time with their purpose unknown to the United States, awaiting detonation by
ground command.

High-energy laser weapons currently under development would give the Soviet
Union another way to knock out a target satellite.  Pentagon experts believe
Moscow may be able to deploy such weapons as early as 1985. A laser beam is a
light wave of a very special kind.  Ordinary light is a jumble of many
individual waves, each carrying a minute amount of energy. In a laser beam, the
individual waves are organized so that they hit the target in unison and pack a
tremendous wallop as a result. It is as if wavelets lapping at the shore were
organized into one giant tidal wave. Laser beams move at the speed of light
-making evasive action difficult - and melt or vaporize their target. Laser
beams are invisible, do not show up on a radar, and can make their kill from a
considerable distance, also making identification of the source of the attack
more difficult.

Some scientists have also proposed that lasers could be used to shoot down
ICBM's shortly after launch. However, there is a dispute among experts regarding
the feasibility of this system.

Particle beams are another space weapon, reportedly being tested at a facility
in Kazakhstan, a Soviet republic in central Asia. These are weapons that fire
atomic or subatomic projectiles at high speeds. The energy released by the
impact of the hail of fast-moving particles vaporizes the target. Unlike laser
beams, particle beams can shoot through clouds or haze.

Soviet efforts to establish a permanent manned presence in space - a longtime
Soviet aim - may have a military purpose as well. In June 1981, Moscow took a
major step toward the realization of this aim.  The space station Salyut 6 was
linked in orbit to a large satellite called Cosmos 1267. Since Cosmos 1267 and
Salyut 6 shared the same systems for electrical power and temperature control,
the combination of the two functioned as a single space station weighing 34
tons. A Soviet official described Cosmos 1267 as the first of a series of
''modules,'' or building blocks, that would be joined in space, Tinkertoy
fashion, to provide a commodious habitat for future cosmonauts.

How much military significance should be attached to the Russian space stations?
Military uses of these stations are certainly a part of Soviet planning. Two of
the seven Salyuts launched thus far have been singled out by the Russians
themselves as military, and observers of the Soviet program believe that others
may be also. The Pentagon's chief scientist suggested last month that Soviet
space stations ''may be the forerunner of a weapons platform.'' Why would the
Russians use these space weapons to attack American satellites? It seems
unlikely that the Russians would stalk and disable our satellites or space
shuttle under normal circumstances.Such an unprovoked attack, if its source were
identified, would invite a violent response.

A more likely possibility would be a Soviet declaration that orbital altitudes
above the Soviet Union are part of Soviet airspace and off-limits to American
spacecraft. No international agreement has yet been reached on the division
between a nation's airspace and the outer space above it extending to the edge
of the universe.  Currently, there is a working consensus that satellites have
the right of free passage in space without interference, but the Russians may
not agree with this consensus in the future.

If the Soviet Union demanded that foreign satellites stay out of the space above
its territory, there would be little that the United States could do. As of this
moment, Moscow has killer satellites; Washington has none. We would only be able
to respond to restrictions on our freedom to move around in space through
military actions on the ground, something an American President might find
difficult to initiate.

American security could be severely impaired by such a Soviet action. If our
reconnaissance satellites were unable to fly above the Soviet Union, it would
mean the loss of our ability to monitor any Soviet military buildup. The fact
that satellites make military preparations difficult to conceal has been a very
powerful stabilizing force in the world up to now. Worse still, suppose the
Soviet Union were to extend the umbrella of its airspace to ''friendly'' nations
in the Middle East or elsewhere, denying our reconnaissance satellites access to
those regions as well. The preparations for a Soviet move into regions such as
the Persian Gulf could be cloaked in secrecy. Again we would be all but
powerless.

These are some of the penalties we may have to pay for allowing a potentially
hostile nation to acquire a superior ability to operate and maneuver in space.
In recent years, we have forgotten that the purpose of the Apollo program was
not just to bring back rocks from the moon but to match or exceed the Soviet
ability to control the distant skies. We succeeded in that objective. Then we
dropped out of the race. The British science magazine Nature remarked not long
ago: ''The Soviet space program draws a big yawn in Washington.'' In view of the
single-minded preoccupation of the Soviet Union with the military uses of space,
the consequences of this indifference may prove disastrous.

While the Soviet space program has had a strong military emphasis from the
beginning, the United States program, in contrast, has had an equally strong
civilian emphasis for most of the past 25 years, carrying out the Congressional
mandate to explore space ''for peaceful purposes and the benefit of all
mankind.'' Recently, there have been signs that Washington is starting to
recognize the magnitude of the military space threat now facing this country.

A Reagan policy statement this summer came out in favor of ''activities in space
in support of the right of self-defense.'' In line with this policy, on Sept. 1,
the Air Force established a new Space Command. Military space activities have
now been placed, organizationally, on a par with the Strategic Air Command.

At the same time, an American program for the development of killer satellites
is under serious consideration, and the Reagan Administration has requested $140
million for military spending on space lasers for fiscal 1983, up from $90
million in fiscal 1981, the last year of the Carter Administration.

Administration officials have also begun exploring other ways to protect
American satellites and the space shuttle against attack.  Methods now being
studied include the hardening of satellites to diminish damage resulting from
impact with shrapnel or debris, and reshaping satellites to minimize radar
reflection. Under study, too, are innovations that would give satellites the
ability to maneuver in space, sidestepping or outrunning a stalking killer
satellite. It remains to be seen whether the magnitude of the current effort
will be sufficient to meet the challenge.

In fact, no matter what the United States does to catch up now, the next few
years are almost certain to be a time of Soviet domination in space. By
undertaking a massive military space program designed to gain control of space,
Moscow is attempting to shift the balance of power substantially in its favor.
We have ignored these facts at our peril. Twenty-five years ago, the Russians
surprised us by launching Sputnik. For more than 10 years they have been gearing
up to surprise us again. This time, the surpise may have more serious and even
deadly consequences.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Soyuz 6 photo of cosmonauts photo of orbiting
Sputnik 1 photo of soviet children photo of Sputnik 2 photo of Valentina
Tereshkova photo of Yuri Gagarin

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A TALK WITH TRUDEAU

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3836 words


RESTON: I want to philosophize with you, if I may, not about the Soviet Union or
the Middle East, but things closer to home. I guess my primary question to you
is whether you are worried about the state of the Atlantic alliance.

TRUDEAU: Perhaps ''worried'' is too strong a word, but concerned I am. It is not
stronger than that because I perceive a very clear determination on the part of
the government leaders, various members of the alliance, to minimize the
disruptions and to iron out the difficulties.

Just talking of the Canada-U.S. aspect of it, I have no great quarrel with the
United States Administration, the present one - nor indeed the previous ones. I
believe, by and large, that these Presidents and this President have been, with
varying degrees of success, embodying good will toward Canada - which I hope our
Government has reciprocated - and a willingness to understand our divergencies
in foreign or domestic policies going back to President Nixon's speech here in
Parliament in 1972. He said we understand that the United States was developed
with foreign capital and that it eventually tried to domesticate its control of
the economic environment and it is not surprising that Canada wants to go that
route too. I think there has been a high level of understanding between the
administrations.

Perhaps the danger now is that because of our economic difficulties in the
Western world, including the United States and Canada, the interest groups have
become a bit more strident and vocal and are perhaps attempting to push the
governments on conflicting paths.

I would apply that to Canada. I would apply it, I suppose, to U.S.-European
relations right now as testified by genuine efforts made at the summit (in
Versailles in June) to express frankly the areas of disagreement, but to attempt
to minimize their impact rather than exacerbate them. Difficulties are there,
but they don't damage the fabric of the relations except perhaps in hard
economic times.

Just going over the past decade, we have had deep disappointment with American
decisions, shall we say, not to proceed with the (Alaska) pipeline after they
implored us to proceed quickly with passing special legislation; deep
disappointment with the nonratification of very difficultly achieved and
successful negotiations on (U.S.-Canadian) maritime bound-aries over a period of
years, and so on. But I am sure the American Government has been deeply
disappointed with certain of our policies and measures, but we (in Canada)
always couch those disappointments in terms of ''well, not withstanding that,
let's try and manage the relationship in a way that is limited to certain areas
of agreement to disagree.''

Q. Would you accept the principle that Reagan is now trying to assert: that the
U.S. Government should have control over American commercial subsidiaries
operating in Canada?

A. I am not sure about Reagan personally; but if you are talking about the
American Government, I would say, what is new? Since I have been interested in
public life, I remember instances of the American Government, either directly or
through the head offices (of corporations), trying to direct how their
subsidiaries in Canada would trade with China or Cuba or whatever. To me it has
been and remains a problem, but it is not a running sore. It is something which
we are working to correct and which, over the years, has shown some progress and
some lack of progress, but I don't see any new determination by President Reagan
or by his Administration to assert extraterritorial control.

One of the greatest difficulties we had in recent years was over the uranium
cartel, which was born, if my memory is correct, back in President Nixon's time.
It was of greater concern to us as Canadians than anything that has happened
since President Reagan has been there.

I think the new data have to do with Europe. I think the pipeline is something
on everybody's mind and that is new. It appears new at least to the Europeans
but even they, thank goodness, don't seem to be prepared to create a major rift
over it. There is obviously a confrontation in preparation but I haven't heard
the screams and accusations yet which are the signs of a deteriorating
relationship.

And for what it is worth, the same elements seem to be present now in this
European case, as they were in some of the earlier cases in Canada (though) not
all. In the case of our relations with China or with Cuba there was an economic
element, but there was also an ideological element having to do with
''communism.'' This seems to be the same thing now as regards the European
pipeline. But the effect of it on us has been pretty much the same. We don't
object that the United States has a different foreign policy than we do as
regards Cuba or China. What we objected to in the past is the economic effect:
(their) trying to impose their policy on us through economic instruments. And
that seems to be the nature of the difficulty now in Europe. But once again, I
am rather pleased to see that the thing, serious as it is, hasn't provoked a
tearing of the fabric of the alliance.

Q. You are not exactly a new boy around here. From the time you came into this
office until today, the growth of the multinational corporation has expanded
enormously. Are these corporations getting beyond the control of governments?
Was this discussed at the last summit meeting in Versailles?

A. It wasn't, as I recollect it, discussed in so many words at the meetings,
though I am sure it is increasingly on many people's minds. I know that there
are some - and apparently in increasing numbers - who see a conspiratorial
thesis of history developing here where the multinationals will be running the
governments of the world.

I think most sovereign nations, at least until now, seem to ...feel that their
instruments of sovereignty permit them to assert whatever degree of political
control is necessary over their domestic economic environment and it is up to
these governments to decide how much or how little is necessary in each
circumstance. We all have the means to defend ourselves against foreign
investments; the question or the problem is that we also want foreign investment
and therefore we have to strike a balance between how much we allow and how much
we disallow.

Q. You are catching it both ways, aren't you, on that question? I said the last
time we talked that there was criticism that the United States and its economic
power were exerting too great an influence upon Canadian life. You responded to
that and now they are complaining that you responded too much to it.

I am talking of U.S.-Canadians now and foreign investment in Canada. Now,
Canadian public opinion is blaming that for part of your unemployment.

A. Yes, but in fairness there was never one consensus in Canada on that. There
were the ''Canada-firsters'' and Canadian nationalists on the one hand and there
were the continentalists on the other and the two schools still coexist and will
continue to do so.  I think our response was one that was too measured for the
real economic nationalists, who felt that we were doing much too little, and it
is too strong for those who feel that unimpeded free continental trade is the
ideal. And where you are right is that the criticisms now are a bit more vocal
and a bit more sensitive when they come from the latter group, because there is
high unemployment.  It has always been a recognized theory that the worker would
rather work for a multinational than be out of a job. And these choices have to
be dosed according to the economic times we are living in.

Q. I have the impression that just when we began to get control of the states'
rights movement, you began to lose control over it in Canada. And this seems to
me very odd, because we have the other enormous divisive element of race. And
yet somehow, I think, partly because television showed the spittle on the cheek
and the cattle prod in Alabama, the young people said no, this is not America
and you have got to do something about it, and a great deal was done. But since
then we have had (Rene) Levesque (Premier of Quebec and leader of the separatist
Parti Quebecois), who, I must say, sent a shudder through some of us.

A. Well you are quite right in your diagnosis and your perception of the timing
of the (states' rights) movements. I think it speaks very well and highly of the
American people and of their institutions that they should see the Constitution
as such a living thing that when it talks about equal rights it is part of
America. (To quote you) the young people say this is not the America we want and
know.  You have constitutional guidelines which were forged in blood and which
were bred into Americans of all generations. In Canada we have not had that. And
I think we are paying the price of it now.

I think the problem is soluble. I think, indeed I believe, that the belief in
Canada remains stronger in the breast of most Canadians than the belief in their
particular region or province. And if any demonstration were needed it took
place during the referendum against ''that other fellow,'' as you say, when the
majority of Quebecers, including a slight but real majority of French-speaking
Quebecers, opted for Canada even though the Quebec option was posed in very
ambiguous and reassuring terms.

Q. Would you say that the continentalists are ahead over the separatists, the
states' rights people? What is the trend in Canada?

A. Certainly since the middle 70's the trend has been all in the direction of
the states' rights people. There has been an increasing demand on the part of
the provinces for increased rights and that increased demand met with a rather
sympathetic response at provincial election time in Quebec and in other parts of
the country where the question was posed directly by the running incumbent
Premier.  Newfoundland is the most recent example. Alberta is not a very old
example either.

It is the perception of that trend and a fear of where it is leading us that has
caused our Government and our party to stand for Canadian unity and to put the
people to the test as we did in the constitutional patriation exercise (bringing
the constitution to Canada from Britain). We said we will go alone if necessary
and we will challenge the people to answer whether they think the country should
be broken up because its national Government is bringing home a constitution
after 54 years of failure, without the consent of the provinces.

Q. Let me take that same idea a little further.  If we look at the position of
the leaders of the democratic nations in the world today, beginning with you,
there is not one of them in office who, according to the popularity polls at
least, commands the confidence of 50 percent of the people. It is not true in
our country, it is not true, apparently, in Canada, it is not true in Britain,
or with (Francois) Mitterrand, or in Italy or Germany or Japan. Now what is
this? Is it that expectations of the people are beyond the capacity of the
government to meet? Is it an educational problem? What is it?

A. Well, I think you have defined it on one level by talking of the expectations
of the people. The people of the countries you have mentioned have known
prosperity unparalleled in history beginning in 1945 and increasing relentlessly
until the early and middle 70's.  They have been brought up to expect, as a
matter of right, that their governments would be able to fulfill
ever-increasing, ever-rising expectations, to use (Adlai) Stevenson's phrase.
And these habits are departed from only with difficulty because they have to do
with one's self-satisfaction and interest. I think that there is not yet a
realization that even the best governments cannot fulfill everybody's
expectations everywhere, all the time.

Now I am not trying to explain away or apologize on behalf of myself. But I must
add that that in itself is not worrisome except in terms of the particular party
or group that is in power. The worst that can happen is that at the next
election they be changed and that the successors will find out that they are
running into many of the same difficulties - as happened with the succession of
governments in the United States or, for that matter, in Britain or, for that
matter, now in France.

But there is something worrisome, if you permit me to express it.  It is a bit
of a tendency to question the legitimacy of those governments. There is a little
bit of a tendency to weaken our democratic institutions by questioning the
legitimacy of people who have been legitimately elected and who hold their posts
legitimately by saying, ''Ah, but there is a credibility gap,'' or, ''They are
down in the polls,'' or, ''They are not performing.'' I don't think it has
reached this stage in the United States yet. Nobody is asking President Reagan
to leave just because he has lost some points in the popularity polls. But, in
other countries that is the situation. I think this is serious and it has to be
analyzed and has to be perceived.

Q. In our country, we are finding more and more that we are becoming a separated
people in the sense that the big problems are so complex that people say,
''Well, O.K., we will go with the labor union,'' or, ''We will go with our
particular gang.'' That loyalty is not to the generality but to the special
interest. That is a bit of a problem. After World War II things became so
complicated that there was an enormous need of political leadership and
guidance, to speak and to reduce all this diversity to identity so that people
could dig through the complexity. Yet at that point, it seems to me, the men of
words in the political world disappeared. Who can speak today as de Gaulle did,
or Churchill did, or even Roosevelt did? Where are they? Nehru could speak.

A. That is absolutely dead on, when you are talking about the complexity which
leads people to see their regional or sectional self-interest as opposed to the
commonweal, the general good, because it is so complex. You cannot seize it all.
You cannot seize how Mr.  Smith in some little village, if he does what is right
for him and his cohorts, will be destroying the fabric of the United States of
America because it is so great and so beyond him. I think you have perceived it
very well and indeed you have expressed, in so many words, certainly, the danger
which is menacing Canada now. We are rife with regionalisms and with
sectorialisms.

But any reading of history will remind us that this was ever true.
Factionalism, whether it be in Europe, or tribalism in Africa, or regionalism in
big countries like yours or mine, or Brazil and so on, has always been and
remains a fact of life. Now you seem to say that if we had the men of words this
would not be as great a danger.  I am not sure I agree with you.

I would be inclined to say that in President Reagan you have a man of words. You
have a man who seems to have encapsulated the mood of the American people at a
certain point in history and who, even to his recent tax success in Congress,
seems to have been able to bring people around to his point of view. Then look
at the others. I mean, (Helmut) Schmidt has been there since 1974, and he must
have found some of the words. And in a sense, I suppose our party must have
found some of the words and the feelings. The difference when we are talking
today is that there is economic blight everywhere and (even) Churchill, with all
his words in 1945, when the economic problems came to the floor, was swept away.

Q. I mentioned the words only because the politicians seem to be the most
obvious targets in an age of skepticism. All institutions seem to suffer: not
only the politicians, but the press is disbelieved, the church is disbelieved,
the university is challenged ...

A. The family.

Q. Yes. Wherever you look you find this as a condition of life. So, coming back
to the central thing, the economic blood on the floor, I guess my question is
whether the nation-state is capable of dealing with the world economy? Fifteen
years ago Nelson Rockefeller was proposing that what we needed was confederation
in the Atlantic.There hasn't been a speech on confederation in 10 or 12 years -
not even a speech by people in the academy.

A. Well, I think the reason for that is the one that has been underlying much of
our discussion. It is that before wanting to bring the nation-states into a
confederation, we have to reassert the basic existence of national wills within
our states, and you, with your black problems succeeded by your Vietnams, by
your Watergates, by the indecisiveness of some of your leaders, you have managed
to hold the nation together, which is saying something. But it hasn't had that
degree of self-confidence that it could say, O.K., we have accomplished, we have
fulfilled this national will, let us now look beyond. Certainly that is true of
Canada (which has not fulfilled its nationhood) and probably of the European
Community, which has known better days, when each country wasn't
ultranationalistic or chauvinistic but when it possessed a sense of confidence
about its future which permitted it to look beyond.

Even today we must look beyond institutions which are of utmost importance to
us.  Let's just talk about the World Bank and the I.M.F. (International Monetary
Fund) or of I.D.A. (International Development Association), the whole problem of
foreign aid. We know very well that the problems of today are not being very
well solved by the I.M.F. and this is not a criticism of it. The I.M.F. at
Bretton Woods was set up to meet different challenges, those that had wrecked us
in the 30's, and did it very well over a period of at least three decades. But
now, I think, all reasonable people are beginning to say, how can we go back to
the kind of - not international will or international superstate, that is too
far beyond us - but how we go back to the kind of international cooperation
which underlay the foundation of the I.M.F. at Bretton Woods. We know darn well,
as was visible at Versailles in our discussion, that we are interdependent and
that we must look beyond our own borders to solve the economic problems with
which we are faced within our own borders. Canada is a supreme example. We can't
expect to find full employment in our forests and in our mines, let alone in our
manufacturing industries, unless our markets in other parts of the world have
found their own economic improvement. The I.M.F. has to meet all these new
problems which emerged during the 70's when we were all responding in our own
different and sometimes contradictory but sometimes self-reinforcing ways of
fighting inflation, fighting unemployment in such a way as collectively we were
worsening our chance of winning against inflation. You see the point.

Q. In the critical days of our isolation, just before World War II, we
established a Committee on the Present Danger which played a very important role
in our getting into the war and helping save a civilization. Some years later, a
new Committee on the Present Danger was established, but it was decided that the
clear and present danger is the Soviet Union, not the economic chaos of the free
world.

I happen to believe it is the latter, but I find you can scarcely get a debate
in our country on that question. It is only recently that these fantastic
defense budgets, which surely have something to do with the economic chaos, can
even be talked about. Anybody who gets up in the Senate and tries to raise that
question, they say, well supposing you were wrong, then we have lost everything,
but, if we are right with our budget, all we have lost is money. So, are you
satisfied that we need this level of military expenditure?

A. Well, I would rather not tackle your question that way. Canada enjoys a sense
of protection, even immunity, from the fact that the United States is a mighty
military power. And I would feel it a little bit invidious for me to say, ''But
they are spending too much at this particular point in time.'' Certainly the
accusation is very much more often that Canada is spending too little.

This debate is certainly present in our minds. I can remember (that at) every
economic summit, I think, since the one which was held in London in 1977, we
were conscious of the fact that we were not performing well economically, that
it might get worse before it got better. (Yet) I met the people of the third
world out there who were making choices and making ideological commitments. And
it was important for us to be able to show that the free-market society, the
open-market society, for ideas and goods and services, performs better than the
other model. And therefore it is something I believe we are conscious of.

I guess I am not attuned enough to the precise nature of the debate going on in
the United States to comment on your assertion, except to say that I don't think
that that is true in Canada. There are some people who are more obsessed with
the Soviet Union than with our own poor economic performance, but I would
venture to say that they are a minority - and a small one at that.

Q. Is there a growing isolationism in Canada?

A. I don't think so, not as an organized system of thought or as a doctrine
which is being preached and spread. Certainly, with our economic difficulties,
which have been increasing, people are less inclined to worry about the starving
people of the Sahara or of Bengal and in that sense we are less world-oriented,
less planetworld - or less global-village oriented. But in that political sense
of isolationism, I don't think so. If anything, I have been more criticized for
not being supportive enough of NATO, for instance, rather than for being too
supportive of it.

Q. During the campaign, Reagan threw out an idea about a common market for
Mexico and the United States and Canada and nothing ever came of it. Did you
ever put your mind to that question? Should we be thinking in a totally
different way?

A. I don't think that should be the first stage of our thinking. I think that we
should be doing more to create a communality of views of North American
countries first and perhaps eventually in the hemisphere. We haven't addressed
ourselves enough to that and it is because of my thinking on that that I have
suggested and even promoted with Presidents (Jose Lopez) Portillo and Reagan
trilateral meetings of which only one was held at Grand Rapids, Mich., in
September of last year.

I think we have much to gain and little to lose by increasing the degree of
knowledge of people at all governmental levels of each other. There is a fair
amount of interparliamentary democratic representative exchanges and visits and
so on. Businessmen traveling a lot, certainly governments cooperate a lot
between the United States and Canada on a piecemeal basis. But, there is perhaps
a need for more exchanges and heightening of understanding at levels closer to
the summit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan, Francois Mitterrand and
Pierre Trudeau photo of Pierre Trudeau

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE STYLE OF THREE PRESIDENTS

BYLINE: By Merle Miller; Merle Miller's many books include ''Plain Speaking: An
Oral Biography of Harry S. Truman.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 995 words


TUMULTUOUS YEARS, The Presidency of Harry S. Truman, 1949-53.  By Robert J.
Donovan.

ROBERT J. DONOVAN has devoted 18 years to Harry S. Truman. As Washington
correspondent for The New York Herald Tribune, Mr. Donovan was a close observer
for more than seven years of the Truman Administration, and he has spent over 10
years working on two volumes, ''Conflict and Crisis: The Presidency of Harry S.
Truman, 1945-1948'' and the one under review, ''Tumultuous Years.'' Together
they are among the best books on the Presidency ever written.

Mr. Donovan interviewed the men still living who were associated with the White
House during the Truman years, among them Charles S. Murphy, who was special
counsel to the President, Clark M. Clifford, who preceded Murphy as special
counsel, and Roger W. Tubby, who was Truman's last press secretary and who kept
a detailed and perceptive journal to which Mr. Donovan had access. In fact, Mr.
Donovan seems to have read and remembered every document having to do with the
Truman Presidency.

Like ''Conflict and Crisis,'' ''Tumultuous Years'' is filled with fresh and
revealing insights. We are provided with valuable new information on Truman's
relationship with his imperial Secretary of State, Dean Acheson; they had much
more in common than I had realized. And Mr. Donovan does a particularly fine job
of pointing out the heavy price that Truman paid for his usually futile attempts
(like his disastrous loyalty program) to quiet the fear of Communism. The
development of the hydrogen bomb was, as Mr. Donovan describes it, another price
paid, wrongly and futilely, to appease the hysteria over Communism.

MR. DONOVAN gives the definitive account of the June night in 1950 when, without
bothering with Congress, Truman decided to send troops to resist the North
Korean invasion of South Korea, a decision that was to prove unpopular, though
much less demonstratively so than our decision to fight Ho Chi Minh in Vietnam.
In fact, another fateful decision of Truman's - the commitment in 1950 of
American resources to the defeat of Ho Chi Minh's guerrillas - led to our
involvement in Vietnam; Mr. Donovan calls it ''the first grave step.'' Mr.
Donovan does not indicate that Truman was always wrong in his foreign policy
decisions; in his view, the President was usually right. Not incidentally, Mr.
Donovan makes clear that those decisions were always Truman's and not Acheson's.

In 1948, when this book opens (with what was for many of us the satisfying
Presidential election of this century), Truman felt that he was at last on his
own; from then on it would be his Administration and his Fair Deal, and not a
continuation of Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal. Truman succeeded to some degree,
but the Republican far right had hardened. In its eyes, not only was Truman
trying to get ''Communist'' acts passed by Congress, but had not he and Acheson
made a gift of China to the Reds? And I must admit that though I thought I had
read (and maybe even written) the last word on the Senator from Wisconsin,
Joseph McCarthy, I was wrong; Mr. Donovan has done that.

And the scandals - they are here, too, though less scandalous in the light of
the activities of succeeding administrations. But they were serious enough and,
as Mr. Donovan makes clear, were made to seem larger by Truman's loyalty to pals
like Maj. Gen. Harry Vaughan, his buddy from World War I and Battery D. I must
say that Vaughan emerges here as more stupid than venal. He arranged for Bess
Truman to receive a gift of some deep freezers, a supposed sign of corruption;
you will have to read ''Tumultuous Years'' to find out the final irony of the
present Bess Truman so innocently accepted and of which so much was made.

I also thought I had accumulated or read all the facts about Truman's firing of
Douglas MacArthur, including General Eisenhower's comment from West Germany that
I had forgotten: ''When you put on a uniform there are certain inhibitions you
accept.'' Indeed, the only irritating part of Mr. Donovan's book is that he has
uncovered and dared to use certain facts I thought were mine alone for the
Eisenhower book I'm working on, such as Eisenhower's statement that he would not
have run for the Presidency in 1952 if he had known that Adlai Stevenson and not
Harry Truman would be the candidate of the Democratic Party.

SOME stories are better known, such as the one about Chief Justice Fred Vinson's
telling Truman that he could constitutionally seize the steel mills whose
workers were about to strike, a case that Vinson knew he would soon rule on.
Weren't they both straight-shooting small-town boys, fellow drinkers of bourbon
and players of poker?  Yes, they were all those things, but one of them was
President of the United States and the other was Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court of the United States. I often heard Harry Truman speak glowingly of the
Constitution, the exalted work ''of those fellows in Philadelphia.'' He believed
in the wisdom of the separation of powers. And he had certainly read and
remembered enough history to know that what he and Vinson were doing was wrong.
But Truman was angry over the strike, and he was not at his best when his dander
was up; for example, the morning he wrote that letter to the music critic who
had dared criticize the singing of his daughter, Margaret. We are fortunate that
reason prevailed with him more often than anger, and that a lot of letters he
shouldn't have mailed weren't. Much of the time Bess, a most underestimated
First Lady, prevented him from doing what he shouldn't do.

I had a short though valued acquaintance with Harry Truman. After reading
''Tumultous Years'' and its predecessor, I feel I know him.  I also admire him,
despite the warts, despite the sometimes almost disastrous errors. He was an
old-fashioned man. To describe him it is necessary to use a word not in most
vocabularies today, at least in the sense I intend: He had character.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words


FICTION
1 1 5 MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $15.95.) The hidden truth
behind a woman business tycoon's rise to power.

2 3 5 THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Crown, $15.95.) Continuing the
saga of human survival at the dawn of civilization begun in ''The Clan of the
Cave Bear.''

3 2 6 E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL STORYBOOK, by William Kotzwinkle. (Putnam's,
$6.95.) Abridged, profusely illustrated version of the novelization of the
current film.

4 4 9 DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

5 1 SPACE, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.50.) The story of the
American space program told through fiction.

6 5 18 THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Linden Press, $15.95.) A
sequel to the author's ''Kane & Abel,'' in which two children of those
antagonists marry one another.

7 10 2 CROSSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) A clandestine
trans-Atlantic romance survives the stresses and strains of World War II.

8 6 6 LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Three decades in the
lives of a coterie of members of the international glitter set.

9 8 29 THE PARSIFAL MOSAIC, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $15.95.) Michael
Havelock saves the world from nuclear extinction.

10 7 11 THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders.  (Putnam's, $13.95.) A
psychiatrist finds that an aberrant 8-year-old girl epitomizes the society of
Florida's Gold Coast, where she lives.

1 11 4 19 PURCHASE STREET, by Gerald A. Browne. (Arbor House, $14.95.) A loving
couple set out to bring down a Mafia operation that ''respectable'' bankers have
taken over.

12 9 21 THE MAN FROM ST. PETERSBURG, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $14.50.) A Russian
terrorist collides with his own romantic past, during a mission to Britain on
the eve of World War I.

13 12 8 TOUCH THE DEVIL, by Jack Higgins. (Stein & Day, $14.95.) Terrorist
stalks terrorist at the behest of Britain's antiterrorism chief.

14 13 2 THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books, $15.95.) The war
in Vietnam as it was seen and felt by a diverse group of soldiers.

15 1 MAX, by Howard Fast. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The birth of the American
film industry in New York at the turn of the century.

NONFICTION
1 1 37 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) An
exercise book for women, seasoned with the film star's philosophy of physical
well-being.

2 2 24 LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia.  (Holt/Slack, $13.50.)
Inspirational talks by a University of Southern California professor.

3 3 10 LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $22.50.) Ways to
add years to your life and life to your years: a popularly written
medical-science book.

4 4 34 WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE, by Harold S.  Kushner. (Schocken,
$10.95.) Comforting thoughts from a rabbi.

5 5 5 INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick. (Morrow, $17.50.) The scandal at
Columbia Pictures and Wall Street's part in it.

6 8 27 NO BAD DOGS: The Woodhouse Way, by Barbara Woodhouse.  (Summit, $12.50.)
Advice on training dogs by a British expert: tie-in to a television series.

7 6 10 EDIE, by Jean Stein, edited with George Plimpton.  (Knopf, $16.95.) Edie
Sedgwick, minor celebrity of the 60's, remembered by friends and acquaintances.

8 12 16 RICHARD SIMMONS' NEVER-SAY-DIET COOKBOOK. (Warner, $15.95.) More than
100 recipes by the Hollywood television personality and exercise guru.

9 10 43 A FEW MINUTES WITH ANDY ROONEY, by Andrew A. Rooney.  (Atheneum,
$12.95.) Reflections on contemporary life by the journalist and television
commentator.

10 11 12 HOW TO MAKE LOVE TO A WOMAN, by Michael Morgenstern.  (Clarkson N.
Potter, $10.95.) A lawyer tells men ''what women want.''

11 1 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Morrow,
$15.) How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work as well as
your own.

12 7 12 PRINCESS, by Robert Lacey. (Times Books, $16.95.) The life of the
Princess of Wales in words and pictures.

13 9 48 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Humor
in cartoons and verse.

14 14 2 MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR, by Judith
Martin. (Atheneum, $19.95.) Etiquette prescribed by an amusingly bossy lady.

15 1 WEIGHT WATCHERS FOOD PLAN DIET COOKBOOK, by Jean Nidetch. (New American
Library, $13.95.) A new collection of nearly 600 recipes.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 1,600
bookstores in every region of the United States.

FOOTNOTES

There are some extraordinary qualities to the new hard-cover nonfiction best
seller, ''The One Minute Manager,'' by Kenneth Blanchard, Ph.D.,
''internationally known management consultant,'' and Spencer Johnson, M.D.,
''widely acclaimed author of more than a dozen books dealing with medicine and
psychology.'' On the endpapers of the book are endorsements from the chairman of
the Burger King Corporation (''Buying copies of 'The One Minute Manager' is one
of the best investments I've made in myself and my managers''); the general
manager of Chevron, U.S.A. (''After reading 'The One Minute Manager,' I gave
copies to my boss, my boss's boss . . . and even to my wife''); the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff (''I would like to see this method used throughout the
armed forces - soon!''). This remarkable item is 111 pages long, with margins
generous enough to surround greeting card verse, and costs $15. The publishers
are proud of the price: On the jacket is a gold sticker that says, ''A GEM -
SMALL, EXPENSIVE AND INVALUABLE.'' The text begins: ''Once there was a bright
young man who was looking for an effective manager. ''He wanted to work for one.
He wanted to become one. ''His search had taken him over many years to the far
corners of the world.'' The burden of the story is the discovery by the bright,
much traveled young man of the perfect manager, whose working methods he
explains in simple language; they might be summed up by saying that the manager
is interested in the good of BOTH his company and his employees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REPUBLICAN CANDIDATES FOR HOUSE FOCUS ON LOCAL ISSUES

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1324 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 3


Republicans with plausible chances of defeating incumbent House Democrats are
running local, not national, campaigns, focusing more on the characteristics of
their districts or the weaknesses of their opponents than on matters like the
economy. Knowing that the recession makes many Republicans vulnerable on the
economy, national party leaders here have stressed the importance of recruiting
attractive candidates and have provided the money for it.  They have also
emphasized building up local campaigns and polling to find particular weaknesses
and strengths.

In Long Beach, Calif., Brian Lungren stresses age and vigor in a campaign
against a Congressman twice his age, Glenn M. Anderson.  In southeastern North
Carolina, Eugene (Red) McDaniel emphasizes his record as a prisoner of war in
Vietnam and shows television advertisements attacking Representative Charles O.
Whitley for supporting special tax deductions for Congressmen.

In Colorado, Tom Wiens, a businessman in Dillon, argues that the Third
Congressional district should be represented by someone from the Western slope
of the Rockies, the area added to it

Second of two articles.
by redistricting. The incumbent, Representative Ray Kogovsek of Pueblo, comes
from ''the wrong side of the mountain,'' Mr. Wiens says.

For some Republican challengers, of course, President Reagan's local popularity
does make the economy look like the theme to stress. In Shelbyville, Ind., Ralph
Van Natta contends that the defeat of Philip R. Sharp, the four-term Democrat,
would be part of ''the last great opportunity to allow Reagan's policies to
work.''

This retail rather than wholesale campaign, shown in reports from 63
battleground House races, does not reflect party fragmentation.  Overall, the
Republican approach uses the party's money advantage.  It also copes with the
fact that vulnerable incumbent Democrats have records that vary greatly from one
to the next and do not present a massed target, the way Republican incumbents do
with their almost solid support of President Reagan.

And while a retail House campaign may stir less national partisan enthusiasm
than the solid line of attack on the economy being made by likely Democratic
challengers, it still matters deeply to the party. Republicans hope to hold
their House losses to a minimum, or perhaps even to gain seats, breaking a
48-year history of the White House party losing seats in off-year elections. To
do so they must win about as many seats from Democratic incumbents as they lose
incumbents of their own, and then win more of the open seats than the Democrats.


'Nipping at Their Heels'

Representative Guy Vander Jagt, chairman of the National Republican
Congressional Committee, said the results of the races of 209 Democratic
incumbents and 162 Republican incumbents would be ''about a wash.'' He said
Republican gains would come in the 58 open seats and the six where redistricting
has thrown two incumbents together.

Praising the quality of his party's challengers, Mr. Vander Jagt contended, ''We
have about three times as many challengers nipping at their heels'' as Democrats
have pursuing Republicans.

Not every challenger gets to define the issues or the content of the race. In
rural southeastern Texas, Representative Bill Patman, a Democrat, appears to be
setting the agenda. He demands that his challenger, former Representative Joe
Wyatt, ''clear the air'' about charges that the Washington police arrested him
for a homosexual incident. Mr. Wyatt replies that the police files no longer
exist, and some politicians think the attack may backfire against Mr.  Patman.

On the Massachusetts North Shore, Representative Nicholas Mavroules, a Democrat,
attacks Tom Trimarco, his challenger, for allegiance to Mr. Reagan's economic
policies and for his refusal to support a freeze on the testing, production and
deployment of nuclear weapons.

Some Incumbents Stress Service

As incumbents often do, some Democrats stress service to their districts. In
Raleigh, N.C., Representative Ike F. Andrews, a supporter of many of President
Reagan's programs, is contending with a well-financed campaign for Bill Cobey, a
Republican whose television advertisements denounce ''Ike Andrews and his
liberal buddies.'' Mr. Andrews emphasizes his support of tobacco subsidies in 10
years in the House and relies on a reinvigorated Democratic Party led by Gov.
James B. Hunt Jr. to pull him through.

But this race may turn out to be an example of how little such concerns
sometimes matter. Voter reaction to Mr. Andrews's arrest on drunken driving
charges Saturday night may be what really decides this election.

Even where a challenger has been making a case with some effect, circumstances
can change. John Sonneland, pressing Representative Thomas S. Foley in eastern
Washington, was accusing the Democratic House whip of obstructing Mr. Reagan's
efforts to set the economy right.

Then Mr. Foley went on national television in August, as his party's spokesman,
and supported Mr. Reagan's call for tax increase legislation. That appeared to
deflate Mr. Sonneland's principal argument.

In some districts the Democratic counterattack involves attacking Republicans
generally, or specific elements of Administration policy.

Strong Challenge to Burton

In San Francisco, Representative Phillip Burton, a Democrat, faces the strongest
challenge of his career from State Senator Milton Marks. Mr. Marks's billboard
advertisements feature Mr. Burton's likeness and the slogan ''The Arrogance of
Power,'' a personal attack that draws strength from Mr. Burton's heavy-handed
dominance of the state's Congressional redistricting efforts.

In Redwood City, Calif., Representative Tom Lantos, a Democrat, is blasted by
Bill Royer as a ''radical-liberal'' and denounced as ''Jerry Brown's favorite
Congressman.''

Both Democrats have responded by attacking the Administration, for a faltering
economy and for proposals to broaden offshore oil drilling, as they seek to
fasten onto a key local concern.

It is not a matter of strong Republican challengers abandoning Mr.  Reagan and
his policies. But it is rarely the key to their campaigns.

Loyal to the President

In Pennsylvania, Steve Joachim, a former Temple University quarterback, counts
on name recognition, and his mailings savage Representative Robert W. Edgar as
an creature of ''liberal special interest groups.'' But Mr. Joachim also
directly supports Mr.  Reagan. Mr. Edgar responds by boasting that he ranks
eighth from the bottom out of 435 House members in supporting Mr. Reagan, whose
policies he considers unpopular.

In Atlanta, Dick Winder stresses his orderly life, his consistency and his
specificity in a personality race against Representative Elliott H. Levitas. Mr.
Winder campaigns as a down-the-line backer of President Reagan, but that element
is less significant because Mr.  Levitas is a sometimes supporter, sometimes foe
of the President.

In the Binghamton, N.Y., area, David Crowley, a supporter of most of Mr.
Reagan's policies, has been advertising less on issues and more on his
background and business experience in a strong challenge to Representative
Matthew F. McHugh.

And while Democratic incumbents argue service to the district, some Republicans
fight back on those grounds. In New Jersey, for example, Marie Muhler demands to
know why Democratic Representative James J. Howard, chairman of the House Public
Works and Transportation Committee, cannot see to the repair of roads and
bridges in the district.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

11 CHILDREN FROM VIETNAM LAND ON THE COAST

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 3


Eleven Vietnamese-American children who left Vietnam last week to rejoin their
American fathers arrived in the United States today.

They were met at Los Angeles International Airport and assisted through
immigration processing by American relief agency volunteers, who helped prepare
them for the final leg of their journey to new homes in American towns and
cities.

The children, aged 7 to 15, are the largest group of children of American
parentage from the Vietnam War years to leave that country since the war ended
in 1975. Officials of private relief agencies expressed the hope that the exodus
would continue and grow.

Fright Mixes With Joy

The arrival was marked by confusion and fright as well as relief and joy.  The
children emerged from immigration processing to meet a crowd of press and
television people. One little boy in front, apparently confused by the sight of
so many Caucasian men, cried out, ''Daddy, Daddy,'' although his father was not
on hand.

Most of the American parents of the children chose not to come to Los Angeles,
and were waiting at airports in their hometowns. The exception was Gary D.
Tanous of Camas, Wash., who flew to Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, to meet
his 15-year-old daughter, Jean Marie.

None of the children can speak English yet. Mr. Tanous said his daughter was
exhausted ''but exuberant about this whole thing.'' ''We weren't able to discuss
anything at all on the plane because there's a language barrier,'' he said. ''I
told her through an interpreter that I loved her and she said she loved me -
that and small talk.''

Left Loved Ones Behind

Nguyen Quoc Viet, 11 years old, bound for Sacramento, came out of the airplane
with tears in his eyes. Gary Larsen, who had traveled with the children as a
volunteer with Operation California, a relief agency, explained that the boy had
been weeping over leaving behind an aunt who had cared for him.

''In spite of the fact their existence in Saigon is very tough, they're still
leaving people who have been thir only emotional support for seven years,'' Mr.
Larsen said.

The children are being resettled in America under the Orderly Departure program.
The program, after several years of actively resettling children of French,
Australian and other nations' soldiers who were in Vietnam, has begun to make
progress in getting some Vietnamese-American children out, said Richard Walden,
executive director of Operation California, one of six volunteer agencies at the
airport.

20,000 Children Affected

Relief officials estimate that there were 20,000 children of American fathers in
Vietnam and that they suffered discrimination there because of their racial
heritage. Relief officials say the American Government has been reluctant to
accept them, asserting that there was inadquate proof to indicate that the
children were fathered by Americans and not other nationalities.

The few mixed-race offspring who have been released to date represent a small
minority whose parents have claimed paternity and who have sufficient
documentation to prove it to the satisfaction of the United States Government.
The Rev. Larry Hixon, an official of Church World Services, the relief arm of
the National Council of Churches, said he regarded the transfer of the children
as a bid by the Government of Vietnam to ''normalize relations between the two
Governments.''

''Vietnam has been more willing to talk than the U.S.,'' he said.  Last Friday,
as one result of the expanding effort to repatriate the children, Congress
passed a measure that would give the children of Americans first preference
among those seeking to immigrate from Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
MONDAY, OCTOBER 4, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 910 words


International
Six Israeli soldiers were killed and 22 others wounded in an ambush six miles
east of Lebanon's capital on the Beirut-Damascus highway.  The attackers were
not identified. Military analysts said that the ambush, the second in three days
on Israeli troops in the area, could provoke retaliatory raids by Israeli
artillery on Syrian and Palestinian positions across the cease-fire line. (Page
A1, Column 6.)
The foreign ministers of NATO agreed to set in motion a series of studies on how
Western security interests are affected by energy policies and the extension of
credits to the Soviet bloc nations. The ministers' discussion was seen as a step
toward easing the conflict among NATO partners over financial dealings with the
Soviet Union and its allies. (A1:5.)
Egypt's President accused Israel of ''once again beating the drums of war'' in
the Middle East. President Hosni Mubarak said the policy ''will lead to grave
consequences from which Israel will not be spared.'' Speaking in a nationally
televised address marking the opening session of Parliament, he also praised
Israeli citizens who publically condemmed the massacre in Beirut last month of
more than 300 people. (A6:3-4.)
Sudanese troops will fight beside Iraq against Iran, according to the official
Sudan press agency. The dispatch of Sudanese troops to the battlefront would be
the first involvement by regular armed forces of another Arab state at the side
of Iraqi troops since the start of the Persian Gulf war two years ago. (A8:3-6.)

Former President Jimmy Carter said he believes that Prime Minister Menachem
Begin has no intention of ever removing Israeli settlements from the West Bank
and ''has a single-minded commitment'' to annex the occupied territories.
(A9:1-3.)
National
Republican candidates for the House are running local, not national, campaigns
against incumbent Democrats, focusing more on the characteristics of their
districts or the weaknesses of their opponents than on matters like the economy.
(A1:3-4.)
Cuts in the Federal statistical system by the Reagan Administration have
resulted in the elimination or reduction of more than 50 major programs that
help Government agencies, businesses and the public measure the state of the
economy, the health of the nation and the effectiveness of Federal programs,
according to a report by the House Government Operations Committee. (A14:1-5.)
From 20 to 30 potential suspects have been identified by Attorney General Tyrone
Fahner of Illinois in his investigation to determine who spiked the
Extra-Strength Tylenol capsules with cyanide, killing at least seven people in
the area. (A14:1-2.)
Eleven children from Vietnam, who left that country last week to rejoin their
American fathers arrived in the United States. The 11 children, aged 7 to 15,
are the largest group of children of American parentage from the Vietnam War
years to leave that country since the war ended in 1975. (A15:1-3.)
The impact of video games in American homes has enormous implications for the
entertainment industry. Hollywood has plunged into the field by licensing its
successful movies to game manufacturers, and record stores are now supplementing
their disk sales with video games.  (A1:3.)
Private school enrollment declined over the last two decades despite widespread
dissatisfaction with public education in recent years, the Census Bureau
reported. The study was considered likely to give some support to President
Reagan's legislation to extend tax credits to parents of private school
students. (A14:1-2.)
Metropolitan
New Jersey Governor Kean will ask the Federal Government, the State Legislature
and the public for permission to form an ''Infrastructure Bank'' to help pay for
$10 billion in repairs and maintenance for sewers, water treatment systems and
roads statewide. The money would come from Federal grants formerly earmarked for
projects around the state and from unused proceeds from state bond issues.
(A1:2.)
Two sewage treatment plants in Brooklyn may be repaired under a plan by the city
that would divert $88 million from the construction of another plant. The
repairs would end the danger of a release of raw sewage into the city's
waterways and the possible contamination of beaches. (A1:1.)
The four Poles who sailed to freedom across the Atlantic make a story of a
daring escape with a happy ending. But it is also a story of agonizing
decisions, of men who have left behind families and have lost their jobs and
perhaps their professions, of men who are a bit frightened and very lonely. ''We
are not four tough guys having an adventure,'' said one. (A1:4-6.)
Mayor Koch reflected on his defeat by Lieut. Gov. Mario M. Cuomo in the race for
the Democratic nomination for Governor and said, ''I still can't figure it out
and I'm not going to try.'' He added, ''There's little that I could have done
differently to have changed the outcome. I gave it everything I had. I'm not
angry. I'm not going to engage in hindsight.'' (B1:1-2.)
The Rev. Dr. Norman Vincent Peale marked a half century in the pulpit of the
Marble Collegiate Reformed Church. Thousands of worshipers packed the historic
church to pay him tribute. (B2:1-3.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
GENERAL FOR A SPECIAL FORCE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 3


In a quiet ceremony that befitted soldiers trained to fight behind enemy lines,
Brig. Gen. Joseph C. Lutz signed the orders that brought into service the Army's
new Special Operations Command at Fort Bragg, N.C.

There were no drums and bugles on Friday as the general scratched his name
across the paper, stepped out of his office with his staff to uncover the
command's nameplate and went back inside for 15 minutes of coffee and doughnuts.
''It was for family only,'' an officer said.

Before going back to work, General Lutz took a few minutes to deliver a thought
on his hopes for the command that pulls together Special Forces, Rangers and
other units trained for guerrilla warfare, commando raids, counterterrorism and
other unconventional warfare.

He said in a telephone interview later: ''I told them that this was somewhat of
a breakthrough for special operations in that for the first time we have a
charter to command and control all the special operations forces under one
element. We have to continue with our professional behavior to show that we were
worthy of this structure.''

Result of Policy Shift

The Special Operations Command is a result of the Reagan Administration's plan
to rebuild a capacity for unconventional operations as expressed in Defense
Guidance, the Pentagon's classified five-year program giving strategic direction
to the military.

''We must revitalize and enhance special operations forces to project United
States power where the use of conventional forces would be premature,
inappropriate or infeasible,'' the policy document says.

The new commander of the Army's special operations is a stocky, muscular and
articulate man who weighs only five pounds more than when he was a Catholic
College All-American halfback at St. Norbert College in De Pere, Wis. But fellow
officers say he is different from many soldiers who wear the green beret.

''He's not like most of the snake-eaters who do one thing well, Special Forces,
then get into trouble and retire,'' an officer said.  Another remarked: ''Joe
Lutz has depth in three areas - special operations, armored cavalry, and
personnel management. But Joe is genuinely happiest when he is with soldiers.''

Tested Parachuting Technique

General Lutz was trained in armor as a young officer but volunteered for Special
Forces training and served with the Seventh Special Forces Group at Fort Bragg.
In that tour, he helped to test techniques for parachuting from jet transports
and took part in the first mass jump from a C-141 Starlifter in August 1965.
From there he went to Vietnam, where he fought as a Green Beret for a year.

Later he returned to tank duty as a squadron, or battalion, commander in the 82d
Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, and in 1977 he won a coveted assignment as the
colonel in command of the Third Armored Cavalry Regiment at Fort Bliss, Tex.

For his third speciality, General Lutz has a master's degree in human relations
at Webster College in St. Louis and did two tours in the Pentagon as an
education officer and then as director of human resources development in the
Army personnel office.

Of himself, General Lutz would say only, ''I've tried to be the kind of soldier
I'd want my son to work for.'' Joseph Charles Lutz was born on April 17, 1933,
in Indianapolis, where he was an all-state halfback at Cathedral High School. He
studied economics at St. Norbert's and was commissioned a second lieutenant in
the Regular Army in 1955 after being named a distinguished military graduate in
the Reserve Officers Training Corps.

Has 3 Daughters and a Son

In addition to his civilian education, General Lutz is a graduate of the Armor
Officer Career Course, the Command and General Staff College and the Naval War
College in Newport, R.I. Along the way, he learned to play golf with, as a
fellow officer says, ''no particularly profound skill.''

General Lutz is married to the former Joyce Ann Cunningham of Indianapolis. They
have three daughters, Karla, 21, Krista, 20, and Joan, 19, and a son, Joseph,
14. Their daughter Krista was named Miss El Paso in a beauty contest this year.

One day last month General Lutz went out for a parachute jump to train in
landing on water, which requires skills and reactions different from those in
landing on the ground. Then he cleaned up and caught a plane to Washington,
where he met reporters to describe his new command.

When a senior press officer in the Pentagon asked him if he would step into the
television studio to face the cameras, the general recalled his leap into the
water that morning and muttered, ''I'd rather go jump in the lake than do
that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Joseph Lutz

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 816 words


A VISIT FROM THE FOOTBINDER. And Other Stories. By Emily Prager. 190 pages.
Simon & Schuster. $14.95.

IN the longest, wildest, most blackly humorous piece in this audacious
collection of five stories, a platoon of female soldiers goes into the Vietnam
jungle armed with Lincoln-Pruitt Anti-Rape Devices - L.P.A.R.D.'s, or leopards -
lethal mechanisms designed by one Maj. Victoria Lincoln-Pruitt, the highest
ranking female officer in the United States Army.

As Major Lincoln-Pruitt tells the Joint Chiefs of Staff while promoting what she
calls Operation Foxy Fire: ''The L.P.A.R.D. has given rape a new meaning. And
for this reason, is the long-sought-for answer to the problems of female combat.
With the L.P..A.R.D., for the first time women will be able to kill easily and
fully, and with complete security that no one will be taking obscene Polaroids
of them after the battle. Guns are clearly for men, but the Leopard is for a
woman.'' To this, ''The Joint Chiefs winced, but they recognized her logic as
invincible.''

Does this sound a bit like adolescent fantasy - an exaggerated female
counterpart of boyhood dreams of glory? Of course it does, because that's
exactly what Emily Prager is up to in some of these stories. ''The
Lincoln-Pruitt Anti-Rape Device: Memoirs of the Women's Combat Army in Vietnam''
is a blatant and very funny parody of masculine war fiction, even down to
precombat flashbacks in which the ''girls,'' one by one, recall how they came to
be members of Foxy Fire.

Similarly, ''The Alumnae Bulletin,'' in which three Brearley School graduates
convene for their annual reports on recent sexual activities, is, among other
things, a takeoff of those bull sessions in which the guys get together to boast
of their conquests. Sure enough, Bunny Warburton has deflowered a virgin; Faye
O'Jones reports breathlessly, ''I bought a man for sex,'' and Edda Mallory has
not only captured a celebrity but also produces him live at the meeting.

The danger of this sort of humor is that the idea can sometimes seem funnier
than its execution. And indeed Miss Prager - a contributing editor for the
National Lampoon, Viva and Penthouse, as well as an actress who appeared for
four years on the television serial ''The Edge of Night'' and has performed on
''The National Lampoon Radio Hour'' - is occasionally guilty of overcerebration.
Every so often this reader had to stop and reflect for a while before he could
see the wit of what Miss Prager was up to.

Fortunately, there's a lot more going on in these stories than jokes and sexual
warfare. This is evident in the following wonderfully ambiguous descriptive line
from a scene in the antirape story in which warfare works its malign influence
on pastoral beauty: ''The sun, in its decline, shot its rays like deadbolts
through the open water, and portions of the bank were bathed in the most golden
and secret of lights.''

It is further evident in the book's two shorter stories, ''Agoraphobia,'' about
a young woman struggling to get herself to a party with the help of an imaginary
friend who ''had refused to vanish at adolescence''; and ''Wrinkled Linen,'' in
which another young woman uses her strength to articulate her fragility. In both
these pieces, Miss Prager is more concerned with the social constraints on women
than she is with fantasies of getting even.

Her considerable depths are even evident in the antirape story, where nothing
turns out as one expects it to, and the ending is a twist of a twist of a twist.
But most of all they are apparent in the title story, ''A Visit From the
Footbinder,'' where Miss Prager combines her talents most frighteningly. The
feminist in her seethes at the horror and injustice of the not-so-ancient
Chinese practice of mutilating the feet of aristocratic women. The psychologist
in her understands how the weight of tradition can crush individual protest. The
comedian in her renders an aptly subtle parody of that tinkly literary cliche
that results when Western muscles try to conjure up the delicate Orient.
Together, they make a powerful statement about the crippling power of tradition
- a statement that, incidentally, is captured by Frank Morris's dust-jacket
illustration with particularly horrifying genius.

What we have here then in Emily Prager's collection is the collaboration of an
ideologue, a comedian and a literary artist. When they cooperate, the book is
splendid and original. When they fight, it declines into cleverness. It will be
most intriguing to follow the future adventures of these multiple talents.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Emily Prager

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 5, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ASIANS FORM GROUP ON HAZARDOUS PRODUCTS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Oct. 2


Consumer advocates have organized an investigative network to report on
hazardous products being sold in the Asia-Pacific region and to seek action from
governments to ban or restrict them.

Anwar Fazal, president of the International Organization of Consumer Unions,
said in an interview this week that the network, called Consumer Interpol, had
representatives from every country in the region except China, Vietnam, Cambodia
and Laos. The international network, he said, covers the American, European and
African continents as well.

''Our representatives will investigate hazardous products being marketed in
their countries and provide evidence for governments to act upon,'' Mr. Fazal
said.

He said there was enough evidence to show that inferior goods, especially infant
formulas, harmful pesticides and drugs, were being dumped in poor countries
after they were banned in the more industrialized nations.

''Developing countries thus waste scarce money on goods of little value or
actual hazard to health,'' he said.

Meeting on Artificial Milk

The International Organization of Consumer Unions met this week at the
University of the Philippines campus with health and consumer groups in the
Philippines to stimulate action against indiscriminate use of artificial milk
for infants. The weeklong conference was supported by the United Nations
Children's Fund and the World Health Organization.

In 1981, the two agencies promulgated a marketing code to regulate the sale of
infant formula in poor countries, where breast feeding is generally safer and
less expensive. The World Health Organization reiterated the objectives of the
code at a recent regional conference in Manila.

A member of the Philippine consumer movement, Julie Amargo, said in an interview
that infant formula milk was still widely promoted and advertised in the
Philippines with dire consequences on infant nutrition. Ministry of Education
figures show that some 75 percent of Filipino children suffer from some form of
nutrition deficiency, many as a result of improper milk feeding.

Miss Amargo said that, contrary to the code of the United Nations agencies,
infant-milk manufacturers continued to advertise their products in the third
world. Likewise, she said, Philippine hospitals and pediatricians are slow to
respond to the campaign to promote breast-feeding.

She said the consumer movement of the Philippines forwarded proposals to the
Philippine Government to discourage the use of infant formula, especially in
slum areas with inadequate sanitation.

Hospital Practice Criticized

An international research consultant, Douglas Clement, who was also at the
conference at the university here, said he recently visited the two largest
hospitals in Manila and found that their nursery procedures discouraged mothers
from breast-feeding their infants and encouraged them to use bottles by giving
free samples from milk companies.

''These companies which are based in the Western countries must be made to see
the harmful effects of their indiscriminate promotion of infant-milk products,''
he declared.

The consumer activists also focused on harmful pesticides that they said had
been found in products on supermarket shelves in the Philippines. The pesticides
are widely used in rice, sugar and banana plantations.

Consumer Interpol is also compiling lists of drugs being sold in the
Asia-Pacific region that have been banned in the West. This will be provided to
health authorities, who have had inadequate data on harmful drugs.

The Government of Bangladesh was cited for swift action in publishing a list of
1,700 medicines that it banned as useless or harmful - many of which had also
been taken off the market in the United States. Sri Lanka and Malaysia enacted
similar restrictions.

After the action in Bangladesh, the United States reportedly sent a letter to
Dacca asking for delay in carrying out the order to allow time for discussions
between Bangladesh and the American drug industry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 5, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN U.N., PEKING OFFICIAL PRAISES THIRD WORLD

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 937 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 4


Foreign Minister Huang Hua of China told the 37th session of the United Nations
General Assembly today that the third world had wrought sweeping changes in the
world in recent years, and he affirmed that China stood proudly among the ranks
of third-world nations.

''The emergence of the third world in the international arena after World War II
is an event of primary importance of our time,'' he said.

By banding together, third-world countries have preserved their independence and
''made major contributions toward restructuring the old international economic
order.''

Mr. Huang noted with pride that the 12th congress of China's Communist Party,
held last month in Peking, had set out ''a grand program'' for the country's
''socialist modernization,'' and he declared that ''China now enjoys political
stability and unity, and her economy is growing steadily.''

Assails Soviet and Vietnam

In foreign policy, he said the very creation of the People's Republic of China
''had removed the social causes of China's submission to foreign aggression and
those of any possibility that China might commit aggression abroad.''

''In the 33 years of the People's Republic,'' Mr. Huang said, ''we have shown by
deeds that China never attaches herself to any big power, or group of powers,
nor yields to pressure from any big power.''

Mr. Huang excoriated the Soviet Union and Vietnam for their respective military
occupations of Afghanistan and Cambodia.  The Cambodians, he said ''had won
important victories in their war of resistance,'' while the Afghans ''have not
been cowed by their formidable enemy.'' He called for troop withdrawals from
both nations so that their peoples could determine their own future.

The Chinese minister also was one of the many speakers here since the session
began last Monday to level serious criticism at the United Nations itself. Most
of them took their cue from Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar, who broke
with tradition last month during his first annual message and sharply criticized
the role of the United Nations in world affairs.

Abuse of Veto Power

Mr. Huang said: ''Events over a period of time indicate that the role of the
United Nations has been eroding. This is chiefly because certain countries have
abused their veto power, bypassed the United Nations or refused to implement its
resolutions.''

Mr. Perez de Cuellar, in his first annual report to the world organization last
month said openly what many people associated with the United Nations had been
saying for years: that it plays an increasingly insignificant role in world
affiars.

Again and again, the speakers here have echoed Mr. Perez de Cuellar's concern.
Javier Arias Stella, Peru's Minister for External Affairs, called the crisis of
the United Nations one of the basic elements of a worsening international
situation. He expressed the hope that the Secretary General's recent annual
report would promote a debate that would ''restrengthen'' the world body.

Peacekeeping Operations

Svenn Stray, Norway's Foreign Minister calls for a forthright role for the
Secretary General, so as to bring potentially dangerous situations to the
attention of the Security Council. He endorsed Mr.  Perez de Cuellar's proposals
for better fact-finding in potential conflict areas, as well as the Secretary
General's recommendation that member states, especially members of the Security
Council, urgently study means by which peacekeeping operations could be
strengthened.

The United Nations, said Canada's Foreign Minister, Allan J.  MacEachen, plays
''a unique and absolutely essential role in the promotion of the rule of law,''
but he warned that its crisis management capacity had been called into question
by squabbling within the Security Council, by an erosion of the constitutional
division of authority between the Council and the General Assembly and by a
cycle of ineffectual resolutions.

Mr. MacEachen hailed the Secretary General's ''commitment to administrative
streamlining'' and said that pragmatic changes must be made or the United
Nations would lose its validity as a forum for international negotiations.

Ineffective on Afghan Problem

Chile's Foreign Minister, Rene Rojas Galdames, stated baldly that the United
Nations had proved ''sterile'' in its attempts to find a solution to the Afghan
problem. He added that he had noted with great disillusionment the impotence of
world organizations to preserve peace and create a climate of what he called
minimum consensus.

Oskar Fischer, Foreign Minister of East Germany, expressed the regret that
''certain quarters,'' including permanent members of the Security Council, had
been trying to exclude the United Nations from the settlement of acute problems,
and he praised the efforts of the Secretary General to strengthen the role and
effectiveness of the world body.

The Netherlands would support the Secretary General fully in his efforts to
widen the influence and powers of the United Nations, according to Foreign
Minister Andreas van Agt. The Netherlands, Mr.  van Agt said, shared the
Secretary General's ''sense of anxiety and his disappointment about the
inability of the United Nations to live up to the hopes of the peoples of the
world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 5, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 640 words


FAILURE TO REGISTER FOR DRAFT LEADS TO 2 1/2 YEAR SENTENCE

SAN DIEGO, Calif., Oct. 4 (UPI) - A Federal district judge sentenced Benjamin H.
Sasway today to 30 months in a minimum security prison camp for refusing to
register for a draft.

It was the first time since the Vietnam War that a prison sentence had been
imposed on a person convicted of the felony of willful nonregistration. Only one
other person has been convicted, but he was not given a prison term.

After the sentencing, Judge Gordon Thompson Jr. released Mr.  Sasway, 21 years
old, on $10,000 bond pending the outcome of his appeal. Charles T. Bumer, Mr.
Sasway's volunteer attorney, has filed an appeal charging selective prosecution
by the Government. The judge called the grounds for the appeal ''frivolous.''

The judge had denied bond for Mr. Sasway, of Vista, Calif., after he was
convicted Aug. 26, saying that he feared the young man might flee to Canada in
the style of 1960's war resisters.

After his release, Mr. Sasway said he planned to re-enroll in college while he
awaited the outcome of the appeal. That was one of the conditions required for
him to be released on bond.

Read Statement to Court

Mr. Sasway was allowed to read a statement to the court before he was sentenced
in which he said: ''I am obligated by my conscience to protest the registration
as a moral assault on people's freedom of choice. I believe registration leads
to a draft, and I believe that a draft leads to a kind of unjust Vietnam War.''

Judge Thompson, with his chin propped on his hand, stared back at Mr. Sasway, a
former political science student at Humboldt University, as Mr. Sasway said, ''I
only ask that you let your conscience be your guide as I have let my conscience
be mine.''

Urging that Mr. Sasway be given at least a six-month sentence, United States
Attorney Peter K. Nunez, the chief prosecutor, said, ''Mr. Sasway's actions have
not been based on any moral or religious conviction, but on his political
beliefs.

''What the defendant is asking, your honor, is for the right to break the law
because of his political beliefs.''

Defends Client's Beliefs

Mr. Bumer said his client's sincerity was beyond question and added, ''He's not
a draft dodger because there isn't any draft to dodge, and when he says he would
serve his country, I think we can assume that to be true.

''His motivation, although I know your honor disagrees with it, was of the
highest moral standards.'' Outside the courtroom, Mr. Sasway's mother, Dolores,
said she was not surprised by the sentence.  ''I just hope that the country will
listen to these young people,'' Mrs. Sasway said. ''We can't take away these
people's freedom just because they disagree.''

In another draft case, a Federal judge in Cleveland today reaffirmed her
rejection of a defense motion asserting that Mark A.  Schmucker was singled out
for prosecution. Mr. Schmucker is the third draft resister to be tried this
year.

Judge Ann Aldrich last week rejected the defense motion and today reaffirmed it
with a written order.

----

Registration at 94 Percent

WASHINGTON, Oct. 4 (AP) - More than 170,000 of the young men who had failed to
register for the draft have now signed up, bringing the compliance rate to 94.2
percent, Selective Service officials said today.

Joan Lamb, a spokesman, said that 8,742,000 young men had now registered,
leaving an estimated 500,000 eligible men who had failed to sign up. She said
that last spring 674,000 men had failed to register.

Men are required to register at Post Offices within 30 days of their 18th
birthday.

----

Anti-Draft Protest Planned

WASHINGTON, Oct. 4 (UPI) - A national antidraft organization said today that it
would try to close down the Selective Service headquarters Oct. 18 in a ''civil
disobedience blockade.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Benjamin Sasway

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 5, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AMERASIAN CHILDREN START SETTLING IN

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 560 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Oct. 4


In Luis Villegas's house today, two small bodies were parked in front of a
television set, two more children chattered across the kitchen table and one
orbited the refrigerator while his mother rummaged for snacks.

The size of Mr. Villegas's household leaped from one soul to seven with his
reunion last night with the family he last saw seven years ago in Vietnam. Mr.
Villegas is the father of three of the 11 Amerasian children, American citizens
born and reared in wartime Vietnam, who reached the United States Sunday to be
reunited with American fathers. Similar scenes were reported from coast to
coast; the biggest reunion was at the Villegas home.

If the life of the 62-year-old security guard has changed, the lives of his
Vietnamese wife and their children have been transformed.

Reunion Delayed by War

Four days earlier they were residents of the Vietnamese village of Go Cong,
where they had all lived before Mr. Villegas left for a visit to America. Mr.
Villegas, a civilian construction worker, had come here to seek a transfer from
his American-based company. Before he could get back, Saigon fell.

Now they were in San Diego, in a lively neighborhood of Asians and Hispanics and
black people.  ''I am beaucoup happy,'' said Nguyen Thi Chinh, who soon will
officially become Mrs. Luis Carlos Villegas. Her small face radiated excitement.

Besides Nguyen, Mr. Villegas's new family is composed of their 13-year-old son,
Marco, and two daughters, Linh Da, 11, and Dora, 10, as well as Nguyen Thi's two
older daughters, Tuyet Thi Tram and Mai Tuyet Thi Tram, whom Mr. Villegas
adopted.

As part of their adaptation to American life, Mr. Villegas said, Linh Da will
become plain Linda. Tuyet and Mai Tuyet are to remain the same, having been
given a Chinese name for ''star,'' he said, that was so pretty their mother had
used it twice.

The family went early to a Christian refugee service to register Tuyet and Mai
Tuyet as refugees.  ''Those two are refugees, my wife is an immigrant, my kids
are Americans - we've got three nationalities right here,'' a beaming Mr.
Villegas said.

In the years since America withdrew from Vietnam, the plight of the Amerasian
children left behind has been etched in stories of rejection and scornce.

The Villegas children had a taste of that experience. ''People don't like,''
Mrs. Villegas said in halting English, pointing all around to her brood. She
said other children in the village often picked on Marco, tried to pick fights
and such.

''They didn't talk much about what happened and I don't want them to remember
that,'' Mr. Villegas said.  Mr. Villegas collected his family from volunteer
relief workers Sunday night. When he saw them, he said, ''I was kinda wanting to
cry at first, but then it looked like something lit up in me.''

They all piled into the little house. Mr. Villegas put together their first
American dinner, of rice, kidney beans and spicy fish in the fashion of his
native Panama.

Dinner for seven, one of the instant changes in Mr. Villegas life.  Someone had
also attached a rose to the antenna of his pickup truck.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Kieu My Thi and mother photo of Luis Carlos
Villegas and daughter photo of Ruth Everton and grandaughter photo of Gary
Tanous and daughter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 5, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Coming Home

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 368 words


It is not rare for Congress to perform acts of genuine virtue, but what is rare
is for Congress, having done so, to fail to preen about it. That's just what
happened in the closing hours Friday night.  Though hardly anyone knows it, the
rush to adjourn produced a law concerning children that should warm American
hearts.

The law calls for this country, at last, to try diligently to bring home
thousands of American children who have never set foot on American soil. In some
countries they are persecuted as half-breeds.  In Vietnam, they are the ''dust
of life'' and often run the streets.  They are the Amerasians, children of
soldiers and other Americans who have served in Southeast Asia.

Until now, only those claimed by their fathers or who could identify a specific
father were admissible. The new law recognizes that, though they live in South
Korea, Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos, they are American children. It
expresses the desire of Congress that consular officials be liberal in accepting
evidence, not just documents but also blue eyes or blond hair. As soon as the
executive branch writes rules to implement the law, the flow of Amerasian
children should start, especially from South Korea and Thailand.

The law won't soon do much for those in Vietnam. Some - among the few whose
fathers claim them - are already starting to arrive. For the many others,
instructing consuls to be more liberal is academic.  There are no diplomatic
relations between the United States and Vietnam and hence no consuls. Still,
there will be some benefit.  Children who can make their way to other countries,
with the help of church groups, for instance, will much more easily be admitted
to the United States.

The heroes of the story include Representative Stewart McKinney of Connecticut,
who devoted himself to the legislation for more than two years; Senator Jeremiah
Denton of Alabama, a longtime prisoner of war in Vietnam, and the Rev. Alfred
Keane, a tireless Maryknoll priest. They have reason to be proud. For America
finally to claim these, its children, is an act of both humanity and patriotism.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 5, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
TUESDAY, OCTOBER 5, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


International
Israeli jets attacked missile positions of Syrians in Lebanon, reportedly
destroying a number of sites along the Beirut-Damascus road. The attack followed
Sunday's ambush of an Israeli bus in which six Israeli soldiers were killed and
22 were wounded, 11 seriously.  (Page A1, Column 6.)
Lebanon's Premier was asked to stay by President Amin Gemayel. The President, a
Maronite Christian, had to choose a Sunni Moslem under rigid Lebanese tradition,
and he decided to ask Shafik al-Wazzan to remain at the urging of Saeb Salam,
the 77-year-old former Prime Minister, who is probably the most influential
Moslem leader in Lebanon. (A1:5.)
Continuity in Bonn's foreign policy was suggested by Chancellor Helmut Kohl at
his first news conference since his election by Parliament. The West German
leader said that his new Government planned to seek good relations with European
Communist countries and that it wanted ''friendship and partnership, but not
dependency'' in its ties with Washington. (A1:2.)
Glenn Gould died in Toronto after suffering a stroke at the age of 50. The
Canadian pianist who retired from a concert career in 1964 to become a recording
artist was best known for Bach interpretations.  (A1:5-6.)
National
Tax credits for private school tuition similar to a Federal proposal pressed by
President Reagan are the focus of a state case to be reviewed by the Supreme
Court. Opening the 1982-83 term, the Justices added to a sizable list of
sensitive issues consideration of a Minnesota law that allows state income tax
deductions for private, parochial and, in some instances, public school tuition.
(A1:3-4.)
The Supreme Court agreed to decide several other issues, including liability for
medical bills for a criminal suspect who is wounded while being captured or held
for trial. (A27:1-4.)
A shift in plans to enter college is unusually widespread this fall, according
to private institutions across the country. The colleges report that an
uncommonly high number of prospective freshmen who were accepted for admission
and paid deposits last spring have forfeited the deposits, primarily because of
anxiety over ability to pay the bills. (A1:1-3.)
The scores of black students in the Scholastic Aptitude Test are on average
about 100 points lower than the national norm, according to results made public
by the College Board. George H. Hanford, president of the board, said he hoped
that the disclosure would ''illuminate the extent and nature of the educational
deficit this nation must overcome.'' (A21:1-3.)
A prison sentence for nonregistration for a draft was imposed for the first time
since the Vietnam War. A Federal judge in San Diego sentenced Benjamin H. Sasway
to 30 months in a minimum-security prison camp. He is free on $10,000 bond
pending the outcome of his appeal. (A14:1-2.)
Agents investigating the deaths of seven people from cyanide in Extra-Strength
Tylenol capsules focused on a parking lot near Des Plaines, Ill. A week ago,
before the deaths occurred, two sheriff's deputies found hundreds of empty
Tylenol capsules strewn on the ground with boxes and a white powder. The
deputies became ill with symptoms of poisoning. (A18:1-4.)
Critics of the C-5B cargo plane said that a new, more versatile plane could be
produced almost as rapidly and at a lower ultimate cost. The critics charged
that the Air Force was pressing to sign a contract with Lockheed to buy 50
C-5B's for about $10 billion before more adverse comment was disclosed on its
cost, delivery schedule and performance. (A10:1-4.)
Organ transplants have risen sharply in numbers in recent months and survival
rates have improved. The trends are an apparent result of surgeons' improved
ability to perform transplants and of key new drug therapies that help prevent
rejection of the transplanted organs.  (C1:5.)
Metropolitan
A hiring freeze in mayoral agencies was imposed by Mayor Koch, who cited the
local impact of a ''national depression'' and the cost of New York City's recent
contract settlement with nonuniformed employees. The freeze, the Mayor said,
will last at least 30 days and is designed to provide time to consider other
ways to deal with the city's worsening economy. (A1:1.)
Lewis E. Lehrman has spent $8.8 million so far in his campaign for Governor,
compared with $1.67 million spent by his Democratic-Liberal opponent, Lieut.
Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, according to the finance reports filed by the two
candidates. Mr. Lehrman spent about $7 million to defeat Paul J. Curran in the
Republican primary and has spent $1 million more for additional television
advertising.  (B4:3-6.)
Late filing of nomination papers with the Board of Elections has barred 10
Democratic candidates for State Supreme Court judgeships in Manhattan from the
Democratic line in the Nov. 2 elections. In Manhattan, the Democratic nomination
for the seats is usually tantamount to election. (B1:6.)
Leroy R. Grumman died at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I., at
the age of 87. Mr. Grumman, a quiet engineer, founded an aircraft-repair company
in a little Long Island garage and guided it as it grew into one of the nation's
biggest defense contractors. (D25:1-2.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 5, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION;
SPUTNIK RECALLED: SCIENCE AND MATH IN TROUBLE AGAIN

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2066 words

DATELINE: TWENTY


FIVE years ago yesterday, the Soviet Union's launching of the satellite Sputnik
not only ushered in the modern space age but shocked Americans into the
recognition that Russian science and technology were capable of surpassing their
own.

Sputnik was a dramatic and vivid symbol. Americans could go out into their
backyards at night and watch the tiny speck move slowly and inexorably across
the sky. The Russian accomplishment was to inspire profound changes in many
aspects of American life, and in none more than education.

In the next decade, the quality of education at all levels became the center of
a national debate and the focus of major Federal programs. High school science
education was catapulted in a few short years from the 18th to the 20th century,
and schools at all levels discovered foreign languages. Millions of dollars were
poured into retraining a generation of science, math and language teachers, and
the precedent was set for pervasive Federal involvement in elementary and
secondary education.

A decade later, the rush to reconstruct American education ended as abruptly as
it had begun. When Neil Armstrong walked on the moon in 1969, it signified that
the immediate job of ''catching up with the Russians'' had been accomplished.
The Great Society programs, the war in Vietnam and other changes sent the
country looking in other directions.

Today, educators look back on the post-Sputnik decade with some nostalgia.
''There was an excitement in education at the time,'' recalled Ernest L. Boyer,
a former United States Commissioner of Education. ''The public seemed to turn to
education for answers to a critical problem. Teachers and local schools were
brought into the action.''

They also look back with some sense of irony. There is evidence that, in the
face of new kinds of threats - such as economic competition from Japan - the
country faces the same urgent need to bolster declining science, math and
language skills as it did in the late 1950's, but today there is no vivid symbol
like Sputnik to rally national attention.

''What we need is another Sputnik,'' Mr. Boyer suggested. ''Maybe what we should
do is get the Japanese to put a Toyota into orbit.'' To some, the weaknesses in
the American educational system dramatized by Sputnik came as no surprise. The
country emerged from World War II knowing that science and technology would play
an increasing role in American life. ''The development of radar, the atomic
bomb, electronic intelligence - all of these gave the country a sense that
science and technology were going to improve the quality of life,'' observed
Alphonse Buccino, deputy director of the Office of Scientific Engineering
Personnel of the National Science Foundation.

In 1945, Vannevar Bush, director of the Office of Scientific Research and
Development, reported to President Truman that in the absence of significant
scientific progress ''no amount of achievement in other directions can insure
our health, prosperity and security as a nation in the modern world.'' His
report led Congress in 1950 to establish the National Science Foundation, which
was to develop a national policy to promote basic research and education in
science.

Throughout the early 1950's, critics were pointing out flaws in American
education. Nicholas DeWitt of Harvard found evidence that the Soviet Union had
overtaken the United States in turning out engineers and scientists, and a 1956
study by the Modern Language Association pointed to the low number of people
studying foreign languages in a country that had taken on a new role in the
world.

In 1957, Elliot L. Richardson, then Assistant Secretary of Health, Education and
Welfare, organized a task force on the educational needs of the country, and a
subcommittee of the House of Representatives began hearings on what might be
done.

So when Sputnik burst across the sky it dramatized problems already identified
by academic and political leaders, but pushed them higher on the national
agenda. ''Nothing really happened until Sputnik made the situation into a crisis
event,'' said Paul D. Hurd, professor emeritus of science education at Stanford.


Eisenhower's Pleas to Congress

In January 1958, President Eisenhower twice appealed to Congress, stressing the
importance of education to national security, and that July Congress passed the
National Defense Education Act, identifying math, science and foreign languages
as areas in which the nation had a special stake. Financing of educational
programs by the National Science Foundation also began to soar.

The net result was a truly remarkable crash program to upgrade the nation's
educational resources. By 1973 half a million secondary schoolteachers in math,
science, languages and, eventually, other areas, had gone through summer
workshops and other federally supported programs to raise their skills.
Thousands more had received graduate fellowships.

The next priority was curriculum reform. In the years after Sputnik, the N.S.F.
poured more than $100 million into new curriculums that revolutionized the
teaching of the sciences. The ''new math'' and the so-called ''alphabet soup''
curriculums, such as P.S.S.C., the Physical Science Study Committee, were
designed to incorporate the latest findings into high school textbooks and to
break the traditional cycles of reading-lecture-recitation. ''High school
science curriculums went from Newton to Einstein in little over a decade,''
recalled Harold Howe 2d, a former United States Commissioner of Education.

Meanwhile, new connections were established between research-oriented scholars
and classroom teachers. The language laboratory became a permanent fixture in
schools at all levels, and the National Defense Education Act set the precedent
for Federal involvement in local elementary and high schools.

A Reduced Sense of Urgency

By the late 1960's, though, these strenuous efforts had begun to run their
course. The moderation of the cold war and the success of the space program had
reduced the sense of urgency. A back-to-basics movement took root, cutting into
school time for science and languages.

Perhaps most important, President Johnson's Great Society program created a new
social agenda that emphasized equal access to education, in contrast to the
earlier emphasis on producing highlevel specialists. The National Defense
Education Act was replaced as the focus of Federal educational efforts at the
precollege level by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, which
supported projects such as Head Start for disadvantaged students.

Reaction also developed against the ''alphabet soup'' curriculums and the ''new
math.'' These had worked well for many teachers and for the most talented
students, but many others found them too specialized and abstract, and most high
school science teaching has now gone back to the old methods. Enrollment in high
school language instruction dropped sharply, largely because, during the revolt
of college students against required courses in the 1960's, language
requirements were the first to go.

The pendulum continued to swing, and evidence is now plentiful that 25 years
after Sputnik the country finds itself debating many of the same issues that it
faced then.

The National Assessment of Educational Progress has issued a series of reports
on the low level of knowledge of science and math by elementary and high school
students, and three years ago a Presidential commission headed by James A.
Perkins, the former head of Cornell University, criticized what it called the
''scandalous incompetence'' of American citizens in foreign languages.

''Nothing less is at issue,'' the panel warned, ''than the nation's security.''

A Different Kind of Problem

There are, however, some significant differences between the situations now and
in the 1950's. Today there is no dearth of able science majors in college and
none of the manpower shortages in scientific fields that marked the pre-Sputnik
era. Instead, the problem revolves around the scientific competence of the
population and work force as a whole.

''Sputnik made us realize we were still importing scientists, said F. James
Rutherford, chief educational officer of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science. ''But it did not reach people who are legislators and
heads of business enterprises who don't understand enough about science and
technology but still have to make decisions involving it.''

Gerald Holton, the prominent Harvard physicist, agreed, suggesting, in
retrospect, that Sputnik had not been crisis enough. ''The reasons the Russians
got Sputnik into orbit first was that they put their money on large boosters,''
he said. ''Their electronics was not at all that sophisticated. It only took us
six months to get back in the race, and once we'd won it we relaxed.''

In doing so, Mr. Holton said, the nation passed up the opportunity to develop a
scientifically educated citizenry. ''The post-Sputnik era turned out scientists,
but the real challenge was to lay the foundation of scientific literacy in the
nation as a whole.''

Another difference lies in the public perception of the threats faced by the
country. ''The problem today seems both more pervasive and more ominous,''
suggested Mr. Boyer of the Carnegie Foundation.  ''The threat is not just
military, but it seems to have found its way into the interior of the economy.
Somehow it doesn't have the headline-grabbing, traumatizing explicitness of that
little basketball glittering up there 25 years ago.

The political climate is also different. President Reagan, while he has been
publicly critical of the level of math and science instruction, is committed to
mobilizing the private sector while reducing the Federal role in education, not
to enlarging Federal programs under the guns of such threats as Japanese
technology.  Because the threat is seen in terms of economic rather than
military security, many people feel the solution lies outside the political
system.

Others, however, reject that approach. ''There seems to be a myth that somehow
if we let every school district do what it wants without any guidance, the
national purpose will somehow be served,'' said Paul Simon, the Illinois
Democrat who heads the House Select Subcommittee on Education, ''It will take
leadership to provide this, but unfortunately the Reagan Administration is not
prepared to do so.''

In a broader sense, though, the change is rooted in the way Americans have
traditionally approached education. Since the late 19th century the Government
has poured billions of dollars into education, but rarely for plainly
educational purposes. The Morrill Act of 1862, establishing the land grant
colleges, was a means to dispose of excess Federal land. The G.I. Bill was a
device to reward veterans and ease their way back into normal life. The
Elementary and Secondary Act, pushed by a President who was once a teacher but
never had his name on a major educational bill, was essentially a device to
combat poverty.

The outpouring of Federal funds into education that followed the launching of
Sputnik in October 1957 may have been a response to a military threat, but it
also represents one of the rare moments in American history when the core of the
educational process - the content of curriculums and textbooks, the skills of
teachers and so forth - moved to the center of the national attention.

Perhaps the nostalgia of educators for the post-Sputnik decade lies in the fact
that such a fervor for education had rarely occurred before and has not happened
since. Like Sputnik itself, the urgency about education as a national priority
and the excitement of educational reform passed across the sky and over the
horizon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon of Sputnik

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 6, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Chinese-Soviet Parley Begins

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 270 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 5


Chinese-Soviet talks, the first in nearly three years, resumed today in an
effort to improve relations between the two Communist powers, foreign diplomatic
sources said.

The talks were held in secrecy, and no details were available. The Chinese
Foreign Ministry declined comment. The meetings were not reported in the Chinese
press.

In Moscow, President Leonid I. Brezhnev and Truong Chinh, the chairman of
Vietnam's Council of State, agreed during talks in the Kremlin that improved
relations between China and both the Soviet Union and Vietnam would be in the
interests of all three Communist nations, the Soviet press agency Tass reported.

The Soviet team is led by Deputy Foreign Minister Leonid F.  Ilyichev and the
Chinese side is led by Deputy Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, who is in charge of
Soviet and East European affairs.

Vietnam and its traditional enemy, China, fought a brief border war in early
1979 and have repeatedly accused each other of border violations since then. On
Monday, China said Vietnam was guilty of continuing border provocations and of
firing on civilians during China's National Day celebrations last weekend.

Cambodia is also a major issue between China and both Vietnam and the Soviet
Union. Vietnam, with Soviet backing, invaded Cambodia in December 1978 and drove
the Pol Pot group from Phnom Penh, the capital. Since then, the Chinese have
continued to support the Pol Pot group in its guerrilla war against the
Vietnamese and the Cambodian Communist Government they installed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 7, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. OFFICIAL DEFENDS POLICY ON CUBANS IN ANGOLA

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 526 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 6


A senior State Department official contended today that the United States was
politically realistic in seeking simultaneous accords on the departure of Cuban
troops from Angola and on independence for South-West Africa, the disputed
territory also known as Namibia.

The official said that a historic opportunity now existed to solve the two
issues, the presence of 15,000 Cuban soldiers in Angola and South Africa's
continuing occupation of Namibia.

On Tuesday, Angola's Foreign Minister, Paulo Jorge, accused the United States of
''suffering a kind of paranoia'' over the Cuban troops.

American diplomats said this language reflected a new hardening in Angola's tone
that had recently become apparent in private negotiations that have been in
progress for several months.

Neither Impasse nor Breakdown

Today the senior official said that the talks had reached neither an impasse nor
a breakdown, but he acknowledged that American envoys had failed to win from
Angola the specific agreement that Washington wants. The United States wants
Angola to agree to a timetable for the departure of the Cubans.

By political realism, he said he meant that both Angola and South Africa have
security interests that must be satisfied before agreements are reached. South
Africa contends that the Cuban forces threaten its safety and has said Nambia
cannot be freed until they go; Angola wants assurances that South African
forces, now operating in southern Angola, will no longer pose a threat once the
Cubans are gone.

The senior official observed the diplomatic protocol demanded by African states,
refusing to link the twin accords. The United States calls them parallel
agreements. But he observed that Washington does not believe there will be a
settlement to free Namibia unless progress is made on the issue of Cuban troops.


Shultz Discusses Problems

Secretary of State George P. Shultz discussed the Namibian-Cuban problems today
with three African Foreign Ministers, R.J. Ouko of Kenya, Joaquim Alberto
Chissano of Mozambique and Salim A. Salim of Tanzania. The Secretary was also
host at a breakfast for the other members of the Western contact group involved
in the Namibian negotiations, France, Britain, West Germany and Canada. In
addition, Mr. Shultz gave a lunch for ministers and United Nations
representatives of the members of the Organization of African Unity.

The Secretary also met with Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann, President and
Prime Minister of the coalition dominated by Pol Pot forces that is seeking to
oust the Vietnamese-installed regime in Cambodia. The State Department
spokesman, John Hughes, called that meeting a ''good exchange.''

The United States supports the coalition's retention of Cambodia's seat at the
United Nations. Earlier today the General Assembly's credentials committee again
approved the coalition's claim without a vote. A challenge from Vietnam and the
Soviet Union is expected later in the month on the Assembly floor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 7, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM MEMORIAL: QUESTIONS OF ARCHITECTURE;
An Appraisal

BYLINE: By PAUL GOLDBERGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1397 words


WHEN a plan by Maya Yang Lin, a 21-year-old Yale architecture student, was
selected last year as the winner of a nationwide competition to find a design
for the Vietnam Veterans Memorial on the Mall near the Lincoln Memorial in
Washington, it was hailed by the architectural press with words such as

''stunning,'' ''dignified'' and ''eminently right.'' The reaction was less
enthusiastic from Vietnam veterans themselves, some of whom found the proposed
memorial rather more cool and abstract than they would have liked. Nonetheless,
Miss Lin's scheme, which is neither a building nor a sculpture but, rather, a
pair of 200-foot-long black granite walls that join to form a V and embrace a
gently sloping plot of ground between them, was approved rapidly by the
Department of the Interior, the Fine Arts Commission and other public agencies
that have jurisdiction over what is built in official Washington.

Construction began last March. Next week, however, the Fine Arts Commission will
hold a public hearing to consider a revised design for the memorial, despite the
fact that by now the granite walls - on which are carved the names of all 57,692
Americans who were killed in Vietnam from 1963 to 1973 - are nearly complete.
Opposition to the scheme from Vietnam veterans, which was muted when Miss Lin's
design was first announced, later grew so intense as to lead to the unusual step
of a proposed design change in mid-construction.

Threat to Integrity Seen

The hearing is scheduled for Oct. 13, and the battle lines have already been
drawn fairly sharply. On one side, defending the changes, will be the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Fund, the organization that sponsored the architectural
competition and had committed itself to building the winning scheme, as well as
an advisory committee of Vietnam veterans who were among the more outspoken
critics of the original design.

On the other side is not only Miss Lin, the designer, but the American Institute
of Architects, which has taken a strong public position in defense of the
original design and which sees the move to change the memorial as a threat to
the integrity of the system of architectural competitions in general. Robert M.
Lawrence, the institute's president, wrote this summer to J. Carter Brown,
chairman of the Fine Arts Commission: ''What we have here is nothing less than a
breach of faith. The effort to compromise the design breaks faith with the
designer who won the competition and all those who participated in this
competition.''

What has provoked the heated emotions, however, is less the integrity of
architectural competition than the specifics of Miss Lin's design. To many of
the Vietnam veterans, her scheme was too abstract to reflect the emotion that
the Vietnam War symbolized to them, and too lacking in the symbols of heroism
that more conventional monuments contain. They saw in the simple granite walls
on which the names of the dead are inscribed not merely a means of honoring the
dead, but a way of declaring that the Vietnam War was in some way different from
past wars - from wars such as World War II, whose heroism could be symbolized in
such a vibrant and active memorial as the Iwo Jima Monument just across the
Potomac River, which contains a statue of marines struggling to raise the
American flag.

A Statue Is Proposed

The changes in the Vietnam Memorial, therefore, have all been in the direction
of making it less of an abstraction, and more realistic. When the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Fund decided some months ago to give in to criticism of the
design from Vietnam veterans, it named an advisory committee consisting entirely
of Vietnam veterans, in contrast to the jury of internationally known architects
and design professionals who had selected Miss Lin's design. That committee
selected Frederick Hart, a 38-year-old sculptor who had been a partner in a
losing entry in the original competition, and commissioned him to create a
realistic sculpture to act as the memorial's new centerpiece.

What Mr. Hart has created is an 8-foot-tall statue of three armed soldiers, one
black and two white, which would be placed within the triangular piece of land
between Miss Lin's granite walls. The revision of the design also includes a
50-foot-tall flagpole outside the granite walls, and thus it will change the
view of the observer who is looking at the memorial in any direction.

Mr. Hart claims that his statue will ''preserve and enhance'' Miss Lin's design,
and will ''interact with the wall to form a unified totality.'' Miss Lin,
however, disagrees and in a letter to the Memorial Fund on Sept. 20 she called
the changes an ''intrusion'' that ''destroys the meaning of the design.''

A Subtle Design

Ironically, it is the very strength of the original design - its ability to be
interpreted in a variety of ways -that is making for the current controversy.
Miss Lin's original scheme is, in a sense, a tabula rasa, a blank slate - not a
room, not a building, not a plaza, not a park, not a conventional memorial at
all. It is a place of reflection, where the gradually sloping land, the
thousands of carved names on somber granite and the view of the buildings of
official Washington in the distance should combine to create an understated, yet
powerful, presence.

It is a subtle design, like every great memorial capable of being given
different meanings by each of us. The anguish of the Vietnam War is present
here, but not in a way that does any dishonor to veterans. To call this memorial
a ''black gash of shame,'' as Tom Carhart, a Vietnam veteran who was another
losing entrant in the competition, has said, is to miss its point entirely, and
to fail to see that this design gives every indication of being a place of
extreme dignity that honors the veterans who served in Vietnam with more
poignancy, surely, than any ordinary monument ever could.

The Lin design is discreet an quiet, and perhaps this is what bothers its
opponents the most. It is certainly what bothers Mr.  Carhart, whose own design
was described as ''a statue of an officer offering a dead soldier heavenward.''
By commissioning the Hart sculpture and the flagpole, the Vietnam Veteran
Memorial Fund seems intent on converting a superb design into something that
speaks of heroism and of absolute moral certainty. But there can be no such
literalism and no such certainty where Vietnam is concerned; to try to represent
a period of anguish and complexity in our history with a simple statue of armed
soldiers is to misunderstand all that has happened, and to suggest that no
lessons have been learned at all from the experience of Vietnam.

Presence of the Names Speaks

The Vietnam Veterans Memorial, as it now nears completion, could be one of the
most important works of contemporary architecture in official Washington - and
perhaps the only one that will provide a contemplative space of the equal of any
in the past. The insertion of statues and a flagpole not only destroys the
abstract beauty of that mystical, inside-outside kind of space that Maya Yang
Lin has created; it also tries to shift this memorial away from its focus on the
dead, and toward a kind of literal interpretation of heroism and patriotism that
ultimately treats the war dead in only the most simplistic of terms.

For in the original design, the dead are remembered as individuals through the
moving list of their names carved against the granite. It is the presence of the
names, one after the other, that speaks. But if the statues are added, they will
overpower the space and change the mood altogether. A symbol of loss, which Miss
Lin's design is, will become instead a symbol of war. The names of the dead and
the hushed granite wall will become merely a background for something else, and
the chance for a very special kind of honor - and for a very special kind of
architecture - will be lost.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vietnam war Memorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

24 CHILDREN OF AMERICAN FATHERS, HAPPY BUT TEARFUL, LEAVE VIETNAM

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Oct. 7


Twenty-four children of American fathers and Vietnamese mothers flew out of this
city's Tan Son Nhut Airport today after American officials agreed to a
lastminute Vietnamese demand that two of the children be accompanied by their
Vietnamese half-brothers and sisters. The departure was the second of its kind
in little over a week.

Both Vietnamese and American officials said that if both sides stayed as
flexible as they were today the ''repatriation'' of thousands of half-Americans
conceived during the Vietnam war might proceed fairly smoothly.

The children, as young as eight years old and including a few in their
mid-teens, seemed alternately nervous, excited and extravagantly happy as they
gathered in the airport waiting room and signed their names or marks to papers
presented them by American consular officers. Later, as they headed for the jet
that took them to Bangkok with 23 of their relatives and dozens of other
refugees, some of the young Amerasians, leaving relatives and even guardians
behind, burst into tears.

These were much poorer children than the 11 Amerasians who left Vietnam last
week, according to a United Nations official here.  Several of the children had
lived in ''new economic zones,'' the notoriously mismanaged agricultural
colonies that the Vietnamese set up after the fall of Saigon in 1975. They left
today with nothing but a few small plastic bags containing their clothes.

Officials Ease Departure

Some small but important decisions by the Vietnamese and American Government
made it easier for today's Amerasians to leave. Three weeks ago, when the United
States submitted the list of those leaving today, Vietnam granted the children
exit permits within hours, an unprecedented turnaround.

This afternoon Vietnam informed a group of American journalists that two
Amerasians were being denied exit permits because the United States wanted more
time to process the unexpected immigration requests of their three Vietnamese
half-siblings. Then, after an exchange of telex messages between the American
Embassy in Bangkok and its visiting consular officers, the young Vietnamese were
granted their request. The plane left an hour later.

Today's children were already certified United States citizens, and they will be
collecting American passports, as the children of American fathers, within a few
days.

The State Department has identified 91 such American citizens over the last few
months. About 500 other Vietnamese-Americans have been categorized as
''documented Americans,'' and embassy officials in Bangkok estimate there may be
8,000 Vietnamese-American offspring still living in Vietnam.

Tearful Family Reunion

One of the fathers wept today when he saw his nine-year-old daughter and her
mother, whom he had asked to marry.  ''I'm the happiest man in the world'' said
the flushed 37-year-old father, Ernest E. Crosby of San Francisco, after a long
tearful embrace with his daughter, Hoa Phuong Crosby, his 33-year-old fiance,
Nguyen Thi The, and his new Vietnamese step-daughter, 12-year-old Mguyen Thi Phi
Yen.

Mr. Crosby left Vietnam as a civilian aircraft electrician in September 1974 and
did not return until today. He had lived with his present fiance for three years
before he left, and had known his daughter for a year. After 1975, mother and
daughters lived either in Ho Chi Minh City or with her parents near the
Cambodian border. They tried once to escape by boat.

About half the children are scheduled to return to their American fathers at the
Phanat Nikom refugee camp south of Bangkok. Only three Amerasians were
unaccompanied today. Only one, an 11-year-old girl named Lynn Fields, whose only
language is Vietnamese, appeared to have no family at the other end. She was
being cared for on the way out by Douglas R. Beane, a Vietnamese-speaking
consultant to Church World Service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT TO SIGN IMMIGRATION BILL

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


President Reagan is expected soon to approve a bill making it possible for
thousands of Asian-born children of American servicemen to immigrate to the
United States.

The House and Senate passed the bill last Friday, just hours before they
adjourned.  Eleven Vietnamese-American children arrived in the United States
this week, but they differ from the intended beneficiaries of the bill passed by
Congress. The 11 children, who range in age from 7 to 15 years, have been openly
acknowledged by their American fathers. By contrast, the bill is meant to assist
children abandoned by, or unknown to, their American fathers.

Supporters of the bill said the United States was facing up to its moral
responsibility in helping the children come to ''the land of their fathers.''

Target of Cultural Biases

Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, said that ''these children,
though blameless in the eyes of God, have been forced to bear alone the brunt of
anti-American sentiment and cultural biases'' that stigmatize illegitimate or
mixed-race children.

Representative Stewart B. McKinney, a Connecticut Republican who led a four-year
effort to gain approval of the legislation, said, ''These children come from
nations committed to racial purity, and so they were regarded as nonpeople.''

The Reagan Administration, after some initial hesitation, supported the bill and
recommended several minor amendments that were adopted by Congress.
Administration officials said today that Mr. Reagan intended to sign the
measure.

The bill had 273 co-sponsors in the House. The chief sponsors of the legislation
in the Senate were Jeremiah Denton, Republican of Alabama, and Carl Levin,
Democrat of Michigan.

Guarantee of Financial Support

Under the bill, a child is eligible to immigrate to the United States if he was
fathered by an American citizen and was born in Korea, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia
or Thailand after 1950. He must also have a guarantee of financial support from
an American family or a private charitable agency for at least five years. The
family must have an income equal to at least 125 percent of the official poverty
standard, which for a family of four is about $9,300 a year. Federal officials
expect that the younger children will be formally adopted by American families.

While paternity is often difficult to establish, the bill lists several types of
evidence that the Attorney General may consider. The evidence includes ''the
physical appearance of the alien,'' birth and baptismal certificates, local
government records and photographs of the ''putative father,'' as well as proof
of financial support from the father.

There is no official estimate of the number of Amerasian children.  Mr. McKinney
said that 60,000 to 100,000 Amerasians might be eligible to immigrate under the
bill, but added that there was no way of knowing how many would come to the
United States.

Representative Douglas K. Bereuter, Republican of Nebraska, said the bill would
not increase the number of people entering the United States each year as
immigrants, would not increase the welfare caseload and would not cost taxpayers
anything.

Preferential Treatment

Under the immigration law, aliens who are children of American citizens are
eligible for preferential treatment when they try to immigrate to the United
States. However, an Amerasian youngster is not recognized as the child of an
American citizen unless the father acknowledges him. Under the bill, the Asian
youngsters would be eligible for the same preferential treatment as other
children of American citizens.

Visas are distributed under a system of six preferences. The Amerasian children
could receive visas under the first preference, for unmarried sons and daughters
of United States citizens, or the fourth preference, for married sons and
daughters of citizens.

The bill, according to Senator Denton, does not require that the fathers be
''specifically or individually identified.'' Federal officials said the
Government would make no attempt to track down the fathers.

Under the bill, an alien seeking entry to the United States must file a petition
with the Attorney General. In most cases, according to Congressional aides,
private charitable organizations will file the petitions on behalf of the
aliens.

Despite widespread support for the bill, it faced many difficulties. The
provision for Amerasians was originally part of a much larger immigration bill
sponsored by Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, and Representative
Romano L. Mazzoli, Democrat of Kentucky. They agreed to have it considered
separately when it became clear that Congress could not complete action on their
bill before adjourning last week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TWO WESTERN WORLDS OF INDOCHINA REFUGEES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 684 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, Oct. 7


Thu Ng Le was a teacher for 20 years before she fled Vietnam with her family in
1975. Today, she works for the Hawaii Department of Education as a liaison agent
with other Vietnamese refugee families.

Nouphanh Malalay was a carpenter and barber who fled the Laotian countryside in
a boat in 1980. Now, two years after his arrival in Hawaii, he is still
unemployed and uncertain about his future.

Both are among the thousands of Indochinese refugees who have arrived in Hawaii
since 1975, trying to make their way in a new culture and a new land.

The state's refugee population now totals about 6,000. Most are Vietnamese,
about 2,400 are Laotians and there are a few Cambodians.

Learning the System

''They're survivors and they're making it,'' said Florence Ricci, coordinator of
the Catholic Social Services refugee assistance program. ''They're smart and
they are learning the system fast and learning how to use things to their
advantage.''

But Bob Ng, coordinator of the state's refugee resettlement program, said that
many of those now arriving were ''country people who often are illiterate in
their own language.''

''They are having a difficult time assimilating and will have a difficult time
getting off welfare,'' he said.  The refugees arriving in 1975, he said, ''were
more educated and urban and had an easier time assimilating.'' Mr. Ng said that
67 percent of the refugees received public assistance.

Job Opportunities on Mainland

The refugees may start their American experience in Hawaii, but many leave after
orientation for life on the mainland, where job possibilities are better, Mr. Ng
said.

Professionals also find it easier to get certified on the mainland, according to
Arlie Porter, coordinator of the refugee employment unit in the state Department
of Labor.

''Those with no skills and no English language ability end up in service areas
with minimum wage and little or no chance for advancement,'' Mr. Porter said.

Mr. Malalay, the Laotian carpenter, mirrors this problem.  ''I am having a
problem with English and am not sure if I can get and keep a job,'' he said
through an interpreter. ''I am not sure what will happen.''

Phoui Phannavong, a career military officer who fled Laos in 1978, is even less
optimistic. He sees no hope of getting off welfare. He has only limited ability
in English and works as a janitor at a fastfood restaurant.

Embarrassed About Aid

''The term welfare is shameful to those who have worked in government,'' said
Seng Dao, a caseworker with Catholic Social Services. ''They know what welfare
means, and are embarrassed to use food stamps.''

But those who are able to get along in English and who have job skills can find
jobs and earn up to $8 an hour, Mr. Porter said.  The Vietnamese are more
business-oriented and are operating their own businesses, such as lunch wagons
and taxicabs, Miss Ricci said.  Laotians generally come from a more rural
background and are getting into farming. A few are successful and are hiring
other refugees.

''But for some, it's a letdown,'' she said. ''Their expectations were so high
and they are finding that they have to start from the bottom.''

Seek to Preserve Customs

The Indochinese immigrants have organized to help each other and to maintain
traditions and culture.  Continuing cultural traditions and maintaining values
is particularly important to the elders, who see their young people becoming
assimilated perhaps too quickly.

''Some Vietnamese children are getting Americanized too fast, and I get some
complaints from parents,'' said Mrs. Le. ''In Vietnam there is strict
discipline, but here the discipline sometimes is too loose. The children are
young and they think they have a right to talk back. It's difficult for parents.
There is a conflict of values.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
Court Will Not Bar Dioxin Brochures

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 139 words

DATELINE: UNIONDALE, L.I., Oct. 7


A Federal judge today denied a request by the Dow Chemical Company to halt
publication and distribution by New York State of brochures and other material
on the hazards of dioxin, specifically Agent Orange, a defoliant once produced
by Dow.

''There is no way that this Federal court will tell a state agency what to
publish,'' said Judge George C. Pratt of Federal District Court.

Lawyers for Dow argued that the public health material prepared by the state's
Temporary Commission on Dioxin Exposure threatened Dow's right to a fair trial.

Dow and several other makers of dioxin have been sued by several thousand
Vietnam veterans, rail workers and others who contend exposure to the chemical
caused deaths, tumors, birth defects and other ailments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Antiwar Films Open Independent Festival

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 380 words


A triple feature of films on war-related subjects begins a monthlong New York
Independent Film Festival today at the Eighth Street Playhouse, 52 West Eighth
Street. The festival includes 36 films and runs through Nov. 4.

Today and tomorrow, the films will be ''The War at Home,'' a documentary about
the antiwar movement in Madison, Wis., from 1963 to 1973; ''Soldier Girls,''
about female Army recruits, and ''Nick Mazzuco: Biography of an Atomic Vet,'' an
enlisted man's eyewitness account of atomic-bomb testing. The screenings begin
at 4:05 P.M.  Admission is $5 a day; there is a $15 series ticket. Information:
674-6515.

Included in the series are musical portraits of Les Paul, Elvin Jones, Charlie
Mingus and Malvina Reynolds (Oct. 24-25) and films about labor, the legal
system, politics and sociology. The schedule follows: ''The Wobblies'' and
Northern Lights,'' Sunday and Monday; ''Imposters'' and ''Casual Relations,''
Tuesday; ''Gal Young Un'' and ''Alambrista,'' Wednesday and Thursday, and
''Rosie the Riveter,'' ''The Willmar 8'' and ''Possum Living,'' Oct. 15 and 16.
''The Dozens'' and ''Joe and Maxi,'' Oct. 17 and 18; ''Imposters'' and ''Mozart
in Love,'' Oct. 19; ''Resurgence: The Movement for Equality vs. the Ku Klux
Klan,'' ''What Could You Do With a Nickel'' and ''Between Rock and a Hard
Place,'' Oct. 20 and 21, and ''Billy in the Lowlands'' and ''Dark End of the
Street,'' Oct. 22 and 23.  ''Stations of the Elevated,'' ''The Wizard of
Waukesha,'' ''Different Drummer: Elvin Jones'' and ''Love It Like a Fool,'' Oct.
24 and 25; ''The Scenic Route'' and ''Local Color,'' Oct. 26; ''Back to
Kampuchea'' and ''Vietnam: An American Journey,'' Oct. 27 and 28, and
''Underground,'' ''Until She Talks'' and ''End of Innocence,'' Oct. 29 and 30.
''The War at Home'' and ''The Wobblies,'' Oct. 31 and Nov. 1; ''A Celtic
Trilogy'' and ''Agee,'' Nov. 2; ''Roses in December,'' ''Blood and Sand'' and
''Americas in Transition,'' Nov. 3 and 4.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HONDURAS AND NICARAGUA GIVE OPPOSING VIEWS AT THE U.N.

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 8


The Honduran Foreign Minister said at the 37th session of the United Nations
General Assembly today that his country had been working to solve some of the
conflicts in Central America but was now threatened by those conflicts and by
regional terrorism.

The Foreign Minister, Edgardo Paz Barnica, said Honduras was working with Costa
Rica to establish a forum for peace, and he hoped that Nicaragua would
contribute.

At an earlier news conference, Nicaragua's Foreign Minister, the Rev. Miguel
d'Escoto Brockman, offered another view of the situation. He said a United
States-inspired invasion of Nicaragua from Honduras was imminent.

He also said there had been many incursions into Nicaragua by anti-Sandinist
followers of the former dictator, Gen. Anastasio Somoza Debayle, who were
harbored by Honduras.

He praised the Mexican-Venezuelan proposal for direct talks between Honduras and
Nicaragua as a ''very important initiative.'' But he criticized the United
States for insisting on a regional agreement to halt the arms trade in Central
America, saying it was an expression of Washington's hostility toward peace
talks.

He said his Government has been rebuffed in repeated efforts to meet with
Honduran leaders to settle differences between the two nations. He also said he
had not been able to meet Secretary of State George P. Shultz during the
Secretary's visit to the General Assembly last week.

'Lack of Realism'

In his statement to the General Assembly, the Cuban Foreign Minister, Isidoro
Malmierca Peoli, blamed the United States for the unrest in Central America.

''Blinded by stupidity and lack of realism,'' he said, ''Mr.  Reagan's
Administration has rejected dialogue and a negoitated political solution in this
explosive area and is preparing the conditions for an armed intervention that
would prevent a revolutionary triumph in El Salvador and drown the Nicaraguan
revolution in blood.''

The United States, the Cuban Minister said, is using the Honduran military as a
''spearhead'' against Nicaragua and El Salvador. He said the intention was to
legalize probable direct intervention by United States forces. Such military
intervention would create a new Vietnam in Central America, he said.

He reaffirmed Cuba's ''unswerving support'' for Puerto Ricans seeking ''full
independence and sovereignty.'' He said Cuba also backed the efforts by Grenada
to lay ''the foundations for a new society,'' the efforts by Panama to carry out
the Panama Canal agreements, and Bolivia's desire to recover an outlet to the
sea.

In other speeches, Rabbie L. Namaliu, Papua New Guinea's Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Trade, called colonialism an anochronism and commended France for
trying to help the indigenous Melanesian population of New Caledonia. He
expressed hope that the French efforts would lead to independence. He added that
he hoped other French territories in the Pacific would be given a chance to
determine their own future.

Mr. Namaliu praised the United States for giving the people of Micronesia ''a
range of options, including a plebescite on their future.''

But he condemned France for continuing to test nuclear weapons in the Pacific,
and noted that Pacific leaders had asked atomic powers to refrain from dumping
nuclear waste in their area.

Mosese Qionibaravi, Fiji's Foreign Minister, noted that his country had not been
fully reimbursed for maintaining troops in Lebanon.  Fiji's soldiers have been
part of the United Nations peacekeeping force in Lebanon for four years. ''The
cost of maintaining troops in Lebanon has been burdensome,'' he said.

He also said the force must have the support of all parties in the conflict.
''This had not always been the case in Lebanon,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

China Is Said to Insist On a Pullback by Soviet

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 150 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 8


China has told the Soviet Union during exploratory talks that Soviet troops must
be withdrawn from the Chinese and Mongolian borders because they are a threat to
China's security, foreign diplomatic sources reported today. China and the
Soviet Union resumed negotiations Tuesday for the first time in nearly three
years.

China's Deputy Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, also told the Soviet Deputy
Foreign Minister, Leonid F. Ilyichev, that better Chinese-Soviet relations
require the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan and an end to support
for Vietnamese ''aggression'' in Cambodia and along the Vietnam-China border,
the sources said.

China says Afghanistan, Vietnam and Cambodia and the border situation are the
fundamental obstacles to better relations between the two nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DEFECTORS DETAIL HANOI ROLE IN RUNNING CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 8


Two Cambodian diplomats who defected to Thailand last May say that Vietnamese
political advisers have been directing the Cambodian Government's day-to-day
decisions.

The Vietnamese Ambassador to Phnom Penh, for example, meets nearly every morning
with Foreign Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia and his senior subordinates to outline
the proper responses to the day's affairs, according to the defectors, Dy
Lamthol and his wife, Niang Sida.

Speaking to reporters Thursday at the Khao I Dang refugee camp between Bangkok
and the Cambodian border, the pair said the daily Foreign Ministry briefing was
typical of Vietnam's minute control over the entire Cambodian Government of
Prime Minister Heng Samrin.

The Heng Samrin regime was installed soon after the Vietnamese invasion of
Cambodia in December 1978.

Similar to Earlier Accounts

Western diplomats here who follow Cambodian affairs closely said that the two
defectors' account, which formed the lead articles on the front pages of today's
Bangkok newspapers, resembled earlier but less detailed descriptions by other
defectors from Phnom Penh. Asked if the defectors seemed reliable witnesses, one
Western diplomat said, ''Completely.''

The two former Foreign Ministry officials said Thursday that Vietnamese control
over Cambodia had sapped the Government's morale in some quarters. Mr. Dy
Lamthol, according to today's Englishlanguage Nation Review, said, ''The cadres
working in the Foreign Ministry don't like instructions from the Vietnamese, but
they are too afraid to protest.''

Describing Vietnam's control over the part of the Government he knew best, the
former official said that 17 Vietnamese officials were attached to his Foreign
Ministry and that they worked for the ''B-68 unit'' in Hanoi.

Thai intelligence officials said several weeks ago that the B-68 unit controlled
Vietnam's advisers in Cambodia. According to Thanu Chalarak, assistant director
general of Thailand's Central Intelligence Department, B-68 consists of two
sections: A-40, which controls Cambodia's administration and national security,
and A-50, which controls Phnom Penh.

Mr. Dy Lamthol and his wife said the Vietnamese Ambassador to Phnom Penh, Ngo
Dinh, and another top Vietnamese adviser, identified only as ''Cau,'' brought
cables from Hanoi each morning as they advised the Cambodian Foreign Minister.
Their recommendations were then passed on to department heads.

The former head of the Western desk also said that, before he traveled abroad or
met with foreign ministers, Vietnamese advisers provided him with position
papers in French or English. Similarly, he said, at meetings of Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos, Cambodian communiques were drafted by Vietnam.

Personal and Political Reasons

A Western diplomat said that the B-68 unit was evidently in charge of some
military as well as political affairs and that its key military advisers worked
out of Vietnam's 478th Army Division.

The defectors explained that they had left Cambodia for both personal and
political reasons. They disapproved of Vietnamese activity in Cambodia and said
the Government had frowned on their recent marriage. Mrs. Niang Sida is a
Vietnamese of Khmer extraction, and a Western diplomat described her as more
outspoken than her husband.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

UNEMPLOYMENT UNDER PRESIDENCIES SINCE DEPRESSION

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 620 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 8


The following is an outline of unemployment in the Presidencies since the
Depression. Data for 1929 through 1946 include workers 14 and 15 years old.
Since 1947 only those 16 and older are included.

HERBERT HOOVER - Unemployment was at an annual average of 3.2 percent when
Hoover took office in 1929. Then the stock market crashed and many businesses
failed. The jobless rate increased to 8.7 percent in 1930 and then to the high
of 24.9 percent in 1933, when Hoover left office after being defeated for
re-election.

FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT - In his first 100 days in office, Roosevelt moved to
reform banks, establish parity for agriculture production, allow collective
bargaining by unions and create the Public Works Administration, which gave jobs
to thousands. The unemployment rate dropped but lingered in the teens until
World War II, plunging to 1.2 percent in 1944. It was 1.9 percent when Roosevelt
died in 1945.

HARRY S. TRUMAN - With the end of World War II, American servicemen returned
home. Some could not find work, causing the jobless rate to double within a year
and to rise to 7.9 percent in October 1949, before it dropped as a result of the
Korean War. When Truman left office in 1953, unemployment was down to 2.9
percent.

DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER - As had happened at the end of World War II, there was an
increase in the jobless rate when the Korean War ended.  The highest rate in the
Eisenhower Administration was 7.5 percent, in July 1958. It dropped to 4.8
percent a year and a half later before beginning another upward swing, to 6.6
percent at the end of Eisenhower's two terms.

JOHN F. KENNEDY - The jobless rate climbed to 7.1 percent in the first four
months after Kennedy took office in 1961 but then began a steady decline. It was
5.7 percent when Kennedy was assasinated Nov.  22, 1963.

LYNDON B. JOHNSON - Johnson's Great Society programs and the Vietnam War created
the most positive employment period since World War II. By the end of his first
year in office the rate was down to 4.8 percent and it reached a low of 3.4
percent in 1968. Only twice in the last three years of the Johnson Presidency
was the unemployment rate as high as 4 percent.

RICHARD M. NIXON - At the start of his first term in 1969, joblessness
fluctuated, rising from 3.4 percent to 3.9 percent by the end of the first year.
It then climbed quickly as the Vietnam War wound down, and it remained in the
range of 5.6 percent to 6.1 percent for 25 months. It was 5.5 percent in August
1974 when the Presdient resigned in the Watergate crisis.

GERALD R. FORD - Unemployment soared in the Ford Administration, hitting a
recession high of 9 percent in May 1975 and then slowly declining to 8.2 percent
by year's end. It was 7.5 percent when Jimmy Carter was inaugurated in 1977.

JIMMY CARTER - The jobless rolls dropped to 5.6 percent in May 1979 and saw
little fluctuation from 5.7 to 6 percent for more than a year. Recession brought
a 7.8 percent rate in July 1980. The rate then began a decline that left it at
7.4 percent when Ronald Reagan assumed the Presidency last year.

RONALD REAGAN - The 10.1 percent rate for September is the highest since the
Depression, exceeding the 9.9 percent annual average for 1941. In the first
months of the Administration, there was little movement in the rate. But in
September 1981 it jumped 0.3 percentage points to 7.6 percent, and since then it
has risen steadily. It stood at 8.5 percent at the end of the President's first
year in office and 9.8 percent in both July and August of this year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

LORD NOEL-BAKER DIES AT 92; WINNER OF NOBEL PRIZE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 443 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Oct. 8


Lord Noel-Baker, an Olympic athlete and Labor Party stalwart who won the Nobel
Peace Prize in 1959, died today at his home in London. He was 92 years old.

A lifelong campaigner for peace and disarmament, he said on his retirement from
the House of Commons at the age of 80: ''While I have the health and strength, I
shall give all my time to the work of breaking the dogmatic sleep of those who
allow the nuclear, chemical, biological and conventional arms race to go on.''

He was awarded the Nobel Prize for relief work during the Russian famine in the
1920's, his work as an official and ardent supporter of the League of Nations
and his efforts for disarmament.

Born Philip Baker, he added Noel to his name when he married Irene Noel in 1915.
She died in 1956.

Served in Ambulance Corps

An honor graduate of Cambridge in economics, he served throughout World War I in
the British Ambulance Corps in Italy and was decorated by the Italians. After
the war he was instrumental in founding the League of Nations and was a member
of its secretariat for a time.

He competed in the Olympic Games of 1920, 1924 and 1928 and won a silver medal
in the 1,500-meter run in 1920.  He was elected to Parliament for the Labor
Party in 1929 and reelected until 1970, when he retired from politics.  He
became a minister in the Foreign Office in Clement Attlee's post-World War II
Government, was named Secretary for Air in 1946, Commonwealth Secretary from
1947 to 1950 and Minister of Fuel and Power from 1950 to 1951.

Member of U.N. Delegation

He was a member of the British delegation to the United Nations in 1945 and from
1946 to 1947.  Queen Elizabeth II made him a life peer in 1977 as Baron
Noel-Baker of Derby, the city he represented in the Commons for many years.  He
was the author of a number of books on world peace. The most notable were ''The
Private Manufacture for Armaments,'' in 1936, a classic argument against arms
industries unfettered by Government controls, and ''The Arms Race,'' in 1958.

Lord Noel-Baker opposed the United States' role in the Vietnam War and
campaigned actively against it as president of the British Vietnam Committee.
But he credited the Americans with good faith, saying, ''I do not question the
honorable motives of President Johnson, still less the brave soldiers who are
giving their lives.''

Lord Noel-Baker is survived by his son, Francis, an author and former Labor
member of the House of Commons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NATION IN SUMMARY;
OPening a Door To Amerasians

BYLINE: By Carlyle Douglas Caroline Rand Herron and Micahel Wright

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 280 words


For thousands of children and young adults in Asia, the United States is more
than a symbolic fatherland. But until last week, Washington took little official
notice of the offspring of Americans, mostly servicemen, in that part of the
world.

Just hours before it adjourned, Congress approved a bill, which the President
was expected to sign, that will make it possible for many such children to
immigrate to America. Unlike the few Amerasian children who have already made
the trip, those affected by the bill are unknown or unacknowledged by their
fathers.

Supporters of the bill said the United States was facing up to its moral
responsiblity for the well-being of children who were stigmatized in the
countries of their birth because of their mixed race and American parentage.
They said the immigration of perhaps 100,000 eligible Amerasians would cost
taxpayers nothing - the new arrivals must have a five-year guarantee of
financial support from an American family. Eligibility was limited to people
fathered by American citizens and born in Korea, Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and
Vietnam after 1950.

There was no progress, meanwhile, on a comprehsive measure that would overhaul
the nation's immigration law. The bill, which includes provisions for gentler
treatment of illegal aliens, is expected to die if Congress does not consider it
in its post-election session.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Carlyle C. Douglas, Caroline Rand Herron and Michael Wright

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE V.A. DIGS IN FOR MORE BUDGET BATTLES

BYLINE: By DAVID NEWELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When he announced his resignation as chief of the Veterans Administration last
week, Robert P. Nimmo said ''Economics can catch up with me, too.'' However, it
was more than personal finances that had caught up with Mr. Nimmo. His
blunt-edged efforts to cut back programs and tighten eligibility requirements
had prompted veterans to refer to him as ''Mr. Nommo,'' as in ''you don't
deserve no mo'.''

His call for fiscal restraint had taken on a hollow ring, some said, when it was
discovered that he had spent $54,000 redecorating his office and $6,000 putting
his chauffeur to personal use. But even without the criticism that followed
those disclosures, trouble had been brewing for the man at the helm of the
Veterans Administration.  A generation gap among its clientele, among other
things, had made running it increasingly difficult.

Mr. Nimmo has said he would stay on until Mr. Reagan released him, and V.A.
officials are reluctant even to speculate about who might replace him. The
Veterans of Foreign Wars urged only that it be done quickly. ''The last thing we
need is a lame duck administrator,'' said Cooper T. Holt, who heads the V.F.W.'s
Washington office.

Whoever succeeds Mr. Nimmo will face a host of politcally sensitive issues tied
by a common thread: money. With more than 10 million veterans reaching their
60's in the next few years, health care costs are likely to rise dramatically.
Similarly, the V.A.'s position with respect to veterans' claims of health damage
from exposure to Agent Orange in Vietnam will have significant financial
effects, because the claims are likely to be numerous and expensive. A broad
body of epidemiological studies have linked Agent Orange with soft tissue
cancers. The House Foreign Affairs Committee is expected to address the issue of
Government responsiblity in the near future.

Veterans organizations are expected to be a powerful presence in any
deliberations affecting the V.A.'s future. After more than 50 years of steady
growth, they have become one of the most formidable lobbying blocs on Capitol
Hill, winning billions of dollars in programs and benefits for millions of
veterans and their dependents.

In so doing, they have prompted the development of an immense bureaucracy with a
$24 billion budget and more employees than any other Federal agency except the
Defense Department. This pattern has been challenged by the Reagan
Administration just when veterans' demands are increasing more rapidly than
ever.

''America is waking up to the special needs of Vietnam veterans precisely at the
moment when aging World War II servicemen are facing chronic health care
problems,'' says Steve Champlin, a veteran affairs specialist on the staff of
Representative David E. Bonior, Democrat of Michigan. He added that either of
these items alone

''could strain the V. A. budget.'' Mr. Nimmo, a 60-year-old former World War II
bomber pilot, was caught between these conflicting demands. He acknowledged that
he was bound to preserve veterans' benefits while trying to help the President,
an old friend, keep his early promise to balance the budget by 1984.

In the past, ''Congress threw money at veterans and asked only that they be
happy,'' Mr. Nimmo said. Now, he said, the V.A. is being asked to hold down
costs while veterans ask for ''more, more, more.''

Early proposals by budget director David A. Stockman would have cut the Veterans
Administration budget for fiscal year 1983 by $328 million. That attempt was
beaten back by an intense lobbying effort led by groups including the American
Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, and the Disabled American Veterans. Final
cuts were held to $75 million.

Despite that reprieve, Mr. Nimmo warned last summer that ''changing
Congressional spending patterns'' urged by the President would make Congress
''extremely reluctant to increase, enrich, or propose new benefits.''

This view is at least partially shared by Representative G.V.  Montgomery, the
Mississippi Democrat who heads the House Veterans' Affairs Committee. He agreed
that ''we will have to make further budget cuts'' and resist ''big ticket''
items for the Veterans Administration.

Given the Veterans Administration's budget, the cuts to date have been
relatively insignificant. As Mr. Montgomery put it, ''We got by pretty good this
time; next time will be tougher and harder.''

Senator Alan Cranston, Democrat of California, voiced his concern about ''next
time'' in a letter to President Reagan last week which warned that without a
fully effective leader, the Veterans Administration was ''defenseless against''
unwise budget cuts. The remark echoed growing fears among veterans that the
Administration would use the two-year gap between Congressional and Presidential
elections to push through the stiff budget cuts that the V.A. has so far
avoided. The Disabled American Veteran's national commander, Edward Galian, has
reminded the President of his 1980 campaign criticism of Carter Administration
policies - it was ''unconscionable,'' candidate Reagan said, ''that veterans in
need are denied hospital and medical care because of inadequate funding.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Nimmo

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
VOGUE WORD WATCH

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1350 words


Some words or phrases appear like comets in the evening sky of language; they
are watched by lexicographers and are used by speakers who like to be hip, with
it and au courant - or, as they would now say, ''on the qui vive.''

These are vogue words, and the time of their streakage helps historians define
an era or locate a moment. Anyone who uses compatible or disharmonious, or
tosses about zero-based, betrays himself as a product of the Carter years; in
those days, we were describing any deception as doing a number on. Gone, all
gone; where are the vogue words of today?

At Congressional hearings, that's where the vogue words are. I dropped by a
subcommittee hearing of the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation,
where members were bemoaning the state of America's infrastructure - the
bridges, tunnels, roads, dams and canals that form a kind of circulating system
for the body politic. A few years ago, all you heard was reindustrialization;
that never made it to the top of the neoliberal agenda, but perhaps the infra
will dig.

A word does not have to be freshly minted to be in vogue.  Infrastructure
surfaced in England soon after World War II when British Labor Minister of
Defense Emanuel Shinwell used it to describe the airfields and signal
communications of his military establishment; Winston Churchill rose in Commons
to say, ''As to this new word with which he has dignified our language, but
which perhaps was imposed upon him internationally, I can only say that we must
have full opportunity to consider it and to consult the dictionary.''

Two months later, when the word reappeared in debate, Churchill was armed for
combat: ''In this debate we have had the usual jargon about 'the infrastructure
of a supranational authority' ... these words 'infra' and 'supra' have been
introduced into our current political parlance by the band of intellectual
highbrows who are naturally anxious to impress British labor with the fact that
they learned Latin at Winchester.'' (Churchill meant to say eager, not anxious.)
Under such a barrage of scorn, the word hunkered down, to pop up again during
the Vietnam War and to flower in the early 1980's.

At the House hearing to which I went for my vogue-word fix, Senator Christopher
Dodd of Connecticut was testifying: ''It's hard to rally people around terms
like 'infrastructure,' '' he admitted, unwittingly following in the footsteps of
the hapless Mr. Shinwell, ''but we're talking about jobs.''

Another witness, David Mahoney, the decisive chairman of Norton Simon Inc., set
forth his ideas on the capital budget, a means of separating long-term
investments from current expenditures, thereby making possible more businesslike
planning to build and maintain the nation's you-know-what.

The subcommittee chairman, James Oberstar of Minnesota, interjected another
vogue word in a question: ''Isn't there a great deal of collegiality in the
decision-making process?''

''Collegiality is important,'' the second-to-none Mahoney acknowledged, ''but
after the issue goes through all the collegiality, it gets to the somebody who
has to decide.''

Keep your eye on that comet: Collegiality should be good for at least a year in
vogue, replacing team player, which was tainted by Watergate, and substituting
for consensus, overused by Lyndon Johnson. It is closely associated with
colleague, a vogue word imported from academia by Henry Kissinger and now used
in place of associate, assistant or co-worker in introductions. (''Meet my
colleague, Ms. Fandango.'')

Over in the Senate, John East of North Carolina - our only multidirectional
Senator - was using another hot word in worrying aloud about the hemorrhaging of
the Federal budget. Writes an irate Meyer Rangell of Bloomingburg, N.Y.: ''To
cure the hemorrhage he wants to cut (or should it be leech or bloodlet) the
budget ...  bloody nonsense!''

Down at Foggy Bottom, State Department types are doing signals. In the 60's,
Gov. George Wallace's slogan was ''Send Them a Message,'' but message is out and
signal is in, often in the negative form: Nothing is to be done lest it send the
wrong signal.

Inadvertently, I just adverted to the latest vogue verb: doing.  Long ago, in
the early Reagan years, people were into this or that; whatever it was they were
into, they are now doing. The early slang use - as in doing time in jail - has
reappeared in vogue as doing drugs, doing the scene, doing needlework.

I used to be into infrastructure; now I'm doing collegiality.

Noisemakers

Most of the time, it's a mistake in pronunciation to mix languages. There are
exceptions: You are permitted to call an EN-voy an ON-voy, but you cannot call
an EN-clave an ON-clave. You can call an EN-dive an ON-deev, but you cannot
mismatch languages and call it an EN-deev or an ON-dive.  Got that straight?

I enjoy issuing marching orders about pronunciation. Such instruction in this
space is not arbitrary, because regional differences are recognized. It is SOUR
cream in New York and sour CREAM in the rest of the country, just as it is CHOP
meat in New York and chopped MEAT in America.

O.K., wise guy, how about Illinois? Looks French, but hardly anybody says
Ee-lee-NWAH. So is it Illi-NOY, or Illi-NOISE?  In 1936, H.L. Mencken laid down
the law: ''In Illinois the state name is pronounced Illinoy.'' In 1938, Alfred
Holt agreed: ''The French-English compromise is the preferred form: 'noy' rather
than 'noise.' '' But not every reporter went along: John Kenyon's authoritative
Pronouncing Dictionary of 1944 noted that the form with a z ending was ''not
infrequent generally'' and was ''especially common in the South.'' In ''Word
Study,'' the G.& C. Merriam house organ, Prof. Daniel Gage gave the z a logic:
''To pronounce the final syllable 'oy' is to leave the word neither French nor
English, just as in the case of St. Louis the dropping of the final s sound
leaves the word a hybrid of pronunciation.''

Turn now to Dr. Allen Walker Read, the O.K. etymologist who has dug more deeply
than anyone into the ''noy-noise'' controversy. He finds that the name is
derived from the Indian ilini, meaning ''man,'' which became Illiniwek, the
final iwek meaning ''is'' in plural ending form. French explorers changed the
plural to the French ois and applied the name to Algonquian peoples in the
Middle West. Early pronunciations included the z sound, especially by Spaniards
who spelled it ''Ylinneses.''

Pronunciation detectives always look for evidence of rhymes, and Dr. Read found
one from 1779: ''From these lank loins have sprung two boys / Shall trail it
through the Islenois.''

That makes a case for the z ending, but Thomas Jefferson, laying a plan before
the Congress in 1794 to divide the old Northwest into 16 nicely rectangular
states, called one of them Illinoia (rhymes with paranoia). And John Hay, the
poet who had been Abraham Lincoln's secretary, in 1871 rhymed ''Illanoy'' with
''boy.''

Since etymology can find substantiation for both pronunciations, what does
dialect geography say about the word's position on the map of usage? The
Linguistic Atlas of the United States and Canada, a huge effort with some
sections yet unfinished, offers this evidence: A large minority still uses the
z, and the size of the minority grows in use with the distance from the state.
Thus, one-tenth of Iowans call it Illinoise, as do a quarter of the people of
Nebraska, and over a third of Minnesotans and North Dakotans prefer the z
ending.

The answer to ''Which is correct?'' Both, but as you get closer to the state,
start dropping the z ending. Tell them that in Duh MOYN and DES Plaines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of a comet watched by people

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 773 words


FICTION
1 5 2 SPACE, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.50.) The story of the
American space program told through fiction.

2 1 6 MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $15.95.) The hidden truth
behind a woman business tycoon's rise to power.

3 2 6 THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Crown, $15.95.) Continuing the
saga of human survival at the dawn of civilization begun in ''The Clan of the
Cave Bear.''

4 3 7 E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL STORYBOOK, by William Kotzwinkle. (Putnam's,
$6.95.) Abridged, profusely illustrated version of the novelization of the
current film.

5 4 10 DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

6 8 7 LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Three decades in the
lives of a coterie of members of the international glitter set.

7 7 3 CROSSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) A clandestine
trans-Atlantic romance survives the stresses and strains of World War II.

8 9 30 THE PARSIFAL MOSAIC, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $15.95.) Michael
Havelock saves the world from nuclear extinction.

9 6 19 THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Linden Press, $15.95.) A
sequel to the author's ''Kane & Abel,'' in which two children of those
antagonists marry one another.

10 11 5 19 PURCHASE STREET, by Gerald A. Browne. (Arbor House, $14.95.) A loving
couple set out to bring down a Mafia operation that ''respectable'' bankers have
taken over.

11 12 22 THE MAN FROM ST. PETERSBURG, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $14.50.) A
Russian terrorist collides with his own romantic past, during a mission to
Britain on the eve of World War I.

12 10 12 THE CASE OF LUCY BENDING, by Lawrence Sanders.(Putnam's, $13.95.) A
psychiatrist finds that an aberrant 8-year-old girl epitomizes the society of
Florida's Gold Coast, where she lives.

13 1 MONSIGNOR QUIXOTE, by Graham Greene. (Simon & Schuster, $12.95.) A
contemporary fable that loosely parallels the Cervantes classic.

14 14 3 THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books, $15.95.) The war
in Vietnam as it was seen and felt by a diverse group of soldiers.

15 1 CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $13.95.)
The operator of a c ounterterrorist agency finds himself high on an
assassination list.

NONFICTION
1 3 11 LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $22.50.) Ways to
add years to your life and life to your years: a popularly written
medical-science book.

2 1 38 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) An
exercise book for women, seasoned with the film star's philosophy of physical
well-being.

3 2 25 LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia.  (Holt/Slack, $13.50.)
Inspirational talks by a University of Southern California professor.

4 4 35 WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE, by Harold S.  Kushner. (Schocken,
$10.95.) Comforting thoughts from a rabbi.

5 5 6 INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick. (Morrow, $17.50.) The scandal at
Columbia Pictures and Wall Street's part in it.

6 2 THE G SPOT, by Alice Kahn Ladas, Beverly Whipple and John D. Perry. (Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, $11.95.) Recent discoveries about human sexuality.

7 7 11 EDIE, by Jean Stein, edited with George Plimpton.  (Knopf, $16.95.) Edie
Sedgwick, minor celebrity of the 60's, remembered by friends and acquaintances.

8 12 13 PRINCESS, by Robert Lacey. (Times Books, $16.95.) The life of the
Princess of Wales in words and pictures.

9 6 28 NO BAD DOGS: The Woodhouse Way, by Barbara Woodhouse.  (Summit, $12.50.)
Advice on training dogs by a British expert: tie-in to a television series.

10 1 ATLANTIC HIGH, by William F. Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Log of a
transatlantic crossing aboard a luxurious ketch.

11 10 13 HOW TO MAKE LOVE TO A WOMAN, by Michael Morgenstern.  (Clarkson N.
Potter, $10.95.) A lawyer tells men ''what women want.''

12 13 49 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.)
Humor in cartoons and verse.

13 11 2 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson.
(Morrow, $15.) How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work as
well as your own.

14 9 44 A FEW MINUTES WITH ANDY ROONEY, by Andrew A. Rooney.  (Atheneum,
$12.95.) Reflections on contemporary life by the journalist and television
commentator.

15 15 2 WEIGHT WATCHERS FOOD PLAN DIET COOKBOOK, by Jean Nidetch. (New American
Library, $13.95.) A new collection of nearly 600 recipes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 3, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1601 words


AFTER 10 years in Bristol, the grass suddenly looked a lot greener in a number
of other cities, particularly Hartford, for the Bristol Red Sox of the Eastern
League late last summer. But then a projected move to the capital city fell
through when the Hartford City Council balked at approving funds for the
renovation of Dillon Stadium.

That development did not unduly faze the Red Sox management, since the club had
also received bids from a number of other cities, including Portland, Me., and
New Britain.

New Britain appeared to have the edge in the bidding. But on Sept.  30 the club
announced it had reached agreement with officials in Portland and that the team
would move to Portland next year.

But, as was the case in Hartford, Joseph Buzas, the owner of the Red Sox, and
Edward P. Kenney, the team's general manager, failed to reckon with the Portland
City Council.

To the astonishment of Mr. Buzas and Mr. Kenney, the council last Monday night
fell one vote short of approving the $500,000 bonding for the construction of a
stadium. The vote was 6-3 in favor, but seven votes were needed for approval.

''We were shocked and very disappointed,'' said Mr. Kenney. ''When we were in
Portland in the previous weeks, we had been told that the council, at a secret
meeting, had approved the bonding and that it would be approved at the public
hearing.''

Brian L. Dudley, the deputy city manager in Portland, who along with Mr. Buzas
had announced that the Red Sox were moving to Portland, also was stunned by the
council's action.

''We're very embarrassed, both for the city and for Mr. Buzas and Mr. Kenney,''
he said. ''We fully expected that we had the seven votes we needed.''

What apparently swayed at least one council member was a presentation by a
lawyer from Bangor, Me., Jordan Kobritz, who told the council he was prepared to
bring a Triple-A team, the Charleston, W. Va., Charlies of the International
League, to Portland. Moreover, Mr. Kobritz said, he, as the proposed new owner,
would build a stadium with private funds.

Where do the Bristol Red Sox go from here?  ''Well, we have Bristol,'' Mr.
Kenney said, fully aware that the club's actions in the last few weeks have
alienated Bristol city officials and many Bristol fans. ''And there's still New
Britain.''

Since the Red Sox management announced the team's moving to Portland, officials
in both Bristol and New Britain have begun moves to lure other minor league
teams to their cities, including the West Haven A's of the Eastern League whose
owner, David Goldstein, has grown disenchanted with West Haven and indicated he
was prepared to move the team out of Connecticut.

If both the Red Sox and A's had left the state, Connecticut would have been left
with only one minor league team, the Waterbury Giants, who are also in the
Eastern League.

Pfc. Roger Dumas, a young Connecticut serviceman, was shipped off to North Korea
on a summer day 32 years ago. Five months later, he was reported as missing in
action. His older brother, Robert, who lives in Canterbury, believes that Roger
was taken as a prisoner by North Koreans and that he could still be alive. He
has spent the last three decades searching for information that would lead to
his brother's whereabouts.

The story of Robert and Roger Dumas interested John D. Harney, a Salisbury
innkeeper and now a member of the National Advisory Committee of Project
Freedom, an organization founded last October.  Project Freedom is dedicated to
obtaining a full accounting of all American servicemen who are listed as
prisoners of war or missing in action. The group, which has some 600 members,
will hold its second annual meeting and conference at Mr. Harney's
establishment, The White Hart Inn, from Oct. 19 through 21.

At the gathering, Richard Childress, a member of President Reagan's National
Security Council, will accept for Mr. Reagan the 1982 Project Freedom Award for
leadership in public service in furthering the cause of servicemen considered
missing in action or taken prisoner in the Vietnam and Korean Wars and World War
II.

Representatives from the National League of Families, an organization of the
relatives of men missing in action in Southeast Asia, will report on their
recent trip to Hanoi and their meetings with Vietnamese leaders there.

There are 2,500 American P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s still unaccounted for in the
Vietnam War and 389 known P.O.W's and several thousand M.I.A.'s from the Korean
War, members of Project Freedom say.

The aim of Project Freedom is to build awareness of the P.O.W.- M.I.A. issue,
said Michael J. Blair, one of the founders of the group. ''If we don't keep
bringing the matter to the attention of the public, particularly to our elected
officials,'' he declared, ''it will be forgotten.''

A couple dozen supporters of Bruce A. Morrison, the Democratic candidate in the
Third District Congressional race, jogged around the New Haven Green last Monday
to protest the opposition of former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig to a
nuclear arms freeze.  Meanwhile, Mr. Haig was nearby at the New Haven Lawn Club
defending his support for Mr. Morrison's Republican opponent, Lawrence J.
DeNardis, the incumbent who also disagrees with Mr. Haig's position.

The joggers ran in green T-shirts in what they called the ''First Annual Al Haig
Run for It Road Race,'' contending they would really have to ''run for it'' to
reach an evacuation site in Lake George, N.Y., in the event of a nuclear
holocaust.

Meanwhile, Mr. Haig said that Mr. DeNardis ''has to deal with his own
conscience, and to come down on a different side of one issue is clearly not a
dominant factor'' in his decision to campaign for the Republican candidate.

Mr. DeNardis said his support for a nuclear freeze is a reflection of his
constituents' wishes.  ''Those who represent the people must be responsive to
those constituents. They want me to vote for a nuclear freeze. I'm in accord
with that,'' he said at a news conference before to a $500-aplate dinner in his
honor.

Attempting to explain why he and the former Secretary of State are on opposite
sides of the issue, Mr. DeNardis said, ''I never sat across the table from
Soviet officials.''

As an example of ''our continuing efforts to involve the community in our
activities,'' The Gunnery School in the town of Washington, an independent
secondary school of 212 students, will dedicate its new library Saturday,
according to E. Laurence White, the school's director of development. Residents
of the rural northwestern Connecticut town, many of whom donated money for the
$635,000 project, will be encouraged to visit the library and borrow from its
24,000-volume collection. The library will be open year-round.

''I see the new library as another plus factor for Washington,'' said the town's
First Selectman, John A. Marsh, who has been invited to speak at the 1:15 P.M.
dedication ceremony. ''Our intent is not to compete with the Gunn Memorial
Library, the town's public library,'' Mr. White pointed out, ''but to complement
it.''

The complete renovation of a 19th-century classroom building to house The Tisch
Family Library, as it has been named, was made possible through a donation from
Mr. and Mrs. Preston Robert Tisch of New York City, said Mr. White. Mr. Tisch is
the president of Loews Corporation. The couple's two sons, Steven and Jonathan,
are alumni of The Gunnery.

Of the $489,000 raised to date for the new library, approximately $150,000 was
contributed by townspeople, some of whom are trustees of the school, according
to Mr. White.

College and high school students and job counselors around the state are
learning that the latest time-consuming effort to be assumed by computers is the
search for a job. At more than 150 sites across the state, students, job-service
officers and vocational rehabilitation planners are plugging into the state's
comprehensive occupational information system, with requests for national job
trend information as well as local job prospects. The resulting wealth of
information might have taken weeks to compile otherwise.

The Consider/GIS system, overseen by the State Occupational Information
Coordinating Committee, has become operational after a one-year pilot program
designed to test the system's effectiveness.

''There has been some good growth since the beginning of the program about a
year and a half ago,'' said Jeff Blodgett, information development coordinator
at the agency. ''I think a majority of the state's high schools subscribe to the
service. It has become an important counseling tool.''

The University of New Haven participated in the pilot program and Charles Bove,
director of career development at the university, says the system is
revolutionizing the career and job search.

''It's a fantastic way for students to find out very quickly what their options
are once they graduate,'' said Mr. Bove.  On the local level, a listing covering
more than 250 occupations in the Hartford, New Haven, Bridgeport, Stamford and
Waterbury areas is updated weekly from the State Department of Labor job bank.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: action photo of game between Bristol Red Sox and West
Haven A's

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 10, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY GUIDE;
THE HOST GUARDS

BYLINE: By Frank Emblen

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 21, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 963 words


You'll be able to see a mariner in distress being hoisted to safety by
helicopter, tour a 180-foot buoy tender and inspect the recruit training center
at the Cape May Coast Guard base -all as part of an open house at the base
tomorrow (there's no school - it's Columbus Day) from 9 A.M. to 2 P.M.

At 11:30 A.M. and again at 1:30 P.M., there will be the searchand-rescue, air
and sea demonstrations. In addition to plucking someone from a boat, a
helicopter will lower a pump to a ''sinking'' craft and then actually land on
the water to effect a rescue.

''Visitors can watch from our pier,'' a Coast Guard spokesman said.  From 10
A.M. to 2 P.M., there will be tours of the buoy tender Hornbeam and a helicopter
will be parked on the lawn for inspection.  Tours of the recruit center will be
conducted from 9 to 11 A.M.

In case your taste does not run to things nautical or military, Cape May is
offering ''guided trolley rides'' through the city's historic districts every
half hour from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. Trolleys will leave from the bandstand on
Lafayette and Decatur Streets, and the fare is $3.

Information (Coast Guard): (609) 884-8451.  Information (trolley tours): (609)
884-5404.

WOMEN IN BUSINESS

With bankruptcies striking like corporate legionnaire's disease, how can women
who own businesses hope to stay in the black?  In Piscataway on Saturday, ''EXPO
82: New Challenges in Business Ownership for New Jersey Women'' will offer
seasoned businesswomen - and would-be ones, too - tips on breaking even and
beyond. Nearly 50 workshops will feature topics like shopping for software,
choosing an accountant or a franchise, beating burnout and an insider's view of
venture capital.

Sponsored by the Small Business Development Center of the state's Office of
Small Business Assistance, EXPO 82 is the fifth annual event.

Workshop leaders will include successful small-business owners and there will be
dozens of exhibitions.  The conference will take place from 8:30 A.M. to 5:30
P.M. in the Busch Campus Center of Rutgers University. Men, of course, are
welcome, too.

The fee is $10. Information: (201) 648-5950.

MA AND AX IN PRINCETON

The pianist Emanuel Ax and the cellist Yo-Yo Ma will share a program Tuesday
evening at McCarter Theater in Princeton.  After Mr. Ax performed with Mr. Ma in
Avery Fisher Hall in New York City last year, Peter G. Davis wrote in The New
York Times: ''A generation ago, celebrated concert pianists tended to be lofty
individualists who rarely performed with other musicians, but Emanuel Ax ... is
just as likely to be heard playing happily with his peers in a variety of
harmonious chamber combinations.''

The concert starts at 8 P.M.  Information: (609) 452-5200, noon to 6 P.M.
(weekdays).

JAZZ IN MONTCLAIR

A concert by the East Coast Jazz All Stars, featuring Bobby Rosengarden on
drums, will be presented by Unity Concerts Saturday at 8 P.M. at Montclair High
School. Others in the jazz group are Bucky Pizzarelli, guitar; Kenny Davern,
clarinet; George Masso, trombone; Warren Vache Jr., trumpet, and Milt Hinton,
bass.

The program is the first of a two-concert mini-series called ''Saturday Night
Jazz.'' The other concert - Bob Wilber's World of Jazz - will not be until next
May 7.

Tickets are $12 and $10.  Information: (201) 744-6770.

SALVADOR DOCUMENTARY

''El Salvador: Another Vietnam,'' a documentary that records ''the mounting
indignation, frustration and terror throughout the land,'' will be shown at 8
P.M. Wednesday in Fair Lawn.

Vincent Canby, who made the above comment when he reviewed the 53-minute film in
The New York Times last year, called it ''a heartbreaking review of recent
events in that deeply torn nation.''

Produced by Glenn Silber and Tete Vasconcellos, the film includes footage from
American, British, German, French, Dutch and Canadian television, film archives
and independent foreign producers.

Dr. Sheldon Weinbaum, a professor of biophysics at the City College of New York,
and Dr. Andrea Fox, a staff physician at Montefiore Hospital in New York City,
will lead a discussion after the showing.

The program is part of a series on world issues being presented at the Maurice
M. Pine Free Public Library, 10-01 Fair Lawn Avenue.  Admission is free.

Information: (201) 796-3400.

NADER IN HACKENSACK

Ralph Nader, who has founded or inspired consumer organizations and influenced
public-health and safety laws, will speak at Fairleigh Dickinson University in
Hackensack tomorrow evening. He will talk about budget cuts in education made by
an Administration he has described as having ''extraordinarily broad wealth,
narrow vision and little compassion.''

Since the 1980 Presidential election, Mr. Nader has re-assessed his role,
saying: ''Regulations alone are not going to work. Regulations cause a
counterattack from the corporate side and the political action committees. There
is no counterattack to the counterattack because the private sector of
consumers, workers and taxpayers is not organized. So that is where the real
arena is, organizing new groups of citizens.''

Mr. Nader will speak at 8 P.M. in Wilson Auditorium of the School of Dentistry,
110 Fuller Place, Hackensack. Admission is a university identification card or
$2.

Information: (201) 692-2000. Frank Emblen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Calendar

BYLINE: By Barbara Gamarekian

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 695 words


Monday

Capitol Hill will be quiet this week with Congress in recess and members of both
houses out campaigning. But for the rest of Washington it will be a busy time,
with a number of foreign officials arriving and a long-awaited oral argument on
an important case scheduled at the Supreme Court.

President Reagan is still on the campaign trail and will fly from his ranch in
Santa Barbara to make an appearance on behalf of the Texas Republican candidate
for Governor, the incumbent, William Clements in Dallas before returning to the
capital this evening. On Wedesday, he plans to issue a progress report on the
economy. Nancy Reagan will make a short trip across the Potomac River to
Arlington, Va., for the first annual conference of the National Federation of
Parents for Drug-Free Youth. Mrs. Reagan will be keynote speaker at the luncheon
at the Twin Bridges Marriott today and will participate in the question session
that follows.

Tuesday

President Suharto of Indonesia and Mrs. Suharto arrive for a state visit today.
At 10 A.M. there will be a welcoming ceremony on the South Lawn of the White
House, followed by talks with President Reagan and Secretary of State George P.
Shultz on a number of issues, including military and development aid. A White
House state dinner at which Frederika von Stadde will sing is scheduled for 7:30
P.M.

High Drama: Assistant Attorney General William Bradford Reynolds squares off
against William T. Coleman Jr., a prominent black lawyer and former Secretary of
Transportation, on the Bob Jones University case. Mr. Coleman has been selected
by the Supreme Court to argue in support of the Government's previous policy,
which the Reagan Adminstration has rejected, of denying tax exemptions to
private schools that discriminate racially. 10 A.M.

Report Card: Ten environmental groups, including the Wilderness Society, the
Sierra Club and Friends of the Earth, release a report on the effect of the
Reagan Administration's environmental policies on communities across the
country. Interior Secretary James G. Watt may get a failing mark. Noon, Offices
of the National Park and Conservation Association, 18th and Q Street N.W.

Puchase Power: September retail sales figures are due out today.  Retail sales
were off 0.9 percent last month, but hopes persist for a major breakout of
consumer buying.

Wednesday

Jihan Sadat, the widow of President Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt, accepts the Freedom
Foundation's American Friendship Medal on behalf of her husband in a White House
ceremony this morning. At 12:30 P.M.  Mrs. Sadat addresses a National Press Club
luncheon in the Atrium of the Kennedy Center.

Inside Story: William H. Webster, Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, delivers the Thomas F. Ryan Lecture at the Georgetown University
Law Center. His subject: ''The Informant, the Undercover Agent, and Electronic
Survelliance: Serving the Ends of Justice.'' 8 P.M., 600 New Jersey Avenue N.W.

Vietnam Vets: The Fine Arts Commission holds a review and public hearing on the
controversial revisions and additions to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial on the
Mall. Noon. Cash Room of the Treasury Department.

Thursday

The industry-Federal Drug Administration study group is scheduled to release its
recommendations today on new regulations requiring tamper-resistant packaging
for over-the-counter drugs.

Middle East Focus: The Israeli Foreign Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, arrives in
Washington and will be meeting with Secretary of State George P. Shultz.

Friday

With unemployment figures at a new high, the Producer Price Index for September,
due out today, may be the last chance for some good economic news for the
Adminstration before Election Day.

Saturday

The American Catholic Committee sponsors a daylong conference, ''Justice and War
in the Nuclear Age'' at the Washington Marriott.  Among the speakers are a
former National Security Adviser, Richard Allen, and Bishop John J. O'Connor. 9
A.M.

Fall Flowers: The White House gardens will be open to the public today and
Sunday from 2 P.M. until 5 P.M. for the White House fall garden tour. East Gate
on East Executive Avenue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICA AND CHINA: THE NEXT 10 YEARS

BYLINE: By Richard Nixon

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1596 words


For the United States and China, 1982 marks t he start of the second decade of
the new relationship ushered in by t he Shanghai Communique, issued at the
conclusion of my first visit t o China, in 1972.

During this past decade, that relationship has matured remarkably.  But for both
sides, the question now is: What next?  For Americans looking ahead at this
second decade, four questions stand out: 1. How permanent will the new
pragmatism shown by China's present leaders be?  2. Will China continue its
hostility toward the Soviet Union, or will the new Soviet overtures lead to a
rapprochement between the two Communist powers?

3. What will become of the Taiwan issue, and of Taiwan itself?  4. What will be
the course of United States-China relations? Will our present friendship grow,
or will differences of ideology and interests lead to a new rupture?

Obviously, the answer to the last question depends on the answers to the first
three. But the answers to the first three will also depend to a large extent on
us and on how we manage our end of the new relationship.

The key factor that brought us together 10 years ago was our common concern with
the Soviet threat, and our recognition that we had a better chance of containing
that threat if we replaced hostility with cooperation between Peking and
Washington. This overriding strategic concern dominated our dialogue, and our
relationship, during the first decade.

Today, the Soviet threat to China is far greater than it was 10 years ago. The
Soviet Union has more forces on China's northern border than in 1972. In
addition, the Soviet Union has a powerful fleet in the Pacific that it did not
have then; it has overtaken the United States in both strategic and theater
land-based nuclear weapons; Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos have become Soviet
satellites; and Soviet troops are in Afghanistan.

But while this growing Soviet threat makes the strategic element of our
relationship even more important now than it was 10 years ago, in the next
decade it will be vital that we reach beyond it. Not only will other elements be
important in themselves, but a more broadly based relationship is inherently
more stable. It rests on a firmer foundation. Fear is the cement of many
alliances, but it is not enough on which to base the sort of long-term
relationship that China and the

United States should be developing.

For the second decade, we must work actively and imaginatively to expand the
economic dimension of our relationship. We must move on from confronting a
common threat to seizing a common opportunity.  Doing so is both in China's
interest and in our interest. An economically strong China can be an enormously
important trading partner, an effective counterweight to the Soviet Union's
ambitions and an obstacle to Soviet expansion -not only to direct Soviet
military expansion but also to indirect Soviet penetration of vulnerable
third-world countries. A weak China, on the other hand, would be a tempting
target that invites aggression. Economic strength is indispensable to military
strength. By helping China advance economically, we also enable it to play its
strategic role more effectively.

Initially, it took a powerful external force - the Soviet threat - to bring us
together, to overcome the inherited rigidities on both sides, and to persuade
each that the dangers of not opening to the other were greater than the risks of
opening.

Some Americans cavalierly refer to our opening to China as ''playing the China
card.'' This disparages China, and trivializes a shift that was correctly seen
on both sides as one of profound historic dimension. The plain fact is that even
if there were no Soviet Union, the opening would have been in the interest of
both sides. As we look to the future, it would be a tragedy of lost opportunity
if the world's most populous nation and the world's most prosperous nation were
not working together now that the foundation for their doing so has been
established.

Just as the Chinese had initially to ask themselves whether we would be a
reliable strategic partner, the United States must ask itself today whether,
over the years ahead, China will be reliable as an economic partner. Will its
new course be a continuing course?

On this, the evidence I have seen -including talks with all three of China's top
leaders during my recent visit to Peking - is highly encouraging. Deng Xiaoping
has shown both a dogged determination and a ruthless skill in putting his own
pragmatic people in key leadership positions, so as to insure that after he
leaves the stage his policies will continue. The recent party congress, in
effect, crowned his success in doing so. The most difficult problem for any
totalitarian regime is to provide for an orderly, peaceful succession. Mr. Deng
has solved this problem in China.

Mr. Deng's choices as Communist Party General Secretary, Hu Yaobang, and as
Prime Minister, Zhao Ziyang, are highly intelligent, strong leaders. They
represent Mr. Deng's own pragmatism and its emphasis on building China's
economy, borrowing techniques from successful capitalist systems to the extent
that these can be incorporated without threatening the stability of the
Communist regime.

There still are left-wing dissidents within the party hierarchy who believe that
Mr. Deng and his followers have moved too far away from the Maoist vision that
plunged China into the nightmare of the Cultural Revolution. But these
dissidents have been largely stripped of power, dispersed or otherwise rendered
unable to mount an effective challenge.

The key to China's future economic success lies in its becoming less Communist
and more Chinese. Its failures during the third of a century since Mao Zedong
took power - and these failures have been staggering - have been a direct result
of Communist dogma generally and Maoist dogma particularly. But even while Mao
stifled incentive, strangled economic development and threw the mainland into
constant turmoil and terror, Chinese elsewhere were working some of the most
impressive economic miracles of the postwar world. Hong Kong, Singapore - both
essentially Chinese cities - and Taiwan all demonstrate dramatically what
Chinese skill and drive can achieve.  These examples cannot help having
significant influence on China's pragmatic leaders.

Those leaders cannot renounce Communism; without at least a formalistic
allegiance to it, their power would lose its legitimacy.  But subtlety,
pragmatism and adaptability are all Chinese characteristics, and the present
Government is showing a shrewd capacity to abandon the practice of Communism
while keeping enough of the forms to maintain the central structure of power
intact.  Politically, the Communist Party is firmly in control and determined to
remain so. Economically, the country is moving away from doctrinaire Communism.

This fact is important to bear in mind in assessing the prospects of a
turnaround in China's relations with the Soviet Union.  Historically, China and
Russia have been enemies: Russia has always been an expansionist power, and
China has stood in the path of its ambitions. During the brief period of the
Sino-Soviet alliance, Communist solidarity held them together. Now that China is
moving away from doctrinaire Communism - even though not embracing a free
political system - there is nothing left to draw the two countries together
again, unless the United States turns unreliable in Chinese eyes and therefore
leaves China no choice but to make the best deal possible with its powerful
neighbor. While Chinese officials may make public statements that seem to lump
the United States and the Soviet Union together as superpowers from which
prudent nations should keep an equal distance, China's leaders - unlike some
naive Europeans - know there is a difference. They know perfectly well that the
Soviet Union threatens them and the United States does not.

We should not underestimate the importance of Taiwan in Peking's eyes, or the
extent to which it is an emotional, neuralgic issue. But at the time of the
Shanghai Communique, and again this year, China showed that it could accept a
creative accommodation that would, in effect, postpone an ultimate solution.
This sort of non-resolution requires patience and subtlety to maintain. We
should be careful not to rock the Taiwan boat, and we should remember that
ultimately the surest guarantee of the interests of the people of Taiwan lies
not in the strength of their weapons but in the strength of the ties between
Washington and Peking.

As China continues its remarkable evolution internally, the bridge that has to
be crossed in fashioning a Taiwan solution acceptable to both sides will become
shorter. Thus, time is on the side of peaceful resolution, and wisdom is on the
side of patience.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Richard Nixon's trip to China, last month, was his fourth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
INSIDE ANDROPOV'S MIND

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 868 words


That handsome woman in the Crimea who calls herself a faith healer might have
put new life in Comrade Brezhnev, but such feeling cannot last long; the
struggle for succession in Moscow is on, and I, Yuri Andropov, represent the
policy line that will win.

Followers of Brezhnev are pushing Konstantin Chernenko (or else old Kirilenko
for an interim period). But their line is merely the status quo - continued
failure of the economy, adventurism in Afghanistan, losses to the Israelis in
the Mideast, helpless pleading with the Chinese and inability to entice the
Americans into detente and SALT.

Some of the generals are behind Viktor Grishin, the man that Western
Kremlinologists failed to realize is our Ariel Sharon. Viktor wants to bring
about a Bay of Pigs in reverse - a superpower confrontation in Iran or
Yugoslavia which, if a weak American President succeeds Reagan, might tip the
scales our way permanently.

The questions before the Central Committee are: What line can best lull America
and Western Europe into providing us the needed hard currency, technology and
food, as we crush the Poles and Ukrainians for any deviationism? And what line
will end our isolation from the billion Chinese?

My line begins with a necessary cult of personality. I would be as different
from Brezhnev as he was from Khrushchev, and as Khrushchev was from Stalin. Any
change must appear to be great change.

Although I headed the K.G.B. for 15 years, and was the man on the scene in
Budapest who put down the Hungarian revolt in 1956, my image is pleasing to the
West. I speak English and dress well. My man Arbatov has persuaded his
Washington contacts that sweet reason is my nature.

The specific issue upon which I ascend to power is this: The only way to achieve
the fruits of detente without having to give one iota of freedom to Eastern
Europe is to arrange an accommodation in Afghanistan.

That adventure has proven to be a mistake. It has involved 6 percent of our
armed forces, and the generals say they will need fully 25 percent to end all
resistance there. It has caused 116 nations to condemn our move in the U.N. and
such third world opposition erodes our position among Arabs and Iranians. It
causes trouble among our own Moslem population.

The damned Afghan tribesmen, who we miscalculated to be as manageable as the
Hungarians and Poles, are willing to accept terrible loss of life. Worse, the
Afghans have a staging area for retaliation from Pakistan, where they are
supplied openly by the Americans and secretly by the Chinese and Israelis.

That is why I have proposed to the Central Committee that we cut our losses and
seek a settlement. Recently we have had our Afghan puppet tell the Pakistanis,
through a U.N. intermediary, that Soviet troops would be removed if we could be
guaranteed the continuance of our present Afghan regime. Same as the Americans
wanted in Vietnam.

The West will not buy this, of course, insisting on the removal of our man in
Kabul. In response, the Brezhnev-Chernenko faction says no, we should keep
fighting on this low level, while the Grishin faction also says no, that we
should send in a half million men and exterminate all resistance.

The line I take is to find some face-saving third party who would make sure the
Afghan Government is not anti-Soviet, and then withdraw our troops.

The other Central Committee factions say that this would amount to committing
the overthrow of a Communist regime for the first time, not counting Allende in
Chile. They say it would encourage the Poles and the American hardliners.

I say an Afghan settlement could set us on the road to victory around the world.
When Khomeini dies, an Afghan settlement would make it that much easier for us
to install a pro-Moscow government in Teheran. When Solidarity tries to regroup
in Poland, we can crack down even harder at no cost to our European gas
pipeline. When the Americans try to impose their settlement in the Mideast, we
can marshal the Moslem world against them and keep King Hussein from talking to
Mr. Begin.

More important, my Kabul solution will be the beginning of a peace offensive to
pressure the Americans to negotiate an arms agreement that would preserve our
lead without succumbing to on-site inspection.

Most important of all, it will be our opening to Peking. As is well known, the
Chinese want three things from us: Remove the Vietnamese from Kampuchea, which
we cannot do; thin out our 46 divisions on the Chinese border, which we can
promise to do one day; and stop the offense to the third world and to China's
closest ally, Pakistan, by pulling out of Afghanistan. Which is what I propose
we do, provided a Sino-Soviet rapprochement follows.

The next leader of the Kremlin will be the representative on the winning line.
The no-change Brezhnev-Chernenko faction, at most, can serve in a transition;
then it will be between Grishin and me. My key is in Kabul, but I must not
overplay my hand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'BUGLES AT DAWN,' MUSICAL

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 742 words


''THE cold passed reluctantly from the earth and the retiring fogs revealed an
army stretched out on the hills, resting.'' The opening line of ''The Red Badge
of Courage'' wouldn't inspire you to kick up your heels and sing, nor might the
rest of Stephen Crane's Civil War novel about the emotions of youth in battle
offer a spine for a show. But the courage of theater people in daring to try
fashioning almost any theme into a musical has to be admired for its bravado and
recklessness. The only way to know if a war story - for instance, James
Michener's ''Tales of the South Pacific'' - can work as a popular musical is to
try it, especially if you're Rodgers and Hammerstein.

''Bugles at Dawn,'' which opened yesterday at the Chernuchin Theater, 314 West
54th Street, and which will play as an Equity showcase production weekends
through Oct. 24, is a valiant effort that has its moments. The program notes
that it was ''suggested'' by the novel. That is an honest way of putting it
because a theatergoer seeking Civil War flavor will be hard put to find it here,
especially when the musical attempts to be vaudeville.

The play and lyrics by David Vando and the music by Mark Barkan are in a modern
musical style - more comedic than lyrical - without capturing the mood of the
19th century as we have come to know it through literature, history and song.
And the stolid direction by Robert Pesola is not helped by a long and awkward
runway dividing the set, which makes it difficult for the performers to move
about gracefully.

There are 18 numbers, from solos to duets to full productions for the cast of 14
performers. The leads - Joseph Breen as the enigmatic hero and Nancy Ringham in
the dual role of his girl friend and a prostitute - are appealing to watch. But
some of the Broadwayesque scenes and actors who put on shows for the soldiers
have a U.S.O.  style that is anachronistic.

The spin of originality is absent in ''Bugles at Dawn.'' You can do anything you
want to a show if there is a central heartbeat in it: satirize even trench
warfare, stiff commanders and death, as the British did in the antiwar ''Oh,
What a Lovely War,'' because of its entertaining World War music-hall turns; or
give war a sentimental revue quality, as Americans did in the post-World War II
''Call Me Mister.'' The Vietnam War was attempted by Elizabeth Swados in her
work based on Michael Herr's ''Dispatches,'' without, however, achieving the
book's special flavor.

There is something about war's bitter aftertaste, and it is at the core of ''The
Red Badge of Courage,'' that, with a few exceptions, fights musicalization.

Civil War Updated
BUGLES AT DAWN, suggested by Stephen Crane's ''The Red Badge of Courage'';
directed by Robert Pesola; music by Mark Barkan; play and lyrics by David Vando;
setting by David C.  Woolard; costumes by Johnetta Lever; lighting by David N.
Weiss; musical director, Stan Free; choreographer, Jerri Garner. Presented by
Courage Productions. At the Chernuchin Thea- ter, 314 West 54th Street, second
floor.  Johnny Fleming ...........................Joseph Breen Rebel Flagbearer
.......................Marcus Neville Spirit of Johnny's Father
..................Jay Devlin Recruiter and Chaplain ...................Brent
Rogers Oscar Redgrave ..........................Edward Crotty Alma and Scarlet
........................Nancy Ringham Johnny's Mother and Battlefield Annie
Peggy Atkinson Sergeant ...................................Luke Lynch Bill
Burnside ..........................David Nighbert J.C.
................................W. Michael Crouch Lieutenant
..............................Chuck Stanley Private Smith and Gaylord
...............Philip Shultz Cherry and Roseanna .....................Mimi
Bessette Ruby and Pearl .......................Margaret Benczak

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Joseph Breen

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 13, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY RECRUITING THRIVES AS ECONOMY FALTERS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1435 words

DATELINE: YOUNGSTOWN, Ohio


On the new downtown brick mall, between two empty shops and across the street
from a shuttered department store, is one of Youngstown's most successful
enterprises, the Armed Forces Recruiting Station.

''We've gone double in terms of quality,'' said Sgt. 1st Class Joe W. Jenkins,
the chief Army recruiter here, sitting at his desk, his green tunic, resplendent
with ribbons and badges, hanging on a nearby coat hanger. ''Numbers are up,
too.''

For the fiscal year 1982, which ended Sept. 30, Sergeant Jenkins said he was
authorized to recruit 95 regular Army soldiers and 41 Army reservists. He said
he was able to recruit 107 people for the regular Army and 52 reservists and
added that if he had accepted all those who wanted to join, he probably could
have enlisted more than 700 men and women.

It is a success story being duplicated by other recruiters around the country,
including those at the Youngstown station who work for the Navy, the Air Force
and the Marine Corps. As the national economy has worsened over the last two
years, recruiting for the armed services has surged.

The recession has all but made the armed services a major American job program.
The Defense Department expected to have 2,099,000 uniformed people on its
payroll by the end of June, the latest month for which complete statistics are
available. It ended up with 2,107,400. The department said it expected figures
for the fiscal year 1982 to show that the services recruited about 327,600
people.

There are also 1,045,400 civilians employed by the Defense Department, up from
973,000 in January 1981.  ''The Department of Defense is pooling a large portion
of the work force that might otherwise be going to Chrysler or some other
company,'' said Sergeant Jenkins, who came here two years ago from the 82d
Airborne Division, in which he had served two tours of duty in Vietnam.

He said that, in terms of recruiting quotas set by his superiors, he and the
other recruiters were ''giving them what they want'' and more, ''which is pretty
easy to do right now.''

An Assistant Secretary of Defense, Lawrence J. Korb, has told Congress that the
overall retention rate as well as enlistments have increased markedly for all
four branches of the armed services, allowing them to raise their standards.

Reasons for Rise in Enlistment

Among the reasons he gave were increased pay, improved advertising, the
increased attractiveness of many military jobs and the troubled economy.

Maj. Gen. Howard G. Crowell Jr., head of the Army Recruiting Command, offers a
similar assessment, but adds that there are more and better recruiters and that
there has been ''a mood change'' in the nation toward military service as the
antipathy caused by the Vietnam War declines.

General Crowell said that as recently as 1979 the Army failed to meet its
recuiting goals, in quantity and quality of personnel. Now, he said, ''we're
turning folks away.''

To Sergeant Jenkins, the man on the front line, there is no doubt that the
economy, with unemployment at 10.1 percent, is the main reason for the
recruiting success in the Youngstown area, and, he believes, in similarly
troubled areas in other parts of the country.

130,000 Army Recruits Annually

The Army, the largest of the services, has an authorized strength of 780,000,
General Crowell said. He said the Army must recruit about 130,000 people a year
to maintain that number.

With the exception of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the
country's single largest private employer, with 847,800 workers, the armed
services employ more people than most civilian companies or entire industries.

The mining, steel and automobile industries have long been the mainstay of such
industrial areas as Youngstown, in northwest Ohio.  But those industries have
suffered widespread layoffs that have greatly reduced the job opportunities for
young people coming out of high school and college.

General Crowell said that recruiters like Sergeant Jenkins, who were responsible
for finding the qualified men and women the country needs for its military, held
important yet often undervalued jobs.

Relatively Attractive Wage

Sergeant Jenkins, who became a recruiter when the Army decided to upgrade the
program by assigning top noncommissioned officers to the position, said the Army
offered relatively attractive wages. He said a private's basic wage was $541.40
a month, not including an October pay increase of 4 percent. The basic pay does
not include allowances for food, housing medical care and clothing.

He said the armed services were being looked upon with increasing attractiveness
by youngsters in economically depressed areas.  ''Look at the mills, they're
down,'' Sergeant Jenkins said. He added that the General Motors Corporation
assembly plant in Lordstown, Ohio, a few miles west of Youngstown, was operating
at substantially reduced schedules. In addition, he noted, public employee
programs are being cut back. He said he was recently notified that he was losing
a secretary who was employed though the Federal Comprehensive Employment and
Training Act.

He said he was enlisting more young men who had dropped out of college because
their money had run out. The sergeant said he had recently ''squeezed through
the door'' a man who was 34 years and six months old, just under the age limit
of 35. More and more, he said, recruits are in their late 20's and looking for
job skills the Army or other military branches might provide.

''I think America is becoming more security conscious,'' Sergeant Jenkins said,
meaning that people appeared more interested in a job that was essentially
guaranteed. ''What could be more secure than Federal service?''

College Aid a Factor

Another reason for the increase in recruits, the sergeant said, is the Army's
programs of providing money for college once a soldier completes his military
obligation; one-time bonuses of as much as $8,000 for entering a combat arm, and
the increasing number of hightechnology jobs for which the service provides
training.

He also said he perceived a recent surge in patriotism. Sergeant Jenkins said he
was treated well at schools by pupils and educators, in contrast with stories
told by recruiters a few years ago. The antipathy toward the service that was
associated with the Vietnam War is ''a thing of the past,'' he said.

''The kids now know little about the Vietnam War,'' said Sergeant Jenkins, who
is 34 years old. ''It's like, for me, the Korean War, which I know very little
about.''

He said such programs as the Airborne Rangers or Special Forces generally
appealed to young men in inner-city schools. This often clashes with the desires
of their parents, who work in manufacturing industries and want their children
to seek training in hightechnology occupations.

Concerns of Parents

Sergeant Jenkins said parents in such instances usually thought, ''I don't want
this kid to go through what I've been through.'' He said the parents knew the
economy was shifting away from unskilled jobs and wanted their son or daughter
to be prepared. But he said the ''average 17-year-old kid'' would look at the
bonus for joining the infantry, artillery, or armored corps and think: ''Eight
thousand dollars. Hmm. Adventure. Ranger. Jumping out of airplanes.''

The sergeant said one of the few difficulties he encountered came when he tried
to recruit a young man or woman who had an older brother who had died in the
Vietnam War. Often in those cases, he said, it is the parents who express
relunctance.

''The mother will say, 'Well, my son was in Vietnam and he died,' '' Sergeant
Jenkins said. ''That's a hard one to overcome. Usually, one out of 10 you hit
something like that.''

The sergeant and five other Army recruiters maintain a bulletin board at the
station with photographs, letters and postcards from people they have guided
into the service.

One person undergoing basic training at Fort Dix, N.J., wrote to Clifford Bell
Jr., one of the Youngstown recruiters: ''Hello, Mr.  Bell. I'm glad I did join.
It's really nice here. You meet a lot of good friends, and it's a good
experience. Thank you. Your best friend, Valery.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph on armed service personnel (page A27) photo of Sgt
1st Class Joe Jenkins (page A27)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 13, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LONDON HAILS FALKLAND VICTORY ANEW

BYLINE: By STEVEN RATTNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 772 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Oct. 12


As many as 300,000 people lined London streets today to cheer parading veterans
of the Falkland war as Britain celebrated yet again its successful military
campaign in the South Atlantic.

While millions more watched on television, 1,250 uniformed representatives of
the 28,000-member task force marched through the historic financial district
with military bands playing and waves of warplanes whining overhead.

Although Britain has largely returned to preoccupations like unemployment, the
conflict with Argentina that ended in June still looms large in the public
consciousness, in part because of efforts by the Conservative Government, for
whom it has proved politically advantageous.

''It is not only the people of the Falklands who feel gratitude to the task
force,'' Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said at a lavish luncheon that
followed the parade. ''We, the British people, are proud of what has been done,
proud of these heroic pages in our island history.''

The delight of Mrs. Thatcher, who was loudly cheered, was as evident today as
was her disappointment in July when a commemorative service at St. Paul's
Cathedral did not prominently mention the British victory.

Tanks and Tears

Attempts by opposition politicians to bring interest in the episode to a close
have had less effect. So popular was the celebration today that Michael Foot,
the Labor Party leader, was there. Undeterred by drizzly weather, the large
crowds waved small Union Jacks, cheered and sang ''Rule, Britannia!'' as the
military men swept by, accompanied by tanks and other equipment.

''I don't mind admitting I had to wipe the tears from my eyes,'' said Andrew
Markely, a 26-year-old clerical worker. ''It was a fantastic display and very
moving.''

But, reflecting the frustration that opposition politicians feel over the issue,
Shirley Williams, president of the Social Democratic Party, told a party
conference in Cardiff, Wales, today that ''there are no victory parades for the
jobless.''

A Chapter Still Not Closed

Even today's march does not close the Falkland chapter. For one thing, Britain
still does not have diplomatic relations with Argentina, and its choice of
Columbus Day - a holiday in much of Latin America - for the victory parade does
not appear likely to speed a resolution of differences. British officials insist
that the choice of date was inadvertent, but in Spain it was attacked by
politicians and newspapers.

In some ways, the cost of the war is not yet fully known. According to most
estimates, it has already amounted to $1.7 billion. But last month, Lord
Shackleton, son of a famous explorer, issued a Government-sponsored report
calling for as much as $200 million for economic development in the Falklands.

In addition, Britain still has several thousand men and considerable numbers of
ships and planes stationed on the islands with every sign that a sizable force
will have to be kept there permanently. The military air link to the islands
continues to be 13-hour flights by C-130 Hercules transport planes based on
Ascension Island that must be refueled twice during the journey.

Examining the Lessons

On top of a permanent defense plan for the islands, the Ministry of Defense is
preparing a paper examining the lessons from the Falklands for the military and
what should be done. The paper is expected before year-end.

Defense Secretary John Nott, who announced during the summer his retirement from
Parliament, walked out in the middle of a television interview last week because
of pointed questions about military spending.

Not having experienced the Vietnam conflict, the British appetite for things
military has never been diminished. With the issuance of Falkland awards earlier
this week, Britons are also reveling in the telling of Falkland campaign
stories, in particular the first public mention of activities of the Special Air
Squadron, whose members are secret. Perhaps the most startling disclosure was of
the exploits of Capt. John Hamilton, who died in a daring raid behind enemy
lines on West Falkland.

The announcement of the awards has opened a considerable rift between the
Government and the national press. The press mostly defied an embargo on
publication and, in retaliation, the Government has stopped providing copies of
pending announcements before the day of release.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of parade honoring veterans of Falkland war

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 13, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REFUGEES MOVING BACK TO CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 12


Since July, thousands of Cambodian refugees from Thailand's Khao I Dang camp,
north of Aranyaprathet, have been moving east across the border into a Cambodian
village now known as Sihanoukville.

They began their migration after Prince Norodom Sihanouk, president of the new
anti-Vietnamese coalition that is recognized by the United Nations as Cambodia's
government, visited Khao I Dang in July. The former head of state told nearly
40,000 people there, ''I will lead you home'' - to a nation still occupied by
about 180,000 Vietnamese troops.

The migrants have been encouraged, according to Western diplomats and refugee
workers, by the thought that because Prince Sihanouk's coalition includes the
feared former dictator, Pol Pot, Cambodian civilians now have less to fear from
that quarter than they did previously. They have been urged on, too, by the
hopeless restrictions of camp life and by their shrinking chances of gaining
admission as refugees to the United States or some other country.

They have had no trouble getting to Sihanoukville, which lies just inside the
Cambodian border north of Samrong. The Thai army has been happy to transport
them there by truck.

Area Could Be Dangerous

There is one major problem. According to diplomats and aid officials, many of
whom are heartened to see dependent civilians striking out on their own,
Sihanoukville, now with more than 14,000 people, could be a dangerous place for
refugees.

The cluster of half a dozen villages, whose traditional name is O Smach, is
surrounded by Vietnamese land mines. Last month, moreover, in an apparent
warning to the anti-Vietnamese coalition, Vietnamese troops subjected the area
to rocket fire, and several villagers were wounded. The nearest hospital, in
Thailand, is an hour away.

What has caused most concern is that O Smach is also the headquarters of Prince
Sihanouk's National Army, the former head of state's force of 3,000 or more men.
It could therefore become a prime target for a Vietnamese attack and, if this
happened, it might be a difficult place to escape from, especially for
civilians, because of the mines.

''It's dangerous, there's no doubt about it,'' said one Western diplomat about
the refugees' new choice of refuge. ''It's sort of terrifying,'' said an
international aid official. Both were nonetheless convinced, as other
independent observers have been, that the migration has been voluntary.

Vietnamese Buildup Reported

When a Vietnamese attack might come, no one knows, but some Thai and Western
military analysts have cited evidence that the Vietnamese army is building its
forces in the border area.

Given the persistent military challenge of Mr. Pol Pot's guerrillas, who may
number as many as 30,000, together with the political challenge of the new
coalition government, some consider it likely that Vietnam will begin concerted
attacks along the border once the rainy season ends next month. Already this
month, the two sides have exchanged fire at several important points.

The third member of the anti-Vietnamese coalition is Son Sann, a former
Cambodian Prime Minister, whose Khmer People's National Liberation Front may be
twice as large as Prince Sihanouk's group.  Both men met recently in Washington
with Vice President Bush.

Departures from Khao I Dang for Sihanoukville have fluctuated since July, about
a month after the settlement began attracting people from nearby villages.
According to one international aid official, its population probably grew by
several thousand, to 5,000, during June.

Migration Continuing

In August the Thai Government announced that so many refugees has gone to
Sihanoukville that Prince Sihanouk himself had called a temporary halt. By
September, though, even more refugees were arriving. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees reports that 4,100 residents of Khao I Dang left for
Sihanoukville in September alone.

Beyond the strictures of camp life and beyond a desire to return to Cambodia,
many of these refugees had recently learned that their chances of being admitted
to a Western country were slipping.

Linda Suttenfield of the International Rescue Committee said it was around this
time that people in Kamput, a refugee camp south of Aranyaprathet, ''were being
told they couldn't go to the United States.''

''Some of the people rejected at Kamput were people who would definitely have
been accepted last year,'' she said.

Rules Tightened by U.S.

The United States accepted 40,232 Cambodian refugees last year, of a permanently
resettled total of 49,743 for the year, according to the United Nations High
Commissioner. In 1982, up to the end of last month, the United States had
accepted 5,411 Cambodians, out of a resettled total of 14,602. The Reagan
Administration tightened the rules of refugee admission last summer to exclude
many who had no special family or other ties to the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SMILING, WAITING, HOPING

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A group of Amerasian children from Vietnam looking out from behind a
barbed wire fence at a processing camp in Thailand. At least four children and
three of their relatives are scheduled to leave for the United States on Friday.
Officials monitoring the airlift program said the remainder of a group of 24
children and 22 relatives should be on flights to families and sponsors in the
U.S. by next week. Associated Press

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING SAYS HANOI STIRS BORDER TURMOIL

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 13


In the latest acknowledgement of border tensions, China accused Vietnam today of
committing ''repeated armed provocations'' along their troubled frontier.

A formal note of protest delivered by the Chinese Foreign Ministry to the
Vietnamese Embassy here charged that over the last six weeks the Vietnamese were
responsible for 109 incidents in which three Chinese were killed and 11 wounded.

The Chinese Foreign Ministry charged that Vietnam had deliberately violated a
border cease-fire that it had proposed to cover the national days of the two
neighboring countries. Vietnam's national holiday falls on Sept. 2 and China's
on Oct. 1.

The Chinese protest comes less than a week after the Vietnamese delegate to the
United Nations, Hoang Bich Son, reiterated an offer from Hanoi to reopen talks
with Peking to normalize their chilly relations. In a speech at the United
Nations, Mr. Son had called the present strain a ''temporary phenomenon.''

Consultations With Soviet Union

Earlier this month, China opened new consultations with the Soviet Union
intended to identify their disagreements. But Chinese officials have said that
they did not expect any real improvement to emerge from the newest contacts
without some practical concessions from Moscow.

The Chinese may have viewed the talks as a method to separate the Soviet Union
from its Vietnamese ally. One of the conditions that China has raised for normal
relations with the Soviet Union is the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces from
Cambodia.

Vietnam's President, Truong Chinh, joined with the Soviet President, Leonid I.
Brezhnev, during a visit to Moscow last week in supporting Mr. Brezhnev's latest
bid for improved ties between China and the Soviet Union. This suggested that
relations with China was prominent among the issues they discussed.

In the absence of a visit to the frontier between China and Vietnam, it has been
nearly impossible for anyone to evaluate the merits of the accusations that have
been traded back and forth since the two countries fought their brief but bloody
border war in early 1979.

Increased Border Tensions

The latest incidents, covering the period from Aug. 27 to Oct 7, seem more
numerous than those that China reported during their previous cease-fire over
the Lunar New Year last January.

China then accused Vietnam of 44 ''military provocations'' over 10 days in which
one Chinese was killed and two others were wounded. On that occasion, China also
charged that Vietnam proposed a holiday truce, only to violate it.

China's protest note was made public by the New China News Agency after it was
delivered to the Vietnamese Embassy today. The note said that 102 of the latest
''provocations'' had involved Vietnamese firing into Chinese territory. Another
three involved artillery shelling of Chinese territory.

The Chinese Foreign Ministry said that on two other occasions Vietnamese armed
personnel crossed into China ''for assaults and sabotage.'' China had previously
reported that Vietnamese troops intruded into Longhuai village in the Guangxi
autonomous region on Sept. 15 and fired at commune members in the fields before
they were driven off by frontier guards. Elsewhere on the same day, the Chinese
charged, Vietnamese troops crossed the border to attack a Chinese frontier post
before being repulsed.

Vietnamese Overflights Protested

In the final two incidents protested today, two Vietnamese MIG-21 jet fighters
intruded into Chinese airspace for two minutes on Sept.  10 for what the Chinese
charged were reconnaisance missions over southern Guangxi. China formally
protested the overflights two days later.

The protest note filed today said that the Vietnamese had killed three Chinese
border inhabitants and frontier guards and wounded 11 other persons during the
incidents.

The Chinese Government demanded that Vietnam ''stop such armed provocations and
intrusions and abandon its anti-China policy,'' but it did not threaten any
consequences.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Science Office Chief Says V.A. Is Stalling Agent Orange Study

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 314 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 13


The head of a science review panel says the Veterans Administration has
needlessly delayed the start of a study on whether servicemen in Vietnam were
harmed by the toxic herbicide Agent Orange.

The official, John H. Gibbons, director of the Office of Technology Assessment,
said that it was three years since Congress directed the agency to conduct the
investigation but that little had been done. His office is an arm Congress.

Vietnam Veterans link exposure to the herbicide to health problems ranging from
cancer to brith defects, but the veterans agency says it has no evidence of such
a link and has refused to pay disability compensation.

The purpose of the study is to determine whether Agent Orange caused the
difficulties and whether compensation should be made.

Basic Decision Not Made

Mr. Gibbons, in a letter to the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee, said the V.A.
still had nto made the basic decision of whether to limit the study to the
health effects of Agent Orange or whether to consider whether other chemicals
used in Vietnam may have been harmful to soldiers.

The Veterans' Administration denied that it had delayed the project. It said the
Army had difficulty identifying men most likely to have been exposed to the
substance and by the need for scientific reviews of the study's design.

Mr. Gibbons said the study has already been screened by three scientific panels.
"Waiting on still another technical review to make a policy decision seems
unnecessary and can be viewed as a delaying tactic," he said.

A decision to broaden the study would involve comparing the health of three
groups, men who served in Vietnam, those in the military at the same time who
were not in Vietnam and men who did not serve in the military.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 14, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CHANGES SET IN VIET MEMORIAL

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 848 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 13


The Federal Fine Arts Commission today approved two controversial additions to
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial now nearing completion on the Mall. The additions
are an eight-foothigh statue realistically depicting three haggard American
fighting men and a 50-foot flagpole.

These objects will now be added to Maya Yang Lin's stark pair of 200-foot long
black granite walls that join to form a V, and have inscribed on them the names
of all 57,692 Americans killed in Vietnam between 1963 and 1973.

While accepting the additions, which had been advocated by veterans
organizations and opposed by Miss Lin and other architects, the commission,
which has authority over the design and location of Federal monuments here,
rejected the proposed location of the statue and flagpole.

A Shift in the Location

J. Carter Brown, chairman of the commission, suggested in his announcement of
the decision that the panel would approve a location for the statue and flagpole
near an entrance to the memorial site rather than adjacent to the two walls.
Placing the additional sculpture too close to the memorial, he said, would
detract from Miss Lin's original abstract design.

The action, which came after a daylong hearing, was unanimous, with Mr. Brown
comparing the result with that of a concert. A great symphony, he said, is not
interrupted by another piece, but a concert program would contain other music
designed to enhance the main piece.

The flagpole, the statue and a name-locator to the war dead will similarly
enhance the memorial, he said.  ''There is a need in the country for healing the
wounds and to recognize all those who served in Vietnam,'' Mr. Brown said, in
effect adopting the assertions of veterans groups that Miss Lin's design honored
only the dead while, instead, it should honor the dead, the wounded and those
who survived and returned home.

Commission Visits Site

The seven members of the commission heard four hours of testimony and then
visited the construction site, which is between the Washington Monument and the
Linoln Memorial, before returning to a meeting room in the Treasury Building to
announce its decision.

''It is extraordinarily moving,'' Mr. Brown said of Miss Lin's almost-completed
memorial. He added that the members were moved by ''the litany of the names of
those killed'' and by its location on ''sacred soil, near our greatest
memorials.''

Miss Lin, who had urged the commission earlier in testimony to resist tampering
with her design, was not present when the decision was announced.

The commission heard four hours of testimony, some of it almost tearful, as the
pros and cons of the proposed modifications were discussed.

Many Veterans Approve

Many veterans of the war in Vietnam urged approval of the statue and the
flagpole, and others, including Miss Lin, urged that her design be left
unchanged.

Most of the veterans organizations - including the American Legion, the Veterans
of Foreign Wars, and Amvets - sent representatives to endorse the additions, and
they were supported by Representative Donald Bailey, Democrat of Pennsylvania,
who seemed on the verge of tears as he spoke.

''I plead with you,'' said Mr. Bailey, a Vietnam veteran, asserting that the
flag and the depiction of the fighting men would demonstrate that the war in
Vietnam was fought for freedom, a righteous cause.

On the other hand, another witness also seemed near tears as she asked why the
advocates of the statue wanted a literal representation of the United States
role in Vietnam. ''What are the memorable images of the war in Vietnam?'' asked
the witness, Janice Connally, and she provided these answers: The photos of the
guerrilla being summarily executed during the Tet offensive, the naked girl
running down a street, the students killed at the Kent State University
demonstration.

A Reason for Remembering

The veterans insisted that the statue and flagpole ought to be added in the
spirit of compromise with, for example, Tom Carhart asserting that a critic was
correct when he wrote recently that the additions would mean that the memorial
was not intended to remember only the dead.

''This is not a memorial to the dead,'' Mr. Carhart said to the commission.
''This is a memorial to honor those of us who served.'' The sculptor who created
the statue of the three fighting men, Fred Hart, said of his work, ''it does not
intrude or obstruct.'' But advocates of the original design insisted otherwise.

Defends Her Design

Miss Lin said, ''I appeal to the commission to protect the artistic integrity of
my original design,'' which she said would be interrupted by the ''abrupt
verticality of the flagpole and the sculpture.'' The additions, she insisted,
would make her design ''no more than an architectural backdrop.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of figure in Vietnam memorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
9 More Amerasians Leave for the U.S.

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 110 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Friday, Oct. 15


Nine Vietnamese-American children ended a week in a refugee camp and boarded a
jet for the United States today. They are to stop in Bombay, Dubai, Istanbul and
Frankfurt before arriving in New York later today.

The Amerasian children, fathered by Americans during the Vietnam War, are among
the second group of 24 to leave Vietnam through Bangkok en route to the United
States in a little more than three weeks. A total of 35 children have left
Vietnam on two flights, on Sept. 30 and Oct. 7.

The rest of the children and 13 relatives are to leave Bangkok on Sunday for
Hong Kong en route to Seattle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Turns Over Remains of 5 Americans

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 14


Vietnam today turned over to United States officials in Hanoi the remains of
five people believed to be missing Americans and material evidence on three
other Americans listed as missing in action in the Vietnam War, the Pentagon
said.

The remains are being flown to the Central Identification Laboratory in Hawaii
for identification tests and will be received at Hickham Air Force Base with
full military honors, a Pentagon statement said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT A CONVENTION, SONGS AND FOND ECHOES OF A WAR

BYLINE: By GREGORY JAYNES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTE, N.C., Oct. 14


A convention commenced here today with delegates who include some who see a
compromise as a deal in which the other party gives up breathing.

It is a third annual gathering sponsored by Soldier of Fortune Magazine, and it
looks like nothing so much as a bloodless takeover of a local Holiday Inn. Since
the first camouflage-clad participants began checking in Monday, the chef
reports, there hasn't been a single call for quiche.

This is true, silly as it sounds. But what is also taking place in Charlotte
this week is, depending on the point of view, harmless fun, scary, sadly
necessary or just plain sad. It is fun in that the hotel bar has become a
rollicking N.C.O. club, the lusty songs of fighting men sung at the top of the
lungs.

Listeners for War Stories

It is scary in that the most venal views from the nation's last battlefield -
''Kill 'em all, let God sort 'em out'' is an example - are everywhere strung
about. It is sadly necessary, Soldier of Fortune's editor and publisher, Robert
K. Brown, told a former infantry sergeant at the bar Wednesday night, to give
combat veterans attentive listeners for their war stories, since no one else in
America appears to want to hear them.

It is sad in that there are not-so-old soldiers here who seem stuck in another
time, forever stuck.  Soldier of Fortune is a seven-year-old militaristic
publication packed with vitriol and ordnance. Begun in the Boulder, Colo.,
basement of an ex-G.I., Mr. Brown, with an initial press run of 8,500 copies, it
has over the years touched a nerve with many Vietnam veterans as well as with
survivalists who want to arm themselves to the teeth. Paid subscriptions now
number 220,000 and the magazine is securely in the black. ''I was lucky,'' said
Mr. Brown. ''I hit a market.''

Demographic studies of the magazine's readers show that 11 percent are
law-enforcement officers, 12 percent are active-duty personnel and 48 percent
are military veterans. Soldier of Fortune, in Mr.  Brown's published words, ''is
a politically conservative, action adventure magazine which reports on
contemporary and historical subjects.'' He added, ''It is anti-Communist,
pro-military, propolice and pro-veterans and we strongly support the
individual's rights to keep and bear arms.''

'Plugging the Vietnam Veteran'

Mr. Brown, who is 49 years old and difficult to portray verbatim because he is
incapable of speaking without profanity, was saying Wednesday night that his
publication is ''consistently plugging the Vietnam veteran.''

''We are saying he was forgotten,'' he went on. ''We are saying there were just
as many heroes in the Vietnam War as in World War I and World War II, just as
many Sergeant Yorks and Audie Murphys. They were there. We publish the hero
stories.''

The popularity of the product, said Mr. Brown, is so great that ''I would say
I'm probably wealthy on paper but not in my bank account.'' He added, ''We are
financially very healthy on paper. We have a very fluid cash flow. We don't owe
anybody.''

The popularity of the convention, which began essentially as a shooting match in
Columbia, Mo., two years ago, has increased the number of participants from 700
then to 870 last year in Scottsdale, Ariz., and to 1,500 this autumn in North
Carolina. Selection of a convention site depends on a state's gun laws.
Automatic weapons must be allowed, for instance, for there are machine gun
demonstrations. And there must be a good firing range nearby as well as an
adequate DZ, or drop zone, for parachuting demonstrations.

Though the convention officially began this morning with the opening of the
Soldier of Fortune gun show and exhibition at the Charlotte Civic Center and the
beginning of seminars on everything from the siege at Khe Sanh to the Russians
in Afghanistan, scores of participants have been here since Monday.

Jump School and Shooting Match

A group of former paratroopers from Louisiana who organized a paramilitary club
called the ''First Airborne'' have been running a parachute jump school at the
airport in Lancaster, S.C., 40 miles south of here. Off in the hickory woods of
the Charlotte Rifle and Pistol Club, a weeklong shooting contest has been going
on, with 127 contestants.

Near sundown, mud-spattered vehicles festooned with bumper stickers that say
''I'd rather be killing Communists,'' and ''Forget 'Nam?  Never!'' return to the
hotel with people in fatigues, puttees and combat boots.

''Unless you were in Vietnam,'' said that ex-infantry sergeant who was talking
to Mr. Brown in the bar Wednesday night, ''you can't understand.'' He asked not
to be identified, and then launched into a description of sex in Asia that was
not bawdy at all but tender.

One is a 'Living Memorial'

A man passed through wearing a gold earring and a glow-in-the-dark silk jacket
with a map of Vietnam embroidered on it and lettered reminders of Chu Lai and Da
Nang, 1965-66. His name was James Wardell, his lapel said, and he described
without being asked a battle that ''as far as I'm concerned was where we won the
war - the VC just couldn't stand up to the Marines after that.''

Out at the parachute jump school, B.J. Brown, a restaurateur in Shreveport, a
former Army artillery officer, the son of a paratrooper who was killed in World
War II and no relation to the editor of Soldier of Fortune, was explaining that
the Shreveport-based ''First Airborne'' is a ''living memorial to all allied
paratroopers of all wars.'' He pointed to a bear of a man across the tarmac, and
identified him as Sgt. Maj. Major John Cannon, who served with the Special
Forces in Vietnam.

''He's our topkick,'' said Mr. Brown, beckoning the sergeant major over. ''He's
tough, a great soldier. That guy had a VC run a bayonet in his stomach, and then
shoot him. He stood there, and strangled him with his bare hands. He's got a
great scar.''

The sergeant major explained that he runs a bar in Shreveport only because he
could not stay in the Special Forces because of his wounds. Civilian life, he
said, is ''boring, sir.''

The convention ends with a banquet Saturday night. The banquet speakers are Gen.
William C. Westmoreland and G. Gordon Liddy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of bar scene in North Carolina

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Physicians Alerted to Effects Of Exposure to Agent Orange

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 100 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Oct. 14


The American Medical Association told doctors today to be alert for adverse
effects in patients exposed to TCDD, or dioxin, which is in the herbicide Agent
Orange.

Spray programs involving Agent Orange have been used in the United States as a
means of forestry management, according to a report by the association's Council
on Scientific Affairs. The report is in the issue of The Journal of the American
Medical Association published today.

Agent Orange was also used by United States forces in Vietnam to defoliate
jungle areas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY CHIEF REPORTS A 'RENAISSANCE'

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 14


For years, the nation's military leaders have been telling Congress that their
budgets were inadequate, that divisions and ships and wings were not ready for
combat, that neglected American forces would be unable to sustain themselves for
long in battle.

Among the more vocal of these leaders has been the Army's Chief of Staff, Gen.
Edward C. Meyer. He has repeatedly asserted that he was leading a ''hollow
army.''

Now, however, General Meyer says that the Army has acquired some muscle and has
begun a ''renaissance.'' He offers perhaps the most optimistic assessment of a
military service heard from a senior officer since the end of the war in
Vietnam.

In an interview, the tall, lean general said that the Army was still moving
toward excellence; he cited several serious shortcomings, including some
equipment and training deficiencies. But he hastened to add, ''I really think we
could have a great army in the next three to four years.'' He said he had
recently spent much time out of Washington inspecting units and reported, ''I've
never been in a supply room or out on a truck line where things have been as
good as they are today.''

'Continuity and Stability'

For the next five years, General Meyer said, the Reagan Administration plans to
spend $51 billion to continue strengthening the Army. If approved by Congress,
that would be about $10 billion more than he thought two years ago would be
needed.

Whether Congress will do that, however, seems increasingly in doubt, something
the general clearly recognizes. ''The thing that will destroy our ability to get
through this transition,'' he said, ''would be if we can't get continuity and
stability.''

When General Meyer complained of a ''hollow army'' in 1980, only six of 10 Army
divisions in the United States were combat-ready; all units were short of
recruits and experienced sergeants; weapons were obsolete and poorly maintained,
and ammunition and supplies stored for contingencies would have lasted fewer
than 30 days in battle.

Today, the general said, all divisions but one are ready for battle; units are
fully manned and are absorbing a new program intended to provide cohesion;
ammunition and supplies have been stockpiled for more than 30 days, and
maintenance and logistics are being simplified.

Two Serious Shortcomings

The Army has reorganized its heavy divisions, is running tests to determine how
light divisions should be organized and equipped, has adopted tactics to employ
the current force for the next few years and devised a new operational doctrine
intended to govern the development of weapons in the long term.

It is important, General Meyer said, to have a ''vision of where we were going
so that we weren't trapped, as armies in the past have been, into just being a
mirror of the kind of army we were before.''

General Meyer cautioned, however, that at least two serious shortcomings
hindered the Army. Although new weapons have been coming into the force, he
said, ''we are still a hollow army in equipment.'' He also said that it would
take four to five years to absorb the new weapons being produced now and to
train soldiers to use them.

And he said that the United States lacked the aircraft and ships to deploy the
Army to areas where it might be needed, although he was encouraged by recent
improvements.

Noting reports of equipment that did not work properly, General Meyer said there
were ''isolated pockets where quality control of industry is not what it must
be.'' Recent breakdowns in the long troubled M-1 tank, according to an Army
study, were traced to ''poor quality control on the production line.''

Emphasis on Improvements

The Reagan Administration has changed the Army's mission from fighting only on
the central front in Europe to preparing to fight anywhere in the world. In the
long run, General Meyer said, the Army will need three to five more divisions to
fulfill that mission.  Currently, there are 16 active and eight reserve
divisions.

But he placed more emphasis on continuing improvements than on expanding the
force. ''I'm convinced that the next war will be won by the best Army, not by
the biggest Army,'' he said.

When the Army was withdrawn from Vietnam, General Meyer said, the focus shifted
almost entirely to the central front in Europe. But officers were untrained in
anything but jungle warfare and the noncommissioned officer corps had been
decimated.

Of all the changes that were needed, General Meyer indicated, personnel was at
the top.  Today, the Army has more than filled its recruiting quotas, with about
85 percent of the recruits being high school graduates, usually a sign of
quality. And because more experienced sergeants are staying in the Army,
shortages there should end next year.

Trends in Education

Similarly, the shortage of trained technicians should drop to about 700,
according to Army surveys, or half of what they have been this year. Most senior
Army officers attribute the recruiting and retention turnaround to improved pay,
a better spirit in Army life and unemployment in the civilian sector.

General Meyer noted that a special school to train first sergeants, the key
noncommissioned officers, had been opened and that schools for officers had been
instructed to emphasize fundamental tactics and leadership rather than general
military education.

Beyond individual training, General Meyer has insisted on achieving unit
cohesion by assigning soldiers to a company at the beginning of their service
and keeping them together when they are deployedoverseas.

At the same time, General Meyer has instituted a regimental system that will
take another three years to put into place. It will keep soldiers, sergeants and
young officers in a regiment with a home post so that they can count on serving
with familar faces when they are rotated overseas and on returning to the same
post in the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph on upgrading armed services photo of Gen. Edward
Meyer

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Common Ground

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 334 words


The Vietnam Veterans Memorial that is nearing completion on the Mall in
Washington was inspired not by any desire to glorify America's role in the war
but by guilt over the postwar neglect of the men and women who served. The idea
was that in memorializing the names of 57,692 Americans who died in Vietnam, a
divided nation could find common ground.

The design, selected by a panel of eminent art experts, records the names on
long simple walls that form a V descending below ground level. Its simplicity
fulfilled the purpose: honoring the dead without commenting on the war.

Yet in reaching for political neutrality, the design jury took a cultural
stance. The severe modernist walls, Tom Wolfe argues in The Washington Post,
reflect the taste of a cultural elite. The more conventional preference of most
Vietnam veterans, he contends, runs to more realistic statues of soldiers
helping buddies or fighting the enemy.

The complaints of veterans who thought precisely that led to a compromise, now
approved by the Federal Fine Arts Commission. The walls will be supplemented by
a flagpole and a modest, realistic statue of three soldiers. To make sure they
do not diminish the starkness of the walls, the commission situated the pole and
statue some distance away, near the entrance to the monument.

If compromises have to be made with public works of art, this one seems decent
enough. But the episode raises a deeper issue.  More than other foreign
involvements, the Vietnam War inflamed social conflicts in America -among
classes, races, generations, cultures. Was that an accident of history, because
the war coincided with other trends? Or did the war itself inspire so much broad
dissension? Let the memorial commemorate the dead of the war. But let this
controversy commemorate an era of domestic strife that changed America. And let
the visitors ponder it all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
A CHINA-SOVIET THAW

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 826 words

DATELINE: BUCHAREST, Rumania


After a generation of harsh political conflict and some armed skirmishes, the
Soviet Union and China now seem seriously intent on achieving ''normal''
relations.

That is the assessment in Bucharest. Rumania is in the best position to know; it
has long passed messages between the two Communist giants. It played a crucial
role in opening American-Chinese relations and in arranging Anwar Sadat's
dramatic trip to Jerusalem.

It was in Bucharest in 1960 that Nikita Khrushchev publicly acknowledged the
break between Moscow and Peking, a shift that changed the world power picture
and gradually led to a basic turnaround by the U.S. Now, a reverse process is
beginning. It will take wise and steady U.S. diplomacy to adjust and obtain the
gains for world peace that could emerge instead of falling into a new trap of
tensions.

The Chinese have made clear that by ''normal'' relations they do not mean a
return to junior-partner status in a Moscow-dominated bloc, which they call
Soviet ''hegemonism'' and which led to the historic rupture. The Russians speak
cautiously of economic, cultural, technological, scientific, sports and cultural
exchanges, pointedly leaving out Communist Party ties and military issues.

Already, according to authoritative word here, Moscow has made the first
concession by dropping its refusal to discuss ''third'' countries, which means
it at least accepts the Chinese list of problems.

In order of importance to Peking, these are Vietnam and its occupation of
Cambodia, Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, Soviet troops in Mongolia and the
one million Soviet soldiers that China says are massed on its border and borders
of areas it claims.

This list is of great significance to the U.S. Washington has imposed sanctions,
made the harshest declarations, tried various maneuvers. But it hasn't been able
to budge Moscow an inch from Afghanistan or support for Vietnam's aggression.

The list also shows that the opening of Chinese-Soviet talks is not a pout and a
parry by Peking because of President Reagan's waffles on Taiwan. It is much more
profound, judged in Bucharest to reflect an underlying urge to defuse strains on
both sides of the long Asian border.

Nobody expects quick progress. The reversal may take years, and it may falter.
Even a start probably wouldn't have been possible before the death of the Moscow
ideologist Mikhail Suslov, and likely it will take the emergence of new leaders
with no involvement in past quarrels to bring important change.

But the initial analysis is that what look from Washington like insuperable
obstacles may not prove lasting. The Bucharest view is that the Russians are
beginning to feel mired in Afghanistan and growing interested in a settlement
that would leave it nonaligned, perhaps ''Finlandized,'' to use a barely
appropriate comparison.  Moscow is also feeling the burden of maintaining huge
forces far from their supplies in the rigorous Siberian climate.

If this is so, the time is coming when the U.S. will have to review its own
position and redefine its attitudes.  Certainly, withdrawal of Soviet forces
from Afghanistan and thus from Pakistan's border would be in U.S. interests. It
would reduce the threat to the Persian Gulf and quite possibly produce a new
sense of prudence in Moscow toward military adventures, as failure in Vietnam
made the U.S. cautious about the large-scale use of force abroad.

Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia and a calmer situation in Southeast Asia
would ease fears of America's friends in the area.  Reduction of Soviet forces
facing China could be helpful for the general world climate providing they
weren't redeployed against Europe or the Middle East.

The U.S. has to contemplate losing its ''China card'' in the rivalry with the
Russians, and to think how it should move to avoid provoking a new hostile
alliance between Moscow and Peking, the strategic planners' nightmare for 20
years. This means accepting a common need for peace by all three powers.

This can be good news for the long term, reducing the danger of nuclear war,
perhaps reducing the Soviet paranoia about encirclement with which Moscow
justifies expansionist urges. It can be bad news if the U.S. takes fright,
blusters and decides to hunker down.

In any case, it is a reminder that there is a lot of world out there beyond
America's borders. We have to live with it, we can have some influence, but it
can't be teleguided from Washington. Other countries are going to go their own
way. Whether it is a collision course depends on both them and us.

Though the outcome of the new attempt between the Soviet Union and China for
better neighborliness is uncertain, it is not too soon to prepare. China, as
much as the U.S., wants Soviet restraint. Peking is now seeking it by
negotiation, not confrontation. That's another reason for accepting continued
Soviet probes for a Brezhnev-Reagan meeting, and getting on with Soviet-American
talks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 15, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

UNUSUAL FILMS ABOUND

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


The New York Film Festival has come and gone, but the almost yearround film
festival that is New York is still offering unusual fare for the adventurous
this weekend. Film buffs can see, for instance, a love story from South Korea, a
rarely shown all-black Western, a tale of old age by the Japanese director
Yasujiro Ozu and an avant-garde video film showing heat waves rising off the
Sahara.

''Films from Korea,'' a five-week series that opens this weekend at the Asia
Society, will introduce many Western moviegoers to the comparatively obscure
Korean cinema.

''In these films, you see complex individuals and situations,'' Muriel Peters,
curator of the Korean series, said the other day.  ''Shamanism and Buddhism are
very much alive in Korea today. You see that, not the cultish Moonie thing.''

Tonight at 8, the film is ''Gaetmaul,'' a love story about a woman who lives in
a fishing village whose men often die at sea. The film is quiet and
straightforward, almost presenting a documentary look at Korean village life.

A video film, ''The Wedding Day,'' based on a popular Korean folktale, will also
be shown. It is a bright, colorful fantasy with a happy ending that is intended
for young audiences, a contrast to most of the dramas in the series. The film
will be continuously shown in a small screening room near the auditorium, where
parents might want to drop off their children.

The Asia Society is at 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street. Tickets are $4. For
information: 288-6400, extension 247, 248 or 249.

New Moon Festival

The actress Lorey Hayes has turned a brownstone in Harlem into an artistic
salon. Tomorrow and Sunday, she will celebrate its opening with her New Moon
Festival, showing four all-black films made in the 1930's and 40's.

Two of the films, ''Harlem Rides the Range'' and ''Two-Gun Man From Harlem'' are
all-black Western musicals. They resemble Gene Autry Westerns except for the
music, which is rock and blues. For example, the cowboys in ''Two-Gun Man From
Harlem'' play saxophones and drums for bunkhouse entertainment.

The other two films are both from 1948. They are ''Look Out Sister,'' with Louis
Jordan and the Tympany Five, and ''Boarding House Blues,'' with the comedian
Moms Mabley. The movies will be shown simultaneously on double bills in separate
theaters at 8 and 11 P.M. tomorrow and at 3 and 6 P.M. Sunday. The address is
210 West 137th Street, between Seventh and Eighth Avenues. The $5 admission
includes free popcorn.

This weekend at Columbia University there is a Duke Ellington film festival,
made up of film clips of the Duke's life. Included is a special tribute to the
original Ellington drummer, Sonny Greer, who died last March. Film footage of
Mr. Greer is rare because Mr.  Ellington did not like extended drum solos. One
clip from the 1930 Amos and Andy movie ''Check and Double Check'' shows Mr.
Greer pounding a huge battery of drums behind the Ellington band.

David Chertok, the jazz film historian, will introduce the program, which starts
at 6 P.M. Sunday at the Wollman Auditorium, Broadway at 115th Street, on the
Columbia campus. Tickets are $5.

Family Flicks at Cooper-Hewitt

The Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street, at Fifth Avenue, will open a
series called ''Family Flicks'' this weekend. Each showing is a workshop
intended to draw parents and children into a richer museumgoing experience than
they might have on their own.

Tomorrow two 10-minute films will be shown, one of them a newsreel supposedly
made by Martian visitors to Earth, who conclude that the automobile is the
dominant form of life on the planet. After the film, parents and children will
be encouraged to visit one of the museums exhibits and describe objects -
Victorian lace, for example - as if seen through Martian eyes.

The show begins at 1 P.M. The cost is $12 a workshop for each family, or $60 for
the series. For information: 860-6868.  Downtown at the Kitchen, the performance
space at 484 Broome Street in SoHo, moviegoers will find an outpost of
avant-garde video art.  The theater consists of five televisions sitting atop
pedestals scattered through a huge loft. The audience sits in groups of 30
around each television.

This weekend the Kitchen has a retrospective of its video screenings. The works
range from straight documentary (Fred Simon's ''Portrait of a Vietnam Vet'') to
more conceptual work (Brian Eno's ''Mistaken Memories of Medieval Manhattan'').

Showings are at 8, 9, 10 and 11 tonight through Sunday night, with matinees
beginning at 2 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday. The price is $3, for which you can stay
for all subsequent shows. For information: 925-3615.

Ozu Continues at Japan Society

As part of a continuing retrospective of the films of Yasujiro Ozu, the Japan
Society is offering a double bill tonight at 7 of ''I Was Born but ...,'' a 1932
silent film that is one of Ozu's earliest, and ''An Autumn Afternoon,'' the
director's last film, made in 1962.  The Japan Society is at 333 East 47th
Street. Tickets cost $4. For information: 832-1155.

Moviegoers will also have another chance this weekend to see Abel Gance's 1927
silent classic, ''Napoleon,'' at Radio City Music Hall.  Show times for the
four-hour film are 7:30 tonight and tomorrow night and 2:30 P.M. on Sunday.
Radio City Music Hall is at the Avenue of the Americas and 50th Street. Prices
are $10 to $15. Information: 944-9300.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ENVOY AT U.N. SESSION: A BLUR OF CONSTANT MOTION

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1268 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 13


So far as the public is concerned, the annual session of the United Nations
General Assembly is an opportunity for ministers of some 130 countries to come
to New York, deliver a pro forma speech to an almost empty chamber, drop in on a
few parties and go home.

''Not quite,'' said Suppiah Dhanabalan, the Foreign Minister of Singapore. ''If
that's all it was I could find many better things to do with the time.''

The speeches, which began on Sept. 27, are almost entirely for home consumption.
They are well planned and carefully written because they are covered
exhaustively in the speakers' home countries. But here in New York, the
speeches, except for those of the United States and the Soviet Union, are mostly
window dressing for the real work of this gathering, which is to afford the
foreign ministers of the world an opportunity to see each other on a relatively
informal basis.

A Full Schedule

To show just what takes place behind the scenes at one of these long General
Assembly meetings, Mr. Dhanabalan agreed to discuss his full schedule during the
session here.

From the moment he stepped off British Airways flight 175 from London on Sunday,
Sept. 26, until he left for Washington and Singapore 11 days later, Mr.
Dhanabalan was working. In addition to his speech before the General Assembly,
he took part in 35 scheduled meetings, dinners, lunches and receptions. ''There
were almost as many impromptu ones,'' he said wearily.

Working out of his room at the United Nations Plaza Hotel and the Singapore
Mission's offices in the same building, Mr. Dhanabalan dashed back and forth
around the East Side 18 hours a day. On the day he arrived there were briefings
and only a short time for a rest before heading to the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel for
a dinner for Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia given by the foreign ministers
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, of which Singapore is a member.

''That was a working dinner with an agenda,'' Mr. Dhanabalan said.  ''In fact,''
he added, checking down his own calendar, ''all the lunches and dinners were
working affairs. Well, no, here is one, on Wednesday the 29th. It was given for
Prince Sihanouk by the Malaysian Prime Minister, Dr. Mahathir bin Mohamad, at
the Helmsley Palace, and I really wasn't working at that one.''

'A Reservoir of Contacts'

The people Mr. Dhanabalan saw here also included Secretary of State George P.
Shultz; Joseph Natuman, Foreign Minister of Vanuatu, the newest member of the
United Nations; Stefan Andrei, the Foreign Minster of Rumania, and Lewis T.
Preston, chairman of the Morgan Guaranty Bank. ''Where else could I see so many
people so easily?'' Mr. Dhanabalan asked. ''It would take a year of traveling to
cover the ground that I cover here.''

''In many instances,'' he continued, ''it's just a question of touching base
with people. Then, if and when a crisis occurs, I will be dealing with someone I
know rather than a stranger. I try to see some people every year, and of course
I try to meet new people as well. I think of it as building up a reservoir of
contacts.''

His most important meetings, Mr. Dhanabalan said, were with his fellow foreign
ministers from the other countries in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
- the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand.  ''It was a great
opportunity to bring each other up to date on a variety of problems,'' he said.

''Our major mutual concern was, of course, Indochina,'' the Singaporean Foreign
Minister said. ''Particularly this year, with the added element of the new
coalition government for Kampuchea, headed by Prince Sihanouk. We talked to all
the parties in that group about their problems and future plans.''

Meeting With Vietnamese Official

Although Singapore and the other members of the Southeast Asian group are
solidly behind the Sihanouk coalition's efforts to retake control of Cambodia,
Mr. Dhanabalan's first working meeting in New York was with Vietnam's Foreign
Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, whose Government is accused by the Southeast Asian
group of illegally invading Cambodia with Soviet support. The Singaporean
official declined to disclose the substance of that meeting; he did indicate
that it was a valuable encounter and one that would be almost impossible to hold
anywhere except at the United Nations.

The meeting with Mr. Thach was followed by a luncheon for foreign ministers of
the nations that regard themselves as nonaligned, in honor of Prince Sihanouk,
at the United Nations Plaza Hotel; a briefing by a member of the Singapore
Economic Development Board; a reception by the President of Brazil, Joao
Baptista Figueiredo, at the Plaza Hotel; a meeting between the Southeast Asian
foreign ministers and Willibald Pahr, the Austrian Foreign Minister, and a
dinner for Mr. Pahr given by the Southeast Asian ministers at the
Inter-Continental Hotel.

On Tuesday, Sept. 28, after a morning meeting of the Southeast Asian foreign
ministers at the Waldorf-Astoria continued through lunch, Mr. Dhanabalan met
with Mr. Preston of Morgan Guaranty at 23 Wall Street, then with Assistant
Secretary of State John H. Holdridge at the Singapore Mission.  Later there was
a dinner at Le Perigord, a restaurant on East 52d Street, to introduce Prince
Sihanouk and the prime minister in his coalition, Son Sann, to journalists.

Informal Meetings

On Wednesday the Southeast Asian ministers met with Secretary of State Shultz at
the United Nations Plaza Hotel, then went to the Helmsley Palace for the
Malaysian Prime Minister's luncheon. ''There were no scheduled meetings that
afternoon,'' Mr. Dhanabalan said, ''but we had meetings just the same. Informal
meetings.''

On Thursday there were sessions with the Foreign Ministers of Pakistan and
Portugal.  Lunch was at another French restaurant on the East Side, La Petite
Marmite. This time the nonaligned foreign ministers were present and again the
honored guest was Prince Sihanouk.

After lunch there was a meeting with the Rumanian Foreign Mininster, a reception
at United Nations headquarters given by Secretary General Javier Perez de
Cuellar and the President of the General Assembly, Imre Hollai. At the end of
that day the Southeast Asian group gave a dinner for the Secretary General in
the Empire Room at the Waldorf. ''That was another social evening,'' Mr.
Dhanabalan said. ''It's something we do every year.''

And so it went, each day. On Friday, Oct. 1, at 6 P.M. it was Mr.  Dhanabalan's
turn at the podium in General Assembly. Speaking for 20 minutes 12 seconds, he
said a ''majority of nations'' had denied legitimacy to the Vietnamese-backed
Government of Cambodia, criticized the industrial nations for their trade
barriers and the third world countries for spending on arms rather than
development.

He also found time to attend a Chase Manhattan seminar on pharmaceutical
investment in Southeast Asia. ''That's the kind of business we want to
attract,'' he said.

Mr. Dhanabalan looked at his watch. There was just time for a quick briefing
before a meeting with Huang Hua, the Chinese Foreign Minister. ''I'll be glad to
get home,'' he said. ''I need some exercise - a couple of good games of
squash.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Suppiah Dhanabalan and Tommy Koh at U.N.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AGENCY TO YIELD ON HERBICIDE ISSUE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 446 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


The Veterans Administration has yielded to Congressional pressure in giving up
control of an investigation into whether the herbicide Agent Orange damaged the
health of soldiers in Vietnam.

The agency's administrator, Robert P. Nimmo, agreed today to let the national
Centers for Disease Control take over the investigation. He was responding to a
letter from 100 members of Congress who asked him two weeks ago to to allow the
centers to take over the study of the effects of the herbicide.

Mr. Nimmo acknowledged that some veterans might have rejected the findings of a
study directed by the V.A.  Congressional critics have said it was unfair to ask
Vietnam veterans to wait seven or eight years for answers to their concerns
about their health and their ability to produce healthy children.

Shift Based on Prudence

Mr. Nimmo wrote Representatives G.V. Montgomery, Democrat of Mississippi, and
John Paul Hammerschmidt, Republican of Arkansas, the chairman and the ranking
Republican member of the Veterans' Affairs Committee.

But Mr. Nimmo said his agency could have done the job. But he added: ''The need
for public acceptance of both the conduct of the study and the study results is
recognized. Therefore, while I would ordinarily favor retention of
responsibility, I am persuaded that it would be prudent to enter into an
agreement with a non-V.A.  scientific body to perform the Agent Orange
epidemiological study.''

For years veterans have blamed Agent Orange for such problems as cancer, liver
and kidney disorders, nerve and skin troubles, numbness, vision and hearing
impairments, fatigue, reduced sexual drive, impotence, miscarriages and birth
defects.

Agent Orange, which contains highly toxic dioxin, was sprayed to destroy
Vietcong crops and hiding places in the Vietnamese jungle.  But many membes of
the services may also have come in contact with it. Twelve million gallons was
sprayed, chiefly from planes.

Study Ordered Three Years Ago

The proposed study would involve comparing the health of 6,000 men believed to
have been exposed to the defoliant with that of 6,000 not exposed.

Three years ago Congress ordered the Veterans Administration to conduct the
investigation, but the work has not started.  The veterans agency has taken the
position that there is no connection between Agent Orange and any major disease.
It has refused to allow veterans to collect disability compensation for health
problems they attribute to Agent Orange.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WALLACE CAST IN UNFAMILIAR ROLE AS THE LIBERAL IN ALABAMA GOVERNOR RACE

BYLINE: By WENDELL RAWLS Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2207 words

DATELINE: MONTGOMERY, Ala., Oct. 12


It was virtually a quarter-century ago that a tiny, combative rural judge
strutted in from nowhere to command Alabama's public stage, play on the fretting
discontent of a nation and place his stamp on the political mind of America.

Now, George Corley Wallace, variously viewed as a demagogue or a folk hero, is
running again for Governor, seeking a fourth four-year term and another hour on
the stage.

Ironically, in this latest, and perhaps nearly last, campaign he seems to be
trying to restore Alabama as the enclave of populism it was before he
capitalized on the themes of racism, fear and hatred when he was first elected
Governor in 1962, after a failure four years earlier.

Many Follow His Trails

Mr. Wallace, now 63 years old, almost deaf, and paralyzed from the waist down as
a result of an assassination attempt while running for President 10 years ago,
has been the central figure in Alabama politics for the lifetime of more than
one-third of the people in the state. It has been a lifetime of race riots and
recession; Sun Belt growth and space travel; the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
and Richard M. Nixon; Vietnam and Watergate; Moral Majority and the silent
majority; Lee Harvey Oswald, Sirhan Sirhan, James Earl Ray and Arthur H. Bremer.

Those events and trends and people, and many others, had an impact on Alabama
and Mr. Wallace. But his impact on Alabama and America was just as strong and
lingering. His more accurate observations may be his continuing assertions that
the country's most successful and powerful political leaders are following
trails he blazed years ago when he was calling for tougher law-and-order
policies, less activist Federal courts, prayer in school, bans against school
busing, the dismantling of welfare and affirmative action programs, support for
the police, a stronger national defense and a harder line with the Communists.

It is perhaps a measure of where Alabama has come that Mr.  Wallace's opponent
in the general election Nov. 2 is the ultraconservative Republican Mayor of
Montgomery, Emory Folmar, who generally subscribes to all those positions and is
probably farther to the right than Mr. Wallace ever was on most of them.

This year Mr. Wallace has avidly courted the black vote, which makes up about a
quarter of the electorate, and organized labor. Mr.  Folmar has conceded both
groups, saying he is not courting any special interests.

Mr. Folmar likes to ride in police cars, carries a .38-caliber pistol, makes
gun-drawn citizen's arrests at Little League baseball games, provides arms to
his wife and press secretary, worries about moral decay and teen-age
promiscuity, has ordered mass searches of all spectators at concerts at the
Civic Auditorium and is referred to as ''the Mayoratollah'' by some detractors.

The More Liberal Candidate

For the first time since 1958, when he lost the gubernatorial primary election
to John Patterson, who sought and won the endorsement of the Ku Klux Klan, Mr.
Wallace is considered the more liberal candidate in this campaign. He has the
support of blacks, labor unions and teachers and is widely considered to be
leading by a wide margin.

The state's most respected independent poll, conducted by political science
professors at Birmingham Southern College, recently showed Mr. Wallace favored
by 58 percent of the voters and Mr. Folmar by 35 percent.

There is little question that, other than George Wallace himself, the economy is
the central issue in the campaign. The state's unemployment rate of 14.2 percent
is second only to Michigan's and for the same reasons: an overwhelming
industrial reliance on automobile production. Steel mills and automobile plants
have closed. Tire production, in which Alabama is second to Ohio, has fallen
correspondingly; production of coal and iron ore is stagnant.

Industries Hardest Hit

While all the states have felt the sting of recession to some extent, the
diversity of their economies and the nature of their industries have softened
the pain somewhat, according to David G.  Bronner, who manages the state's $3
billion retirement funds for employees and teachers.

''Alabama happened to develop in industrial sectors most adversely affected by
the recession,'' he said. ''There was a concentration on heavy, basic
industries, large, capital-intensive plants and factories. There is a huge
forest products industry that has been hurt by the sagging housing construction
market. Textiles also are weak.''

Politicians and businessmen across the state have been asking recently why
Alabama has not basked in the Sun Belt prosperity in the last 30 years to the
same extent as the rest of the Southeast. Often the answer returns to Mr.
Wallace and his leadership for most of that time.

Winston J. Leavell, press secretary to Gov. Fob James, a conservative Democrat
who decided not to seek re-election, was asked about Mr. Wallace in the absence
of his chief, who was vacationing out of the country. He would not criticize Mr.
Wallace as harshly as some others who declined to be quoted by name, but he
acknowledged that while some 70 Japanese companies had located in Georgia, only
three have settled in Alabama.

''When Fob went to Japan last year to try to sell Alabama,'' Mr.  Leavell said,
''they hardly knew where Alabama was. He was the first Alabama Governor ever to
visit the country.''

Joe McCorquodale, the Speaker of the House, an unsuccessful candidate in the
Democratic gubernatorial primary, recently endorsed Mayor Folmar over Mr.
Wallace, saying, ''We can't afford a Governor who will be in office only an hour
or two a day,'' as Mr. Wallace was much of the time after the assassination
attempt.

Hostility to 'Big Mules'

Alabama was settled by doggedly independent dirt farmers long before the big
planters came from the Carolinas and Virginia to build plantations and grow
cotton from the labor of slaves in the rich black soil of the central region.
When the Civil War erupted, the northern hill country refused to secede from the
Union.

As part of its populist tradition, much of Alabama has long harbored hostility
toward big business interests, big banks and public utilities, known here as the
''Big Mules,'' and significant distrust of its political leaders.

When Mr. Wallace shouts from the flatbed trailers that ''the rich are getting
richer and the poor are getting poorer,'' he is drawing on the spirit of former
Supreme Court Justice Hugo L. Black, who was elected to the Senate over the
opposition of banks, railroads and utilities, and of Gov. Jim Folsom, a Wallace
mentor who refused to endorse segregation and was the South's last true
populist.

Burden on the Poor

But the poor in Alabama seem not to have reaped great benefits from their
loyalty to their leaders.  According to the Bureau of Labor Statisics, Alabama
ranks 47th in the country in per capita income, $5,904 against $7,330 for all
Americans. When the 1980 census was taken 18.5 percent of Alabamians, almost one
in five, were in families with income below the poverty level of $7,412. That
figure was almost 50 percent higher than the national figure of 12.5 percent.

Alabama ranks last in the nation in property taxes, $79 per person, as
contrasted to a national average of slightly more than $300. Alabama also ranks
last in spending for education, at $1,432 per pupil in contrast to a national
average of $2,690.

With the second-highest unemployment rate in the nation, Alabama also provides
the lowest unemployment compensation of any state, a maximum of $90 a week.

Oil and Gas Windfall

In addition, Alabama's sales tax, which provides an overwhelming percentage of
the state's revenue, are as high as 7 percent in some counties, among the
highest in the country. That places another burden on the poor because food,
clothing and medicines are not exempt, although the coal and coke used in making
steel are.

Also, the poor are not protected by the state income tax. Everyone who makes
more than $5,000 a year pays the same rate.  When Governor James succeeded Mr.
Wallace in 1979, the state's Medicaid fund was $43 million in arrears, the
state's prisons and mental health facilities were determined to be among
America's worst and were under Federal court orders to be upgraded to humane
conditions.

Through offshore oil and gas leasing, the state gained about $450 million in
windfall profits, which the James administration is parlaying into some $650
million in capital improvement around the state, including three 1,000-bed
prisons, while leaving the principal intact.

Referendum on Legend

Because Mayor Folmar has vowed unswerving allegiance to President Reagan, some
have characterized the Alabama gubernatorial election as a referendum on the
President's policies, but most political specialists see it more as a referendum
on Alabama's past and the voters' regard for a legend that they helped to
establish.

And some political analysts suggest that Mr. Wallace's acute sense of history is
part of the reason he is running again; that he wants to leave a legacy of
quality to the state, not the memory of a strident segregationist barring a
schoolhouse door.

Mayor Folmar, a former marine with a stern visage, military bearing and country
club connections, who made millions as a shopping center developer, says the
option for voters is ''not the traditional Democrat-Republican partisanship but
the choice of progressive, strong, active leadership or moving the clock back,''
according to his campaign manager, Tom Coker.

Hollow-Eyed Sharecroppers

But Mr. Wallace is quick to tie the President's economic policies to the
Republicanism of the Hoover era and to use photographs of hollow-eyed
sharecroppers in the book ''Let Us Now Praise Famous Men'' to remind voters
''When the Republicans were in power before, we had people just like this all
over the state of Alabama, and if they stay in power in Washington very much
longer, there'll be people just like this all over Alabama again.''

Neither United States Senate seat is being contested this year and only one of
the state's seven Representatives appears to be in jeopardy.

Albert Lee Smith, a former insurance executive and a backer of Moral Majority,
one of three Alabama Republicans in the House, faces a tough re-election battle
against Benjamin Erdrich, a liberal lawyer from Birmingham who was a county
commissioner.

Alabama

Geography
In the heart of the Deep South, Alabama has 51,609 square miles, making it the
29th largest of the 50 states. It lies on the Gulf Coast between Mississipi to
the

west and Georgia to the east.

History
In the 16th century, several Spanish expeditions sailed into Mobile Bay, but it
was not until 1702 that the French established Fort Louis de la Mobile.

In the American Revolution the Spaniards, as allies of the colonists, seized
Mobile, whose residents were loyal to the English crown. Spain's troops did not
leave until 1813, when American forces claimed the only territory added to the
United States as a result of the War of 1812.

Alabama was admitted to statehood in 1819. In 1861 it seceded to join

the Confederacy.

Economy
Cotton was king in Alabama through the 19th century, produced in abundance in
the Black Belt of fertile soil on the coastal plain.  Attempts to create a South
less dependent on agriculture began in 1871 with the founding of Birmingham,
with its coal mines, iron furnaces and steel plants. The city eventually
developed into the leading industrial center of the region. The state, now
heavily dependent on the automobile industry, has an unemployment rate second
only

to Michigan.

Population
The 1980 census counted 3,890,061 Alabamians, an increase of nearly 13 percent
from 1970, making Alabama the 22d most populous state in the union. Birmingham,
with 284,413 residents, is the hub of the 47th largest metropolitan area in the
country. The other principal cities are Mobile, Montgomery,

the capital, and Huntsville.

Politics
With its long populist tradition, Alabama was for generations a province of the
Democratic Party. Its politics over the last 20 years have been dominated by
George C. Wallace, again a candidate. Two years ago a Republican, Jeremiah
Denton, was elected to the Senate.  The other Senator, Howell Heflin, is a
Democrat. In the House of Representatives Alabama has four Democrats and three
Republicans,

THE 1982 ELECTION: ALABAMA Seventh of 10 articles appearing periodically on
states with important gubernatorial races.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Books of The Times;
Beyond the Evidence

BYLINE: By ANATOLE BROYARD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 783 words


TERRORISTS AND NOVELISTS. By Diane Johnson. 251 pages. Knopf.  $14.50.

''Maybe the reason novels exist,'' Diane Johnson says, ''is to disguise human
musings.'' In her case, the same might be said of book reviews, for hers are
full of human musings. Quoting E.M. Forster's remark that ''Each of us knows
from his own experience that there is something beyond the evidence,'' she goes
beyond the evidence of each book discussed in ''Terrorists and Novelists'' and
raises the question of its subject again in her own way. She is not so much
interested in rendering a judgment as she is in inquiring into the book's
occasion, its reason for being. If she were not so eminently down-to-earth, it
would be tempting to say that she supplies each book's philosophical aura.

Observing that autobiography is generally regarded as less artful or inventive
than fiction, she says, ''It might be argued that to impose significant form on
the chaotic materials of life lived, instead of fashioning them from the more
restricted, more determined, more orthodox contents of the imagination, or from
the more restrictive conventions of fictional genres, requires a superior
faculty of invention.''

''Autobiography,'' she writes, ''requires some strategy of selfdramatization. It
normally contains, as in fiction, a crisis and denouement, and it appears, very
generally, that the form of this crisis in autobiography by men has tended to be
different from that of women.'' ''Men,'' she continues, ''recount disillusion
and depression, followed by recovery and action,'' while ''in writing, as in
mourning, it sometimes appears that women have reserved or been assigned the
duty of expressing human resentment, leaving men to fashion the consolations.''

In another of her musings, she says, ''Literary biography usually concerns
itself with how an artist's life and personality influence his work, and usually
fails to engage the problems of how the writer's work affects the growth of his
personality.'' Though this is a brilliant observation, it's delivered casually,
like most of her best lines. You never hear her clearing her throat, like so
many other literary critics. In the same unexpected way, she says that ''Perhaps
there are no endings for women's novels.''

In these collected reviews, which appeared mostly in The New York Review of
Books and The New York Times Book Review, Miss Johnson expresses some impatience
with what she calls the confessional novel. ''A sense of the present,'' she
writes, ''gets lost in novels in the fashionable confessional mode, which, by
funneling life through the mesh of private sensibility, do succeed in reducing
it to manageable literary proportions but sacrifice any authentic social vision
to idiosyncrasy and richness of characterization.''

Examining the novels and stories of Toni Morrison and Gayl Jones, Miss Johnson
finds, ''It is interesting to notice that despite the chorus of lightly admiring
remarks about the power and talent of both writers, little attention has been
paid to what they actually seem to be saying, as if the mere execution of work
as poetic and vigorous as this - by women, and black women at that - were
sufficiently remarkable without the complicated features of meaning or moral
commitment.''

Commenting again on the state of the novel, she says, ''No objections have yet
been raised to the presence of characters in novels; the worry is over whether
it is allowed for us to like and care about them.'' In the novels of E.L.
Doctorow, Miss Johnson ironically observes, ''Enthusiastic sexuality is a
property only of those committed to the class struggle.''

It's odd that Miss Johnson, herself a modern novelist and frequent reviewer of
current fiction, should be more rewarding in writing of George Sand and
Charlotte Bronte than of Don DeLillo and Donald Barthelme, two contemporary
authors that she admires. The reader may wonder whether she's less interested in
writing by men. When she says, ''No other subject, it seems, is regarded so
differently by men and women as rape,'' this statement does seem to suggest some
kind of imaginative deficiency either in them or in herself.

Her long piece on C.D.B. Bryan's ''Friendly Fire,'' though, is very good. The
story of the refusal of a mother and father to accept the apology of the United
States Army for the ''mistake'' that caused their son to be killed in Vietnam by
our own artillery seems to strike Miss Johnson as heartening evidence that
ordinary people can still tell when ''the word 'tragedy' is used to abridge
complexity.'' As long as Miss Johnson is writing reviews, nobody is going to get
away with abridging complexity, no matter which words they employ.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 782 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.  Answers appear on
page 15.  1. Because Don and Judy Quine, pictured above, got more than the usual
kicks out of a sport, they formed an association to raise it to professional
status. What sport is it?

2. After an emotional ceremony in St. Peter's Square, Pope John Paul II kissed
Franciszek Gajowniczek, a haggard, gray-haired Polish peasant, whose presence
added poignancy to the occasion. Identify the occasion and explain.

3. The testimonial dinner was for someone described as ''one of our top Cabinet
members,'' but neither President Reagan nor Vice President Bush attended it, and
Attorney General William French Smith stayed just 15 minutes. Who was the guest
of honor?

4. ''This is the first case I've tried where the proponent, where the state has
attempted to show that every one of its witnesses are lying,'' said a judge in a
conspiracy and misconduct-in-office trial. Who are the defendants and to what
was the judge referring?

5. The International Olympic Committee posthumously restored two 1912 gold
medals and his amateur status to Jim Thorpe. To what sports halls of fame had he
been elected?

6. Alva Myrdal is to peace what her husband, Gunnar Myrdal, is to economic
science. Explain.  7. In cities across the country where the economy has been
particularly hard hit by the recession, one type of office has all the business
it can handle. What office is it?

8. In one of history's more intriguing post-mortems, scientists have examined
the wallpaper and hair of a famous 19th-century figure and concluded that he was
probably not murdered by arsenic. Who is the figure?

9. One economic indicator reached its highest level in 18 months.  Another hit
its lowest level in more than two years. What are they?  10. The puzzle of a
''mystery papyrus,'' a 2,000-year-old Egyptian manuscript that seemed like
''pure gibberish,'' was solved by a Yeshiva University professor. What was the
solution?

11. A statement by five Palestinian groups denounced a concept and the two world
leaders who had reportedly spoken favorably about it in recent discussion. What
is the concept and who are the leaders?

12. Millions of eyes are on Sam Kagel in hopes that, with his efforts, they will
soon be on something else. Identify him and explain.

13. An average increased two points for whites, 13 points for blacks, 12 points
for Puerto Ricans and five points for Mexican Americans. What is it?

14. Ending a controversy, the Federal Arts Commissiion approved a statue of
three American fighting men and a 50-foot flagpole as additions to the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, and said they would be placed (adjacent to/away from) the
memorial's long black granite walls.

15. The warship Mary Rose, a forerunner of the modern British Navy, was salvaged
from the waters where she had sunk in view of the monarch who had considered her
the pride of his fleet. Who was the monarch?

16. The longest lines in years gathered outside the Supreme Court building for a
case that is considered a politically charged symbol of the Reagan
Administration's civil rights policies. What is at issue in the case and what is
the Administration's position?

17. The Milwaukee Brewers won the American League pennant and reached the World
Series by doing something that no other team had done in the history of baseball
championship play. What was it?

18. To pay for its new labor contract, New York City will have to reduce its
work force by about 5 percent, or (5,000/7,500/10,000) people, according to the
State Financial Control Board.

19. The Lenin Shipyard in Gdansk was ''militarized'' by Poland's martial-law
Government. What was the reason for the order and what was its effect?

20. ''Everything is making a big casserole,'' said the tenor Carlo Bini about a
night at the opera. What happened?  21. The Interior Department received $2.1
billion, nearly a record, for a group of tracts that cover 1.8 million acres.
Where are they situated?

22. A reported decision by the French Government could have considerable effect
on the military balance in Europe. What is it?  23. At a time when Mexico is
sorely in need of foreign exchange, its third-largest industry is suffering
surprising losses. What industry is it?  Linda Amster

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Don and Judy Quine

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 16, 1982

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


International
The U.S. opposes an Israeli proposal that Palestine Liberation Forces leave
Lebanon before other foreign troops, State Department officials said. They said
that in the detailed discussions on Lebanon held Thursday by Secretary of State
George P. Shultz and Foreign Minister Yitzhak Shamir some specific problems
arose that will probably take some time to resolve. The United States, acting as
an unofficial intermediary between Israel and Lebanon and Syria has avoided
presenting the Israelis with a detailed American plan, officials said, pending
talks next Tuesday between President Reagan and President Amin Gemayel of
Lebanon. (Page 1, Column 4.)
A U.S. offer to the Soviet Union of 23 million tons of grain will be guaranteed
by President Reagan if it agrees during November to buy all of the grain, the
President announced in a pre-election appeal for farm support of Republican
candidates. Mr. Reagan also threatened ''strong measures'' to counter the
''growing tide of protectionism and export subsidies overseas.'' (1:5.)
Strikes in Poland next week to continue the protests over the outlawing of the
Solidarity union were called for in leaflets circulated in several cities.
Except for clashes in the southern steel center of Nowa Huta, most cities were
reported to be quiet.  (3:4.)
A firefight in Albania has led Western diplomats to believe that its Communist
regime is facing a serious internal problem. On Sept. 26 gunfire lasting five
hours was heard in Corfu from the direction of Albania across the strait of the
Ionian Sea. Acting with unusual speed, Albania announced that an unspecified
number of ''desperate men'' had tried to land and had been killed by security
forces. The Government described one of the invaders as a friend of the son of
Albania's last King, Zog, who was expelled from the country by the Italian
Fascist invasion in 1940. (3:3.)
An Iranian official was assassinated by a man who detonated a grenade while
embracing him. The aide, Ayatollah Ashrafi Isfahani, 83 years old, was the
fourth senior cleric assassinated in recent months.  (5:2.)
National
U.S. industrial production fell again in September, indicating that the
recession may not have ended. At the same time the Government's principal index
of producer prices declined, signaling more relief from inflation, according to
Federal agencies. The declines in output and prices were signs of the weakness
in the economy that has raised the unemployment rate above 10 percent and also
of the slowdown of inflation that President Reagan has stressed in campaign
speeches on behalf of Republican candidates for Congress. (1:6.)
A system for faster reports on poison deaths is being developed by the Food and
Drug Administration after the seven deaths in Chicago from Tylenol capsules
laced with cyanide. Up-to-date national statistics on poison deaths are not
available, according to the director of the agency's poison control center. At
present, it takes three years for national totals of poison deaths to be
gathered and the statistical categories are so broad that a pattern of deaths
such as those that occurred in Chicago would not be apparent. (1:2.)
Chrysler resumed contract talks with the United Auto Workers, which hoped to get
an immediate hourly pay increase that would satisfy the huge majority of
rank-and-file workers that rejected the union's last contract proposal. The new
round of talks should be ended by Friday, ''one way or the other'' the union's
president, Douglas A.  Fraser, said. (1:1.)
Farmers' income has declined in recent years more than that of any other
occupational group because of high interest rates and the deepest recession in
40 years, according to Census Bureau figures.  From 1979 to 1980, the median
family income for farmers, managers and laborers dropped by 21.7 percent, after
adjustment for inflation. In 1981 it fell again, by 11.8 percent, to $12,992,
compared to the national average of $22,390. (1:4.)
Control of an Agent Orange inquiry has been been given up by the Veterans
Administration, which yielded to Congressional pressure. The agency's
Administrator, Robert P. Nimmo, agreed to let the national Centers for Disease
Control take over the investigation into whether the herbicide Agent Orange
damaged the health of soldiers in Vietnam. He responded to a letter from 100
members of Congress who asked him two weeks ago to allow the disease control
centers take over the inquiry. (6:1.)
Metropolitan
A fourth hostage was released by a convict under siege at Kings County Hospital
in Brooklyn, but he continued to hold a fifth at gunpoint in a basement locker
room surrounded by scores of heavily armed police officers. Paying close
attention to media coverage of the ordeal he had initiated, the convict,
33-year-old Larry Van Dyke, released the hostage unharmed after his demand for a
taped television interview had been granted. (1:1.
Shelters that do not meet standards established in a court-approved agreement
signed last year would be used by New York City to house homeless men and women
and it has asked a judge for permission to do so, city officials said. The
agreement the city had signed stipulates the number of toilets, showers and
other facilities the city must provide. Lower standards would save the city,
which faces a $1.1 billion budget deficit, at least $1 million. (29:5.)

Business Digest, Page Page 37

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 16, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Clyde Haberman and Laurie Johnson

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 255 words


A Transfer Point For Young Amerasians

Yesterday was a scramble for several refugee agencies. Eleven Vietnamese
families - 42 persons -were to arrive at Kennedy International Airport from
Bangkok, Thailand, early this morning, and there were still details in need of
arrangement. Not the least of them was what to do with Amerasian youngsters
finally allowed to come to this country.

It was the first passage through New York since the Vietnamese Government began
allowing these children to rejoin their American fathers. Some were arriving
under auspices of the International Rescue Committee, others through the United
States Catholic Conference.

Most of the technical planning, however, was handled by a multinational agency,
the Intergovernmental Committee for Migration, which was reluctant to give out
details about the operation. Ultimate destinations of the children were not
disclosed, and Richard Scott, the committee's New York representative, said he
was not even sure how many youngsters there were.

That was because, in the way of officialdom, an ''adult'' was considered to be
anyone over age 12. Quite a few of the arrivals might be, under any normal
definition, children.

In any event, there was to be no long stay in the city for them.  Those who did
not continue on to their new homes last night were to do so today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TELEVISION;
A CHAT WITH A MASTER OF TELEVISED TALK

BYLINE: By FRED FERRETTI

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1603 words


''We went looking for Khrushchev and we couldn't find him,'' David Susskind
said. ''He was in our office and then he was gone.'' Which was really too bad
since any program celebrating the beginning of Mr. Susskind's 25th year in
television broadcasting would surely have been enhanced by that familiar
black-and-white kinescope of the late Russian premier having a wonderful time on
American television.

But the ''Khrushchev Tapes,'' as they are referred to darkly over at the
Susskind Company, were gone and Mr. Susskind's celebration had to make do with a
couple of still photographs of Nikita Khrushchev chatting that Sunday night in
October 1960 with a younger, brownhaired David Susskind.

It is enough, however, for Mr. Susskind, now 61 and with hair completely white,
to remember being able to snare Nikita Khrushchev, here to address the United
Nations, as a guest on ''Open End,'' the talk show that has evolved into ''The
David Susskind Show.'' ''It was a shot in the dark,'' he said, ''just a written
request, and he said yes.''

Many other people have said yes to David Susskind since Oct. 14, 1958, when
''Open End'' went on the air over WNEW, Metromedia's independent station in New
York, more than 7,000, according to Jean Kennedy, Mr. Susskind's producer.
Bertrand Russell said yes, and so did Harry Truman, Richard Nixon, Marlon
Brando, Paul Newman, Robert Kennedy, Martin Luther King, Gore Vidal, Mel Brooks,
Jane Fonda, Norman Mailer, Hugh Gaitskill, Adlai Stevenson, Dean Rusk, Gloria
Steinem, William Buckley, Helen Gurley Brown, John Cheever, Truman Capote, not
to mention Zbigniew Brzezinski and a ski-masked professional hit man.

''We didn't get J. Edgar Hoover, who we asked 20 times,'' Mr.  Susskind said the
other day as he reminisced about his remarkable record for longevity in a medium
that discourages permanence. ''And we didn't get Pope John XXIII. He declined.''

''Now, people want to come on. If they have ideas, theories they want to
advocate, it's a good forum,'' he said.  Short takes of the many more who
accepted the use of the forum were on Mr. Susskind's anniversary show, which was
broadcast on Channel 5 last Sunday evening in New York and which will be seen on
the other 104 stations that carry ''The David Susskind Show'' nationally between
now and Nov. 14: Mel Brooks talking about the agonies of being a Jewish son with
a Jewish mother; Elvis Presley lookalikes challenging each other, with snarls,
over who sounded more like Elvis; Pauline Tabor, a motherly-looking madam
talking about her pep talks to clients of her ''protogees,'' telling them to
''Trick, Trade or Travel''; Jane Fonda rehearsing anti-Vietnam War skits;
Bertrand Russell describing the absolute horror on William Gladstone's face when
the late British Prime Minister was served ''port in a claret glass.''

Yet, it was less the program - on which, between the videotaped memorabilia, Mr.
Susskind is interviewed by his wife, Joyce Davidson Susskind - than it was an
assortment of memories that Mr. Susskind wanted to talk about in his office, a
corner suite on the 24th floor of the M-G-M Building in Manhattan. ''It's been a
personal adventure, an exciting way to get a lifelong Ph.D.,'' he said. ''I
think I have more miscellaneous knowledge in my head than anybody.

''Why is it important to know that there are 23,186,000 people in Canada, at
least as of last week? Why is it important to know that Alaska is five times the
size of Texas? That the federal budget is $196 billion? That 47 percent of girls
who have reached the age of 16 will have had serious sexual experiences by the
time they graduate high school? That one out of every two marriages of people
between the ages of 18 and 30 ends in divorce? I have all these crazy facts that
hang around.''

They hang around because Mr. Susskind is an insatiable reader who seems to like
facts for their own sake and for their eventual display. ''I have read
fascinating things I would have overlooked or found a reason to avoid reading,
if not for the program,'' he said.  He peppers his conversation constantly with
bits and pieces of what he's been reading, what he's discovered, despite his
awareness that he has been referred to by critics as pedantic and intellectually
pretentious.

''It's an intellectual catharsis,'' Mr. Susskind said.  ''Boring? Pedantic? I
guess I have been from time to time. You talk too much, you impose your own
views, your convictions. But don't forget you're driving your own car. I think I
did do that for awhile, but I hope I haven't been that way in the last 10 years.
I think what I used to be was self-centered. I had an opportunity to tell the
world what I thought. I've learned that it's what these people think that's
important. They are the humans suffering. They can tell better than any
theorist.''

A chatting David Susskind is virtually indistinguishable from an on-the-air
David Susskind. He is an intense man. His head bobs up and down for emphasis. A
fist smacks into a palm. Arms spread apart with suddenness. He leaves his Eames
for a straightback chair and sits perched on its edge, upper body and jaw thrust
forward.

''I think I am less doctrinaire now than I was. I listen more. I'm not so
certain about things anymore as I was,'' he said. ''But what I always tried to
do, try to do, was evoke their conviction from them.  And I've always thought
that you must have left, right and middle on. You try to be what the man at home
is. I'm a traffic director who listens intently. When I come off the air after
two hours, I'm wringing wet.''

For the first couple of years his show was devoted to celebrity interviews, he
said. ''But when you're doing a celebrity show and you get a Khrushchev, who in
the devil do you get next? The President?  The Pope?'' So, he and Miss Kennedy
(''Who was a producer when most women in television sat around taking notes on
script changes'') came up with the concept of shows built around themes.

''We decided we should have a show in the human interest,'' Mr.  Susskind said.
''We would talk about love, divorce, marriage, remarriage, widowhood, taxes,
unemployment, foreign policy, nuclear freeze. I would like to be remembered as
the fellow who had the show of record. If it was fit to print, it was fit to
discuss.''

He said there are ''only two things I've never done: American Nazis, because
they are so loathsome, and incest. Let it be the last taboo and let somebody
else do it.''

So, while he was busy interviewing much of the world, Mr. Susskind was also
producing an impressive list of television dramas, among them Laurence Olivier's
television debut in ''The Moon and Sixpence,'' Ingrid Bergman in ''Hedda
Gabler,'' the two ''Eleanor and Franklin,'' dramatic specials, as well as such
series as ''Alice,'' ''Get Smart,'' ''N.Y.P.D.'' and ''On Our Own,'' gathering
27 network Emmys and 20 more in New York, three Peabodys and a raft of other
honors, he continued to do 39 new talk shows a year. They are broadcast Sunday
nights from 11:30 to 1:30 A.M. and are seen 52 weeks a year; 13 are repeated, in
the summer months.

Each ''David Susskind Show'' takes three weeks of preparation. It begins usually
somewhere in the newspaper and magazine tear sheets that are strewn over Mr.
Susskind's desk. So, a show devoted to jury selection came from clippings about
the Claus von Bulow trial in Newport; another about a professional killer, from
magazine accounts of his preferred occupation; another on a proposed nuclear
freeze, from accounts of testimony before Congressional committees by Jonathan
Schell, the author of the recent best seller, ''The Fate of the Earth.'' His
most popular show was the one devoted to the subject of being a Jewish son, a
program that featured Mel Brooks and George Segal. ''It has been repeated 13
times,'' Mr. Susskind said.

He reaches an audience of about one million people, according to the ratings
services, he said, and ''on nights when we are talking about sex, homosexuality,
bisexuality, asexuality, any man-woman relationships, any sexual point of view,
our audience shoots up to almost double.'' On nights when his themes are, say,
welfare, the problems of blacks in America, Congressional debate and what Mr.
Susskind calls ''involved social issues,'' his ratings drop.

Just as Mr. Susskind's ''Open End'' program became ''The David Susskind Show,''
so did his producing arm, Talent Associates Ltd., evolve. It became part of
Time-Life Films, then as the Susskind Company it became a subsidiary of
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Mr. Susskind is president of his company and an executive
producer for M-G-M. His films include ''Edge of the City,'' ''A Raisin in the
Sun,'' ''Requiem for a Heavyweight,'' ''Lovers and Other Strangers,'' ''Alice
Doesn't Live Here Anymore'' and ''Fort Apache, the Bronx.'' A seven-member
subsidiary, Pandamia, produces ''The David Susskind Show,'' but it remains Mr.
Susskind's personal concern.

''Am I tired? No, never,'' he said. ''Where else could I have met this number of
people? What else could have freed me to do what I've done?'' b

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of 'MADAMA BUTTERFLY' Photo of 'KING LEAR' Photo
of 'THE FRAGILE MOUNTAIN Photo of David Suskind chatting with Nikita Khrushchev

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S NEW IN MARKETING;
FOR MAGAZINES, A STRONG READERSHIP

BYLINE: By Eric Pace

SECTION: Section 3; Page 23, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 623 words


The male special-interest magazine has been holding up relatively well, in
circulation and advertising revenues, during the recession, Madison Avenue media
experts report, and they predict that these more or less macho publications will
continue to perform fairly well in the near future.

One small but muscular publication is Soldier of Fortune, the magazine that
calls itself ''The Journal of Professional Adventurers.'' It has fattened its
circulation - 215,000 for the first six months of this year - by perpetuating,
in its pages, the romantic world of the Foreign Legion and the Green Berets.

So potent is that romance that Soldier of Fortune says its total paid
circulation increased by 31 percent during 1981. For this year's first half the
figure was 13.7 percent higher than in 1981's first six months.

''We were one of the stronger magazines in the the country last year in
newsstand sales increase,'' the magazine's managing editor, Jim Graves, an
ex-marine, said. But he confessed that ''We don't think many of our readers are
actively involved in being soldiers of fortune.''

What sort are they, then? ''The way we analyze it,'' he said, ''the average
reader is a young man in his 30's who's a Vietnam veteran with a college
education and a reasonably well-paying job.''

The seven-year-old monthly, which features articles on weaponry, guerrilla wars
and assorted military adventures, has had particular success, he reported, with
issues ''in which people on our staff go out on trips to exotic battlefields
like Afghanistan.''

The magazine's readers, he said, ''would like to do that kind of thing, but most
of them have 9-to-5 jobs, working in a bank or teaching or whatever, and they're
probably too old and too slow to do it.''

Similar but less well-known magazines that have cropped up in its lusty field
include Combat Illustrated, Eagle and Gung-Ho.  Outside the military adventure
field, other male-orented specialinterest magazines are holding their own, media
experts report. Those magazines include Popular Mechanics, Mechanics
Illustrated, and Outdoor Life. On the smaller side, but also admired on Madison
Avenue, are the dozen magazines of the California-based Petersen Action Group,
with a combined circulation, for the same period, of 3.9 million. They include
Car Craft, Guns and Ammo, Hot Rod, Hunting, Motor Cyclist, Motor Trend, Pickup
Van and 4 Wheel Drive and Skin Diver.

By comparison with Mechanics Illustrated and the like, such broader-based men's
magazines as Penthouse fared substantially less well for the period. Penthouse's
figure for the period this year was 4 million, down 7.79 percent, from the
period last year. And Playboy's circulation was 4.9 million, down 6.72 percent
from the like period in 1981.

The narrow-gauge magazines are holding up because they are ''specialized product
categories, and they are directed to very specific markets, based on lifestyle
and special interest,'' said Michael D. Drexler, executive vice president for
media and programming at the Doyle Dane Bernbach advertising agency.

And their appeal is resilient, despite economic vicissitudes, he suggested,
''because, essentially, to a great extent, these special interest represent the
framework of these men's life styles.''

Unemployment, which has hit blue collar men hard in many areas, is less of a
problem for these magazines, he suggested, than for other products because
''when people are unemployed, they still tend to pursue their personal interests
- and perhaps even more so.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOM-AND-BUST THEORY SHINES LIKE NEW

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words

DATELINE: PARIS


In the midst of the Western world's economic plight and faint hopes for early
recovery, what do the following have in common: the battle of Waterloo, the
Vienna stock market crash of 1873, the ''Roaring 20's,'' the first oil price
shock and Leviticus 25-10?

The first four marked peaks in the so-called Kondratieff long economic wave, a
50-year boom-to-bust cycle named after an obscure Russian economist. Nicolai
Dmitriyevich Kondratieff is attracting increased attention these days as the
West's decade-old recession continues, apparently impervious to classic
remedies, whether Keynesian or monetarist.

According to Kondratieffian analysis, the world is caught in the fourth great
economic downswing since the 1790's, a period of global recession that will
probably last until near the end of the century when a new age of prosperity
will begin - and there is little anyone can do about it. The quotation from the
Bible - ''And ye shall hallow the 50th year ... and ye shall return every man
unto his possession and ye shall return every man unto his family'' - is a
reminder that at the dawn of Western civilization, the Jews also perceived a
50-year cycle in the economic affairs of men, forgiving each other's debts,
freeing slaves and starting over again in each Jubilee Year.

There is nothing inconsistent between Wall Street's record-breaking boom last
week and the gloomy outlook for the world economy painted by Kondratieff's
theory. Donald Toft of the British investment advisory firm of Warren, Cameron
notes that after bottoming out in 1932, Wall Street rose strongly until 1937,
through some of the worst years of the Great Depression.

''Long wave theories are becoming popular because they fit what we see is
happening,'' says Prof. Jakob van Duijn, a leading Dutch authority.

Economists have long known that periods of prosperity and recession alternate
according to a regular 8-to-10-year cycle, as businessmen increase investment
and then cut back in the face of over-capacity.  But in 1925, Kondratieff
noticed a vaster variant of the same cycle, with about 50 years between each
peak and each trough.

Using statistics on prices, interest rates and production, Kondratieff showed
that a first cycle began in the late 18th century, reaching its peak about 1815
at the end of the Napoleonic Wars before dropping to a trough about 1848. A
second upswing then lasted into the 1870's, when decline set in again. The world
economy turned round again at the start of this century, reaching a third peak
about 1920, Kondratieff thought, with another downswing lying ahead - the Great
Depression of the 1930's. Kondratieff's followers traced the fourth upswing from
the Second World War to the 1970's when the world economy turned down again.

Kondratieff fell out of favor with the Soviet authorities because his theories
suggested capitalism recovers from its periodic crises and is not doomed to
collapse as Marx believed. He was shipped off to Siberia where, Alexander
Solzhenitsyn records in ''The Gulag Archipelago,'' he ''became mentally ill and
died.''

Kondratieff offered no explanation for his 50-year business cycle, but his
disciples generally agree that the upswings coincided with new industrial
inventions, the opening up of new continents and the discovery of gold. As a new
technology enters widespread use and other expansionary forces are exhausted,
however, a period of economic contraction sets in, clearing away excessive debt.
This prepares yet another upswing.

The first Kondratieff upswing, between 1780 and 1815, reflected the spread of
steam power and the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. But as steam
technology became commonplace, economic decline began on both sides of the
Atlantic.

The second upswing coincided with railroads and steamboats and the increase in
trade they made possible. A series of financial panics marked its peak in the
1870's when the London and Vienna stock markets were closed. But the subsequent
decline was not fully shared by the United States, where economic activity was
sustained by an influx of new immigrants and by the expansion westward.
Prosperity Creates Tensions

The harnessing of electric power and the invention of the internal combustion
engine fueled the third Kondratieff upswing, which started around the beginning
of this century. World War I gave it further impetus until the frothy boom of
the 1920's disappeared in the great Wall Street crash of 1929, ushering in the
Depression of the 1930's.  World War II launched the fourth upturn, which was
helped along by new plastics and consumer durable industries and by the post-war
expansion in air and road transport. By now inflation had become endemic and
prices no longer declined in recessions. But the overall course of the world
economy is clear enough, with the prosperity of the 50's and 60's coming to an
end around the time of the first oil price shock in 1973.

Kondratieff also noticed a tendency for wars to occur as the upswing nears its
peak - the Napoleonic Wars at the top of the first cycle, the American Civil War
and the Franco-Prussian War at the top of the second, World War I in the third
and finally the Vietnam War near the top of the fourth upturn. The explanation,
he thought, lay in tensions created by prosperity, including shortages of raw
materials and land.
because it implies they have little ability to influence the future.  But Prof.
van Duijn argues that governments can soften downswings by encouraging new
technologies.

Many of the new industries that will stimulate the fifth Kondratieff upturn when
it comes are already visible, including microchips, biotechnology and the
development of new energy sources to replace oil. The irony of the present
situation, for long wave analysts, is that governments effectively postponed the
arrival of these industries by inflationary overspending at the top of the
cycle. So the watchword everywhere is setting things right as countries try to
get inflation and debt under control. But the effect is to reinforce the fourth
Kondratieffian downturn - not to resist it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: chart

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAKING IT IN WASHINGTON, AND NOT

BYLINE: By Julian Moynahan; Julian Moynahan, a member of the English Department
at Rutgers University, occasionally gives courses in Modern American and British
Fiction.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1050 words


IN THE CITY OF FEAR By Ward Just.  291 pp. New York: The Viking Press.$14.95.

NOVELIST and short story writer Ward Just, a former reporter for The Washington
Post, writes fiction from the standpoint of the idealistic generation that was
summoned, as if by a clarion call, to the national capital by the election of
John F. Kennedy to the Presidency in 1960, and then had to suffer over the next
two decades such traumas, disappointments and disillusionments as the two
Kennedy assassinations; the death of the Great Society dream with the huge,
pointless expansion of the war in Southeast Asia; the bizarreries and scandals
of the Nixon years - from carpet bombings and Cambodian incursions to the
Presidential impeachment and the hasty pardon. At 46, having seen it all, Mr.
Just bids to be considered the political novelist of his generation. He may even
be considered for a rarer title, that of national novelist (have we had one
since Henry Adams?), provided one believes that the capital and the nation are
still in touch with each other these days for any essential purposes.

Certainly, from reading ''In the City of Fear,'' which is Mr.  Just's seventh
fictional work since the late 60's, one would never suppose that they were in
touch. The Congressmen, military planners, White House assistants, intelligence
spooks, newspaper editors and crooked high-powered lawyers forming his dramatis
personae don't give a damn about the folks back home or about what used to be
called the Verdict of History. All are myopically and hollowly intent on
furthering their capital careers, and the fear that stalks the handsome city
comes down to the fear of not making it.

Mr. Just's character Col. Sam Joyce seems a mite different from the rest in that
he is the faithful lover of a woman he cannot marry, and he is brave in seeking
five tours of combat duty in the Vietnam war zone, even though he thinks the war
is a bad one and already lost.  But Colonel Joyce has his price too, as is shown
when he agrees to front for a shady military-cum-civilian project in Southeast
Asia in return for the Government's calling off an investigation of some
irregularities in his command during an earlier Vietnam tour of duty.

Ward Just's fiction, notably ''Stringer'' (1974), has been favorably compared to
Ernest Hemingway's, for he writes in that book about men and war with some of
Hemingway's fastidious and sparing use of words. The strongest influence on this
new novel, however, is Henry James's and it operates through Mr. Just's way of
constructing the book, and through his rendering of its central ''affair'' or
''subject.'' His subject is the aforementioned bit of chicanery perpetrated in
Vietnam with the connivance of the White House and the Central Intelligence
Agency, a key Congressman and several other tricky, high-placed people, and how
this piece of dirty business affects the lives of those caught up in it over a
nearly 20-year period.

''In the City of Fear'' opens years after the incident has been closed and the
war ended and reveals that the Congressman is now a Senator, while Colonel Joyce
is eaten up with cancer and one of his fellow officers in the business has gone
mad. The narrative then moves backward in time to pick up a wartime dinner party
of movers and shakers held in Georgetown when the incident was first guardedly
discussed among close friends, and this long party scene is interrupted in turn
by a flashback to the Colonel's fraught, riddling interview in the Oval Office
with the President and his sinister aide, Pat Mundelein. Other key scenes,
liberated from strict chronology, fill in until the reader comes to realize,
without ever getting to the bottom of what actually went on, that sometime
during the past 10 years our national Administration and its top operatives,
under the extraordinary strains and provocations introduced by the impending
loss of the war in Asia, reached a nadir of integrity through the secret
authorization and practice of vile terroristic acts.

At this point it must be admitted that comparison between James and Just is hard
on the latter for it reveals the big difference between tragedy and melodrama.
In Henry James's apparently tame world souls in real torment appear at the heart
of his complicated renderings of fashionable subjects, whereas Ward Just's
characters are mostly hollow men and men of straw. James avoids telling the
reader what is manufactured by the New England family business in ''The
Ambassadors'' and we don't mind, but it is disablingly coy to have hard
information withheld in a political intrigue such as Mr. Just has written.

Did Colonel Joyce pick up his cancer spreading Agent Orange over Vietnamese
ground cover, or did he go out there to drop Vietcong prisoners out of
helicopters, or, as in ''Stringer,'' did he merely plant electronic sensors
along jungle trails used by the enemy's convoys? We need to know if we are to
make much moral sense out of the disaster that has overtaken his career and to
judge the Government that sent him on that secret mission. And why not name the
Presidents, about whom so much of a disturbing nature is alleged, suggested or
hinted at in this book? Does Mr. Just think we will all faint dead away at the
recital of the names Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon and Ford?

''IN THE CITY OF FEAR'S'' earnest, pseudo-liberal Congressman then Senator,
Piatt Warden, is a reissue of the bearded representative who refused to sponsor
an antiwar resolution in Mr. Just's 1971 story, ''The Congressman Who Loved
Flaubert.'' We find him about the same but minus the chin spinach: morosely
sharing his wife, Marina, ''taut belly'' and all, with bachelor Colonel Joyce;
breaking down when he attempts to read passages of Camus at the funeral of a
young National Security Council official who got snuffed out by a runaway
automobile in a Washington street just hours after he had filed an anti-Asian
war memo with his superiors. But no one much cared about his poor performance
because Jackie Kennedy had just come late into the back of the church, to a
popping and flashing of camera bulbs.

As with many calculated appearances in public, the contrivance of this scene,
which ends the book, may miss its effect with a certain low class of reader of
which I number myself one.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE GROWING UP OF LILY SHIELDS

BYLINE: By Anne Tyler; Anne Tyler's most recent novel is ''Dinner at the
Homesick Restaurant.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 801 words


MY OLD SWEETHEART By Susanna Moore.  211 pp. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co.
$12.95.

THERE is something fascinating about those elderly little children you see
taking care of mothers who have never grown up, and most fascinating of all is
the question of what becomes of the children after they themselves are grown. Do
they ever get a second chance at the childhood they missed? What sort of parents
do they make? In ''My Old Sweetheart'' Susanna Moore examines one such child -
both as child and as adult - and the result is a first novel of considerable
skill.

Lily Shields's so-called youth is spent in the surrealistic splendor of Hawaii,
where she lovingly nurses her beautiful, unhappy, drug-ridden mother, Anna. ''I
did not ever become the woman I hoped to be,'' Anna says at one point, but she
goes on to add, ''It is not that I feel sorry for myself. Nothing has ever
happened to me that I did not in some way intend. It is just that I have known
so little and so poorly how to make things right.''

Her accuracy saves her from the reader's condemnation. We can pity not only the
12-year-old Lily, struggling to hoist her mother back into bed at night, but the
mother as well, which shows how attentively and sensitively Susanna Moore draws
her characters.

Even the father, Sheridan, emerges as a man of satisfying complexity. A doctor
who was among the first Americans to witness the effects of the atom bomb in
Hiroshima, he is often invited to attend ''Congresses on Compassion,'' and yet
he exhibits an almost sadistic detachment toward his family. ''It seems to me,''
Anna tells him in a brief moment of clarity, ''that having observed suffering,
even terrible suffering, as you have, that having been through that, it does not
then entitle you to judge all other suffering by that one terrible standard.
There are many horrible things in the world, each with its own awfulness.''
Sheridan listens carefully and appears to agree, but he goes on putting Anna
through a subtle form of hell that makes her failures seem more and more
understandable.

Lily's younger brother and sister are sad, anxious creatures, fiercely attached
to their mother but reliant upon Lily for any stability in their lives. Tosi,
the Japanese boy rescued from Hiroshima by Sheridan, devotes himself to ensuring
Anna's physical comfort - filling her room with flowers, laying out her pajamas.
Together the four children form a circle that is both clinging and protective.
One of the book's most touching moments comes during Anna's stay at an
institution. The children camp in her bedroom during her absence, looking to
Lily for support but waiting for Anna's return with single-minded intensity. It
is clear that, although these children often make do without a mother, they
still have urgent need of one.

What will become of them? Especially, what will become of Lily, who's already
numbed and middle-aged at 12? We're given the answer in the even-numbered
chapters - Lily the adult alternating with Lily the child, the present
alternating with the past. Lily will turn out to be a single parent with a
daughter named Anna. In the company of Tosi, she will tour various islands at
off-season rates.  She cannot bear to be separated from her daughter even for
short periods; her life centers upon the second Anna's happiness as it used to
center upon the first Anna's. ''My bookends,'' Lily calls the two Annas, as she
becomes increasingly aware of the cycle of need and dependency in which she is
trapped. ''I am trying to improve, but I have made (my daughter) my talisman: if
she is happy, then I am not my mother.''

A summary of the twists of plot by which Lily begins to extricate herself would
only seem bewildering -among other things there's a plane trip to the heart of
the war in Vietnam - but it all works somehow. It makes a strange, dreamy kind
of sense. The writing is spare and cryptic, with small moments effectively
implying larger ones. There are startling flicks of humor throughout. The lush
atmosphere of Hawaii hangs over the reader's armchair, and the children -
particularly the younger two - have a wry stubborness of character that rescues
the story from unmitigated despair.

True, a few lapses occur. The author's ear fails her from time to time, allowing
unintentional repetition of sounds and duplication of phrases. Some of what's
conveyed to us via the young Lily seems couched in terms too sophisticated, even
for such a world-weary child (''Lily understood that Anna, in all of her
desperate fineness, inspired ambivalence''), and occasionally the point of view
bounces about in an unsettling fashion. But these are superficial flaws. They do
not diminish one's sense that Susanna Moore is a gifted and compelling novelist,
already in full possession of her own unique voice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS This Week Last Week Weeks on List;
FICTION

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1147 words


1 1 3 SPACE, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) The story of the
American space program told through fiction.
2 2 7 MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $15.95.) The hidden truth
behind a woman business tycoon's rise to power.
3 3 7 THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Crown, $15.95.) Continuing the
saga of human survival at the dawn of civilization begun in ''The Clan of the
Cave Bear.''
4 4 8 E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL STORYBOOK, by William Kotzwinkle. (Putnam's,
$6.95.) Abridged, profusely illustrated version of the novelization of the
current film.
5 7 4 CROSSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) A clandestine
trans-Atlantic romance survives the stresses and strains of World War II.
6 5 11 DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.
7 6 8 LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Three decades in the
lives of a coterie of members of the international glitter set.
8 2 MAX, by Howard Fast. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The birth of the American
film industry in New York at the turn of the century.
9 9 20 THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Linden Press, $15.95.) A
sequel to the author's ''Kane & Abel,'' in which two children of those
antagonists marry one another.
10 1 SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) From soldier in
Vietnam to right-wing television superstar: the career of an evangelist.
11 15 2 CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$13.95.) The operator of a c ounterterrorist agency finds himself high on an
assassination list.
12 8 31 THE PARSIFAL MOSAIC, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $15.95.) Michael
Havelock saves the world from nuclear extinction.
13 1 FOUNDATION'S EDGE, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $14.95.) The struggle to
keep civilization alive in a crumbling empire: fourth volume of s.f. stories in
''The Foundation Trilogy.''
14 10 6 19 PURCHASE STREET, by Gerald A. Browne. (Arbor House, $14.95.) A loving
couple set out to bring down a Mafia operation that ''respectable'' bankers have
taken over.
15 14 4 THE 13TH VALLEY, by John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books, $15.95.) The war
in Vietnam as it was seen and felt by a diverse group of soldiers. .) C

NONFICTION
1 1 12 LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $22.50.) Ways to
add years to your life and life to your years: a popularly written
medical-science book.
2 2 39 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) An
exercise book for women, seasoned with the film star's philosophy of physical
well-being.
3 3 26 LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia.  (Holt/Slack, $13.50.)
Inspirational talks by a University of Southern California professor.
4 4 36 WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE, by Harold S.  Kushner. (Schocken,
$10.95.) Comforting thoughts from a rabbi.
5 13 3 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson.
(Morrow, $15.) How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work as
well as your own.
6 6 3 THE G SPOT, by Alice Kahn Ladas, Beverly Whipple and John D. Perry. (Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, $11.95.) Recent discoveries about human sexuality.
7 5 7 INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick. (Morrow, $17.50.) The scandal at
Columbia Pictures and Wall Street's part in it.
8 10 2 ATLANTIC HIGH, by William F. Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Log of a
transatlantic crossing aboard a luxurious ketch.
9 1 LANA: The Lady, the Legend, the Truth, by Lana Turner.  (Dutton, $14.95.)
The film actress's autobiography.
10 1 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK FOR PREGNANCY, BIRTH AND RECOVERY, by Femmy
DeLyser. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Advice from a colleague of the film star.
11 9 29 NO BAD DOGS: The Woodhouse Way, by Barbara Woodhouse.  (Summit, $12.50.)
Advice on training dogs by a British expert: tie-in to a television series.
12 8 14 PRINCESS, by Robert Lacey. (Times Books, $16.95.) The life of the
Princess of Wales in words and pictures.
13 14 45 A FEW MINUTES WITH ANDY ROONEY, by Andrew A. Rooney.  (Atheneum,
$12.95.) Reflections on contemporary life by the journalist and television
commentator.
14 7 12 EDIE, by Jean Stein, edited with George Plimpton.  (Knopf, $16.95.) Edie
Sedgwick, minor celebrity of the 60's, remembered by friends and acquaintances.
15 12 50 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.)
Humor in cartoons and verse.
The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 1,600
bookstores in every region of the

United States.

FOOTNOTES
A new best seller on the hard-cover fiction list, in 13th place, is Isaac
Asimov's ''Foundation's Edge,'' the author's first sciencefiction novel in a
decade. It must have taken some effort for Mr. Asimov to sidestep the genre for
so long, because he produces a spate of books every year; he is described by his
publisher as ''the author of 244 books on almost every subject, from math and
physics to Shakespeare and the Bible, in addition to science-fiction novels and
short stories.'' The new one concerns ''interplanetary intrigues and a desperate
search for the planet Earth which may hold the key to the future of mankind.''
Surely it will turn up somewhere. Runners-up to the fiction list include P.D.
James's ''The Skull Beneath the Skin,'' a classic detective story set on an
island off the Dorset coast, and ''Second Heaven'' by Judith Guest, author of
the best-selling ''Ordinary People.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT LONG ISLAND

BYLINE: By Fred McMorrow

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 2, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1241 words


HEMPSTEAD THE last time I sat in a stark, utilitarian room with young people
while an instructor ran off a training film and then gave a lecture, not a few
of us fell asleep and he would throw chalk at us. ''Wake that man up over
there!''

But this was not Fort Bragg in 1944, where none of us wanted to be (do you
remember basic training?); it was Hempstead in 1982, two wars later, and none of
these young people fell asleep. All of them wanted to be here very, very much.
For them, it was anything but a bore.

The instructor, Abraham Sammas, was not telling them in dreary, nomenclatural
tones how to survive in hostile lands to which they would be sent; he was
telling them how to survive in this one.

The subject was English as a Second Language, as applied to getting a job. The
eight students, from Haiti, Vietnam, Taiwan and Puerto Rico, were a sampling of
scores of young aliens that Hempstead Town's Department of Occupational
Resources has been training and placing for jobs since 1979.

''They are greatly interested in improving their situation in their new
country,'' said the department's commissioner, Clinton C. Boone.  ''They have a
strong desire to be independent.''

A visitor, Town Councilman Richard V. Guardino Jr., said he was ''tremendously
impressed,'' adding, ''These trainees are making such an effort to become
productive mebers of their newly adopted country. ''

Mr. Sammas, the trainees' instructor, was born in Athens. All the instructors in
the program were once aliens themselves, ''and that,'' Mr. Sammas said, ''gives
them a kind of identification with us.''

He began with a video cassette that showed a listless girl whose mother was
prodding her to get a job. The daughter made a phone call, responding to a
help-wanted ad. She told the woman on the other end she wanted an office job.
Fine, the woman said, but there were several open. Could she type? Well, she had
taken typing in high school, but didn't remember her speed. Oh. Could she take
shorthand?  No. Did she know about filing systems? No.

The woman suggested that the girl write a letter outlining her qualifications.
It was strongly implied where that letter would be filed. Mr. Sammas turned the
machine off. ''Now,'' he said, a piece of chalk in his hand, ''what have we seen
here?''

''This girl - did not know - how to - qualify?'' a Vietnamese responded.
''Good, good!'' Mr. Sammas said, and he wrote a (1) on a blackboard behind him,
and the response. He then elicited from his charges - with no more prodding each
time than a ''What else?'' - these additions to that list of shortcomings:

(2) Didn't have experience other than high school.  (3) Wasn't speaking in a
positive way.  (4) Voice not strong/assertive.  (5) Didn't prepare for questions
(by the employer).  (6) Felt nervous.  (7) Was told, ''Send a letter.'' (8) Was
hesitant.  (9) The girl didn't have patience.  Mr. Sammas and the students then
developed, with the help of a text, ''Jobs and Training: Beginning the Search,''
a compendium of sources for a job seeker. Advertisements on buses and trains. On
high school bulletin boards. At banks. At construction sites - ''You see a
building's going up, you're going to know what business will be there, you ask
for the job before the building's up.'' Post offices.  Newspaper and radio and
television ads. The state Labor Department.  Their friends. The phone book's
yellow pages.

And the armed forces. Why them? ''If you don't have a skill, or you want a new
skill,'' Mr. Sammas said, ''you get one in the Army, the Navy, the Air Force,
the Marines. And you don't have to be a citizen to join. Then, when your tour of
duty is over, you're eligible for Veterans Administration benefits.''

Not the rosiest possible future to hold out for them, perhaps, but some of these
students had been boat people, with horrors in their pasts. Many already had
skills: electronics, some data programming, bookkeeping. And some had already
applied for jobs. They were told that their membership in ethnic minority groups
was not a handicap, but an asset, since industry wanted to show a good
equal-employment record.

Indeed, Island industry plays a role in this program, in the form of the Private
Industry Council, which works with the department in placement. The instructor
also stressed the students' grasp of not one, but several languages; Spanish,
English and French.  International concerns and banks always need translators,
he said.

''And wherever you go,'' he said, ''always carry a pencil and paper with you.
You take taxis on the Island? All right, they have job ads on the back seat.
Make notes. And you want a part-time job while you're looking for a real one?
Ask the driver if they need people.  Taxi companies always do.''

At the outset the eight had seemed overpolite, soft-spoken, almost diffident,
reflecting the gentle ways of their lands. But Mr. Sammas is a dynamic and
enthusiastic teacher. In the give-and-take, his questions and their responses,
their voices rose in volume and their personalities began to sparkle. They
seemed eminently employable.

''When they come to us,'' he said to me later, ''some of them have a basic,
survival English. We develop that into specific English for vocational training.
We work on their foundation, their prior knowledge.'

In the Hempstead program's three years, the four-month classes, financed though
the state Education Department and CETA funds, have sent 65 young aliens into
Island jobs. Its success rate, Commissioner Boone said, is 95 percent.

Ana Maria Hurtado, the head of the Classroom Training section of the program,
proudly supplied a sample list of concerns that have hired the aliens: branches
of the European-American Bank, PRD Electronics of Syosset, Arrow Exterminating
of Lynbrook, Publishers Typography of Hicksville and Dakota Instruments of
Freeport.

Michael L. Oddo, Commissioner Boone's assistant, told of the program's
beginnings. ''It was a pilot project,'' he said. ''We had an increasingly large
community of Hispanic residents, Vietnamese, Cambodians and Haitians in the
township. There were schools that were providing E.S.L.'' - English as a Second
Language - ''service, but on a full four-month basis. There was no provision for
a bright sudent who might cut through the course in two months.

''We provided that flexibility, but, more important, we aimed our programs
toward getting a job. Very few native Americans know how to do that. It wasn't
very long - eight weeks of the first 12 - before we started planning the next
class.

''Also, the teachers don't just hold classes and go home. They have lunch with
the students. They socialize with them. Some of our students came to us as
professional people - we've had doctors and lawyers go through this. We're very
proud.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of student explaining use of video tapes

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 17, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 3, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words


Hot off the presses in Fairfield County this month are two new, almost identical
monthly publications, aimed at the affluent, educated woman of the county, who,
unlike women in the rest of the country, is still presumed to have not only a
job but a well-paying one.

Stuffed into mailboxes, tossed into the ''in'' trays of many a corporate desk
and available for browsing in waiting rooms of professional offices all across
Fairfield County last week was the first of them. It bore a distinctive green
logo and was called, Connecticut Woman: Fairfield County Edition.

It is being published in Fairfield by Ilene Oppenheim, 36 years old, a former
promotions director for Connecticut magazine and also an assistant professor of
arts and communications at Sacred Heart University in Bridgeport.

The focus, according to Mrs. Oppenheim, will be on service features tailored
specifically to the working woman, 30 years and older, with a personal annual
income in excess of $20,000.

One of the surprises of the prepublication survey of likely readership, said
Mrs. Oppenheim, was that the market was both older and had a higher earning
capacity than the editors had expected.  Thus, she said, features would try to
avoid the kind of start-up topics that dominated the working woman's
publications at a national level in recent years.

''Instead of 20 ways to write your resume, or how to deal with your boss, we are
assuming a certain level of sophistication that suggests the reader is already
the boss,'' she said. ''So we'll have such topics as 'Are you getting paid
fairly for your job?' or 'Where can I pick up dinner on the way home and have a
suit tailored after 5 P.M.?' ''

The magazine will also profile distinguished women in the area.  Missing, said
Mrs. Oppenheim, will be space devoted to the problems of juggling young children
and a career, since a survey showed that most of the readers were beyond this
stage of life.

For those who cannot quite fit into this profile, the other magazine, which will
be out on Oct. 25 and distributed in much the same manner, is being called
Fairfield County Woman. It is also a monthly tabloid, and is being published
from Stamford by Terry Gamer, publisher of the year-old Hartford Woman, its
prototype. The magazine will also cover mostly service features, although the
editors see their market as ''women of all ages whether or not they are working
outside the home,'' said Mrs. Gamer.

However, Mrs. Gamer acknowledged, the emphasis will still be on the working
woman and her needs, and will deal specifically with services available in the
area. Among upcoming features: How and where to find volunteer work, profiles of
outstanding local women and regular health and finance columns. Both magazines
will also be available at newsstands.

While many veterans of the Vietnam War still find themselves traumatized by the
conflict, others have become successful in their civilian lives. Windsor's Chief
of Police, Maxie L. Patterson, is currently heading an effort to capitalize upon
veterans' successes.

The Greater Hartford Vietnam Veterans leadership program is one of 33 programs
of its kind in the country financed by the Federal Government's Action Agency.

''We're trying to reach out and identify Vietnam veterans who in a sense have
made it and have established themselves in their lives,'' said Chief Patterson,
who is the program's chairman.

''We're asking them to come forward and volunteer some of their time and reach
out and extend a helping hand to those Vietnam veterans who may not be as
fortunate as some of us,'' he said.

Since July 9, Vista volunteers who are Vietnam War veterans have been visiting
area employers, social service agencies and other veterans, under the program.

''First of all we want to improve the employment opportunities for unemployed
and underemployed Vietnam veterans,'' said Dennis Peaslee, director of the
program.

''We're not looking to place Vietnam veterans into seasonal jobs or in mediocre
jobs,'' said Mr. Peaslee. ''We want to give Vietnam veterans the opportunity to
go into the workplace and find meaningful employment, something where there is a
future, where they can support their families, where they can feel a certain
pride in going to work every morning.''

Mr. Peaslee said the program will also attempt to aid those veterans with
physical and psychological difficulties.  ''We want to project an image of a
Vietnam veteran that is a more positive, realistic image, something to begin to
change this negative attitude that has gone on in this country for a number of
years,'' he said.

The award-winning poet David Ignatow will open the sixth season of the Poet's
Voice today with a reading at the Darien Library at 3 P.M.  The series, which
began in 1977, is sponsored by the Fairfield County Poetry Group of Libraries.
It originally included the libraries of Fairfield, Greenwich, Stamford and
Westport. By 1979, the Darien Library had joined the group, and this year the
libraries of New Canaan and Norwalk have been added.

The program was started with an endowment from the late Horace E.  Manacher, a
resident of Greenwich and a lover of poetry. His intentions were to sponsor
local readings and support the growth of poetry in general. That legacy has been
continued by his wife, Zelda Manacher, and the efforts of the Poet's Voice,
which will sponsor seven free public readings this year, one at each of the
participating libraries.

Mr. Ignatow, who received the Bollingen Prize at Yale in 1977, has been on the
editorial staffs of many prestigious poetry publications in the country for more
than 20 years. Last year he published his 11th book of poems, ''Whisper to the
Earth.'' He lives in New York and teaches at York College of the City University
of New York and is poet-in-residence at Columbia University.

All of the subsequent readings in the series this year will be on Sundays at 3
P.M. The other poets scheduled are Philip Levine at the Fairfield Library on
Oct. 31; Richard Howard, Westport Library, Nov.  21; Rachel Hadas, Norwalk
Library, Jan. 30; Michael Benedikt, New Canaan Library, Feb. 20; Jay Parini,
Ferguson Library in Stamford, March 20, and Robert Fitzgerald, Greenwich
Library, April 24.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

News Analysis;
A SOVIET-CHINA THAW?

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Oct. 17


After an interval of three years, the Soviet Union and China are talking to each
other again at an authoritative level. But officials on both sides say the deep
differences that made the two nations antagonists for two decades seem unlikely
to yield at any time soon.

All the same, diplomats here generally agree that the United States would be
unwise to discount the possibility that there will be some lowering of the
temperature between the two Communist powers. Apart from the benefits such a
development might bring in relationships with the United States, a lessening of
intensity would be a relief from an exhausting dispute that has taken on a life
of its own, outstripping original causes.

After months of entreaty from Moscow, the agreement by Peking to resume the
high-level talks that were suspended after the Soviet intervention in
Afghanistan - and the conciliatory comments now being made by Chinese leaders -
mark a juncture of at least symbolic importance. The Soviet Deputy Foreign
Minister who has handled the Chinese talks for years, Leonid F. Ilyichev,
returned to Peking last week and has said that he expects to be there for some
time.

No Resolution in Sight

At the same time, there is little to suggest any sudden improvement in a
relationship that is pivotal in world affairs. Conversations with Soviet and
Chinese officials here suggest that both sides are approaching the talks with
the realization that there is no resolution in sight to a dispute that involves
complex issues of ideology, territory and national pride. These issues are
compounded by Chinese anxieties over Soviet involvement in Asia.

Instead, the resumption of talks at a point when both Moscow and Peking are
disgruntled at their relations with the United States suggests that what may be
involved is a ploy to jog Washington into more amenable attitudes -over arms
issues, in the case of Moscow, and over Taiwan in the case of Peking. Both
Communist powers are keenly aware that the triangular relationship that
developed after President Richard M. Nixon's opening to China a decade ago so
far has worked mainly to the benefit of the United States.

With the central issues still seemingly intractable, the prospects seem to face
toward an improvement in atmospherics, a process that has already begun with a
toning down of propaganda assaults and, on the Soviet side, with an
acknowledgment by Leonid I. Brezhnev that China is, after all, a ''socialist''
country. This is a change from the days when Mao Zedong and his associates were
condemned as ''pseudo-Marxists'' and ''great-power chauvinists.''

Along with this, diplomats here see a cautious broadening of commercial,
academic and sporting contacts, which are already picking up.

'Social Imperialism' at Issue

But the Chinese leaders have already said that Mr. Ilyichev's return to Peking
will not bring an overall thaw unless Moscow meets Chinese conditions for an end
to Soviet ''social imperialism'' in Afghanistan, Cambodia, Mongolia and along
the 4,500-mile border between the two countries, where costly armies are arrayed
across disputed frontiers.

Before Mr. Ilyichev arrived, Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang said that Peking
continued to view the Soviet Union's role in Asia as a threat to world peace and
that the differences were such that any improvement in relations would take a
long time.

This, and the demand for deeds rather than words if Moscow wants a
rapprochement, has been the Chinese position for years. It has been left to the
Russians to make the running for a ''normalization'' of the relationship, an
effort that produced a flurry of speeches and articles by the Soviet leadership
this year. Mr. Brezhnev made such an speech last month when he traveled to
Soviet Azerbaijan to renew the overtures to Peking. But Mr. Brezhnev took care
not to overstate the possibilities. In talks with President Truong Chinh of
Vietnam shortly after the Azerbaijan speech, he acknowledged the suspicion and
resentment that weighs on the relationship.

The Vietnamese leader's hurried journey to Moscow after the Azerbaijan speech
indicated that Soviet allies in Asia are nervous about the Peking talks.
Commitments in Afghanistan, Vietnam and Cambodia, and Soviet troop emplacements
on the Chinese frontier, are a heavy drain on Moscow's resources at a time when
the economy at home is in disarray, and dependent governments must worry that
the Russians might one day trade their interests for a less troublesome
relationship with Peking.

Soviet Firm on Afghanistan

But Mr. Brezhnev reassured Mr. Chinh that relationships with ''third countries''
would be inviolable during the Peking talks.  Whatever this may have done to
mend fences it would certainly be read in China as confirmation of the Peking
leadership's conviction that the Kremlin wants better relations with Peking, and
the spur that would give to the United States, without removing the basic causes
of China's discontent.

At least on Afghanistan, the Soviet leadership has given every indication that
the Chinese apprehensions are correct. When Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko
met in New York recently with Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Mr. Gromyko
said that Soviet troops would not be withdrawn until ''outside interference'' in
Afghan affairs was ended, meaning when Afghan guerrillas were defeated or
deprived of their Western support. Drawing back from extensive military and
financial backing of Vietnam and the Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia
appears equally improbable. As for Mongolia, it has become a key fortress in
Soviet defenses, not something Moscow is likely to barter.

Beyond day-to-day issues such as trade, there could be room for maneuver in the
territorial dispute. Chinese leaders have said that all they seek are
''adjustments'' to the frontier, not the return of large areas of the Soviet Far
East, but the Russians have balked on the ground that any concession would lead
to more threatening Chinese demands.

An easier issue to settle might be troop disengagement. Since the fighting on
the Amur and Ussuri rivers, encampments of heavily armed troops have faced each
other across narrow strips of land and water, in danger of stumbling into fresh
clashes as they patrol undemarcated frontiers. As a means of easing tensions and
building a degree of trust, Mr. Ilyichev and his Chinese counterparts could find
it a productive place to start.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 515 words


CHINA RENEWS FRENCH PARTY TIES; TALKS ON SOVIET LINKS TO CONTINUE

PEKING, Oct. 17 (AP) - China Communist leaders officially resumed relations with
the pro-Soviet French Communist Party today and suggested that they wanted the
same improvement in party-to-party relations with Moscow.

Both developments were seen as China's latest attempts to reassert influence in
the world Communist movement and move toward better ties with its Soviet rival.

Hu Yaobang, the party general secretary, was quoted as saying of the Soviet
Union that ''the Chinese side sincerely hopes that the obstacles to
normalization of relations will be removed so that relations between the two
countries will embark on the road of healthy development,''

(According to a Reuters report, however, members of an Italian delegation
visiting Peking were told by Deputy Prime Minister Wan Li that conditions did
not exist for a real improvement with Mosccow and that the Kremlin had ignored
Peking's conditions for ending the two nations' split.)

Comments to French Journalists

Mr. Hu made his comments to French journalists before opening final talks here
with the French Communist Party leader, Georges Marchais.  Asked whether talks
now going on with Moscow would continue, Mr. Hu said both sides had agreed that
continuing discussions would be held alternately in Peking and Moscow.

The decision by the French and Chinese Communist parties to restore relations
came after Mr. Hu had accepted an invitation to visit France, the official New
China News Agency said. Ties were broken in 1965 because of what China called
the French party's blind allegiance to Moscow.

Official Paris Envoy

Mr. Marchais, whose party shares power with the Socialists in France, is
considered an official envoy of the French Government, but he came to Peking
primarily to discuss restoring party relations with the Chinese.

He told French reporters after the agreement was reached that Mr.  Hu had
suggested that China wanted to resume party-to-party relations with the Soviet
Union. Diplomats here said they thought it was the first official indication
that China might want to restore party ties with the Russians.

Relations between parties of the two nations have been poor since the early
1960's because of differences in ideology and how the international Communist
movement should be led.

Talks Continue in Peking

''It is a pity that relations between the Chinese Communist Party and Soviet
Communist Party were interrupted such a long time ago,'' Mr. Marchais quoted Mr.
Hu as having said.

China is holding consultations with the Soviet Union in Peking to improve
relations betweeen the two countries, which is considered separate fro the issue
of restoring party ties.

State relations between China and the Soviet Union have worsened in recent years
because of a territorial dispute along the China-Soviet border, where Moscow has
deployed about a million troops. China has accused Moscow of seeking to expanded
its territory by invading Afghanistan and supplying huge amounts of military aid
to Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Westmoreland and Liddy Salute Young Collegians

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 125 words

DATELINE: CHARLOTTE, N.C., Oct. 17


Today's college students are different than those who protested the Vietnam War,
retired Gen.  William Westmoreland of the Army and G. Gordon Liddy, a convicted
Watergate conspirator, told a convention of former members of the military
services, soldiers of fortune and admirers of the military Saturday.

''You can be proud of them,'' Mr. Liddy told the 1,500 men and women at the
weeklong meeting. General Westmoreland said his ''observation of young people of
today is that they are a different breed.'' He said they realized that the
''odds of war are exceptionally high in the future'' and accepted the belief
that ''the route to peace lies in the ability to wage war.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS WORLD SPECIALS;
O Say Can You Sing?

BYLINE: By Thomas Rogers

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 431 words


Just like everyone else in Milwaukee last Friday, Frances Langford found herself
caught up in the community's delirium over the Brewers as they prepared for
their World Series game that night against the St. Louis Cardinals.

''This town is going crazy,'' said the former star of the Broadway stage, movies
and radio. ''Everyone here is behind the Brewers. I went to a supermarket this
morning and the motto 'Go Brewers' was stamped all over the checkout slip. It's
like that all over town - you can't get away from it.''

But later on Friday, Miss Langford was in the eye of the cheering hurricane. She
had been selected to sing the national anthem before the start of the opening
game in County Stadium.

''I'm a big Brewer fan,'' said Miss Langford, who is married to Ralph Evinrude,
the chairman of Evinrude Motors and an investor in the Milwaukee franchise.
''O.K., I have to be. But I really love this team.''

Miss Langford, who grew up in Lakeland, Fla., said that baseball and many other
sports had been part of her upbringing before she attended Southern College and
then used her husky singing voice to propel her to a career in show business.

Miss Langford recalled that during World War II, when she was a featured singer
on the Bob Hope radio programs, she had accompanied the comedian and his troupe
on eight overseas trips to entertain American servicemen. She also made singing
appearances before military audiences later in Korea and Vietnam.

''Singing the national anthem is nothing new for me,'' she said before her
appearance. ''I've been singing it all my life, all over the world. It is a
little difficult to sing because the range is so wide and the lyrics are a
little difficult. But I don't anticipate any trouble. I'll just go down to the
ball park a couple of hours before game time and speak to the organist, Frank
Charles, about how we'll do it. We probably won't even rehearse.''

Miss Langford said that in recent years, her only other public singing
appearances had been with Hope at some charity benefits in Florida.

''Oh, and we also own a restaurant called The Outrigger in our hometown of
Stuart, Fla.,'' she said. ''Every once in a while I get up and sing a few
songs.''

Miss Langford admitted that she had eagerly looked forward to singing the
national anthem, though.  ''It's the thought behind it that thrills you,'' she
said.  Thomas Rogers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ FORESEES UPSETS IN COMMUNIST NATIONS

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 599 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that recent developments in
Communist countries ''suggest that a new age of democratic reform and revolution
lies ahead of us.'' He said that while the United States would not seek to
foment violent unrest, it also would not ignore those seeking to bring about
change.

''It is our responsibility, both moral and strategic, to meet their calls for
help,'' he told the opening session of a two-day State Department conference on
finding ways to spread democracy to Communist countries. ''We must aid their
struggle for freedom.''

The conference, which was held behind closed doors except for speeches by Mr.
Shultz and Lawrence S. Eagleburger, Under Secretary of State for Poltical
Affairs, brought together Soviet emigres, American academics and Government
specialists. The meeting was the first public follow-up to a speech in London
last July by President Reagan in which he announced an American political
offensive to spread democracy to Communist countries.

Mr. Shultz said that ''the weaknesses of Communist societies are becoming
increasingly apparent.'' ''Popular desires for freedom remain strong,'' he said.
''The concessions that Communist regimes make to popular sentiment and to
economic necessity may sow the seeds of their transformation.''

He cited the rise of Solidarity in Poland as the prime example of this
''trend,'' but he cautioned that ''internal forces must be the major factors for
democratization of Communist states.''

''We do not seek to foment violent unrest or to undermine Communist regimes,''
Mr. Shultz said. ''Yet we will not ignore the individuals and groups in
Communist countries who seek peaceful change.''

As far as could be ascertained, this was the first time the State Department had
officially sponsored a meeting to discuss ways of changing the structure of the
Communist countries.

Mr. Eagleburger said the Soviet press would probably call the meeting
provocative and a return ''to the bad old days of cold war and confrontation.''

''But all these claims will prove is how lacking in confidence in their own
system are those who make them,'' he said. ''Exporting revolution is a Soviet
tradition, not an American one. We intend to spread the idea of democracy on the
battlefield of ideas, not at the end of the bayonet.''

''Each Soviet leader, including President Brezhnev, has stressed that the
peaceful competition of ideas should continue,'' he said.  The speeches by
others at the conference were ''off the record'' but copies were made available.
Prof. Ken Jowitt of the University of California, Berkeley, said the most
effective way for the United States to shape the political development in
Eastern Europe would be to withdraw American troops from Western Europe in
phases. He said this would reduce the impact of blocs, ''increase the likelihood
of political experimentation'' and decrease the likelihood of Soviet
intervention in Eastern Europe. His proposal provoked shouts of protest, a
participant said.

Prof. Andrew Nathan of Columbia University said ''the prospects for
self-generated democratization in China today are dim; the same is probably true
of North Korea and Vietnam.'' But he advocated continued information activities,
cultural exchanges and case-bycase human rights appeals to aid adherents of
American values.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Aid to Vietnam Voted by Food Agency

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 96 words

DATELINE: ROME, Oct. 18


The World Food Program approved more than $180 million in aid to 15 countries
today. The projects approved included $24 million for feeding vulnerable
population groups in Vietnam. A previous aid project to Vietnam was effectively
blocked by Western countries.

Because of the project's humanitarian value, diplomatic sources said, the United
States, Britain, Canada and Thailand had decided not to oppose it. But they
emphasized their reservations about aid to Vietnam while its troops were in
Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Soviet Reports Chinese Fired On Vietnamese Border Area

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 94 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Oct. 18


The official press agency Tass reported today that Chinese forces fired on
Vietnamese border areas on Oct. 8, the last day of Soviet-Vietnamese talks on
improving relations with Peking.

Tass quoted Vietnam's national press agency for the report, which said that
several frontier districts came under machine gun and mortar fire from China
between Oct. 8 and 10 and that there were civilian casualties.

The Vietnamese President, Truong Chinh, completed a four-day visit to Moscow on
Oct. 8.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words


Speech Coach for Glenn

Notes from the Donkey Pasture: The inside word is that Senator John Glenn, the
Ohio Democrat who is beginning his Presidential campaign countdown, is thinking
about hiring a professional speech coach to help him overcome his image as a
tedious speaker. Mr. Glenn, who thinks criticism of his speaking style is a bum
rap, reportedly made the comment, ''If Ted Kennedy can lose weight, I can learn
to speak.''

Meanwhile, Representative Morris K. Udall, Democrat of Arizona, is showing signs
of again surrendering to the political sirens that lured him into the 1976
campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination, a race won by Jimmy Carter.

The Congressman, who has Parkinson's disease, has been campaigning extensively
for other House Democrats around the country. He has told friends privately that
one reason he is pushing himself on the campaign trail this year is to determine
whether his health is up to another run for the Presidency.
Vietnam Parade Nov. 10

A t last there is to be a parade in the nation's capital for Vietnam veterans.
There will be no ticker-tape shower, however, just a march down Constitution
Avenue to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, the latest symbol of the emotional
division that the war continues to inflict on the nation.

The parade is one of the activities planned for a four-day National Salute to
Vietnam Veterans that begins here Nov. 10. There will be entertainment featuring
Jimmy Stewart as the master of ceremonies, receptions, reunions and a
candlelight vigil at the National Cathedral during which there will be a
round-the-clock reading of the names of the dead from that war.

Hanging over these events, however, will be the continuing controversy over the
memorial, a 500-foot, V-shaped black marble wall sunk 10 feet into the ground.
On the wall is inscribed, by the date of their deaths, the names of the the
57,000 Americans who died in Vietnam. From the beginning, the memorial, located
in the shadow of the Lincoln Memorial, has been denounced as ''the black hole''
and a ''tribute to Jane Fonda'' by veterans who saw it as an attempt to
emphasize in funereal black the human cost of the war without so much as a nod
to the patriotism of those who fought.

''The only place the names of the dead should appear is in a cemetery, and even
then, they are normally found in white stone above ground,'' Tom Carhart, a
Vietnam veteran and critic of the memorial, said recently.

Last week the United States Commission on Fine Arts approved a compromise that
alleviated but did not eliminate tensions over the memorial. It approved the
addition of two conventional pieces to it, an American flag and a sculpture of
three infantrymen, which are to be placed at a safe distance esthetically from
the centerpiece.
Where Charity Begins

T he Combined Federal Campaign, the charity arm of Federal employees, is
permitting contributors this year to specify which of more than 250 recipient
organizations should benefit from the pledges. The American Federation of
Government Employees was quick to point out to some workers that even charity
can be in their selfinterest.

The union distributed a flier to employees at the Department of Transportation
suggesting that they would be ''smart'' to earmark their contributions to the
Center for Auto Safety, one of Ralph Nader's groups.

In addition to helping the center promote auto safety, the flier said, ''You'll
be helping a group that's working to support your work and help save your
jobs.''
Forum Called 'Biased'

O ver the objections of House Democrats, the Department of Energy went ahead
yesterday with an ''educational forum'' on nuclear waste disposal.
Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, protested the use of
taxpayers' money to finance what he called ''an overtly biased and one-sided
discussion'' of the issue.

The program, which was planned by Paula Unruh, director of the agency's Office
of Consumer Affairs, featured only Republican Congressional staff members and
representatives of the nuclear power industry in a panel discussion of the
impact on consumers of pending legislation on nuclear waste disposal.

Mr. Markey said in an angry letter to Energy Secretary James B.  Edwards: ''The
nuclear industry certainly has ample means by which to lobby for its viewpoint
without assistance from the Administration.''
Constituent Service?
ACongressman does many things in the name of constituent services, b ut
promoting a newspaper columnist is rarely one of them.  R epresentative Newt
Gingrich, Republican of Georgia, has written a n umber of major newspapers,
urging them to consider running a m ilitary affairs column written by one of his
constituents, Mike B ressler, a West Point graduate who also works as a
consultant to t he Department of Defense and as assistant to the president of
the S outhwire Company in Carollton, Ga.

''While intensely patriotic,'' Mr. Gingrich assures editors, ''Mike is not a
blind defender of all things military. Like the Congressional Military Reform
Caucus that I work with, he's for reforming the military along lean and ready
standards. In addition, he understands the complex needs and relationships of
future technological warfare and its relationship to industry.''

The Congressman even includes some clippings of Mr. Bressler's columns from the
Daily Times-Georgian, his local newspaper, and the Pentagon Current News
Service.  Phil Gailey Warren Weaver Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S HUMAN RIGHTS CHIEF: NO 'LIBERAL MOLE'

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1137 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


As a teen-ager, Elliot Abrams attended a private high school in Greenwich
Village whose alumni included Angela Davis and Kathy Boudin. At Harvard, Mr.
Abrams headed the campus chapter of the Americans for Democratic Action and
supported Hubert H. Humphrey's Presidential bid.

It was hardly a surprise, then, that when the 34-year-old lawyer accepted a key
Administration job in the State Department, he was viewed by former colleagues
as a ''secret'' liberal. ''They thought I was a liberal mole hidden in the
Reagan Administration,'' Mr. Abrams said with a laugh.

No more.  As Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian
Affairs, the highest ranking official working in this area, Mr.  Abrams has
emerged as a blunt, articulate defender of a policy that tends to excoriate
left-wing and Communist regimes and mute public criticism of such rightist
countries as the Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan and South Africa. In the
process, Mr. Abrams has rankled liberals and many human rights activists.

''I just can't abide the fact that the left sits on its high horse and think
they have a morally superior position on human rights because they are on the
left,'' said Mr. Abrams. ''I've taken to being relatively combative.''

Angry Letter to Drinan

Recently, for example, Robert F. Drinan, the president of A.D.A.  and a former
liberal member of Congress, said, in effect, that he agreed with the comment of
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India that El Salvador was to the United States
what Afghanistan was to the Russians. ''So I wrote him a letter,'' said Mr.
Abrams. ''I said, 'You stink.' I said, '100,000 Russian troops are waging
chemical warfare in Afghanistan, and that's the analogy you draw?' ''

Actually, Mr. Abrams contends, the differences between the human rights politics
of the Reagan and Carter Administrations are surprisingly blurred, although he
concedes that there are some key points of divergence.

''There is less difference than a lot of people expected,'' he said. ''The goals
are essentially similar, but the tactics vary. The Carter Administration was
more given to public criticisms of friendly governments than we are. Another
difference is that we say it is not enough to ask who is in power and what is he
like. We also have to ask what is the alternative, what are the likely prospects
for improvement. Look at Vietnam and Iran. Bad situations can and do get
worse.''

Mr. Abrams added that he was ''appalled'' at the ''hypocrisy'' of some human
rights groups that denounce rightist excesses in Latin America and re-issue
statements made in El Salvador by the Roman Catholic Church, which is often
antigovernment, but then ignore church criticisms of the leftist regime in
Nicaragua.

Friends 'Get Some Points'

''We think people who are friends of the United States get some points for
that,'' said Mr. Abrams. ''It doesn't mean you're forgiven, but it does mean you
address that government with a slightly different attitude. I have a feeling
that in the Carter Administration, and among some human rights advocates, to be
a friend of the U.S. was considered a net minus, not a net plus. One of the
things that was held against the Shah was that he was a friend.''

Mr. Abrams's policies and provocative comments have, of course, stirred anger.
''The policy is d@i@s@a@s@t@r@o@u@s@,@'@' said Patricia M. Derian, who held Mr.
Abrams's job during most of the Carter years. ''It's catastrophic. They have
essentially abandoned human rights policy and then continued this incredible
courtship with the sleaziest of the world's leaders. Falling all over Marcos.
The guy from South Korea. You pick a seedy dictator and you've got a great
friend in the Reagan Administration.''

Jerome J. Shestack, a Philadelphia lawyer who is president of the International
League for Human Rights, and was the United States representative to the United
Nations Human Rights Commission during the Carter Administration, said, ''This
Administration says it's engaging in muted diplomacy, but it's actually mute
diplomacy.  They're not interested. The general impression is they'd prefer to
act in complicity with countries like South Africa rather than in confrontation.
There's lip service to human rights but there's very little meaningful action.''

Mr. Abrams strongly disagrees. He argues that the Administration, in avoiding
public criticism of nations such as South Africa or Haiti, is hardly shrinking
from its goals of advancing human rights.  ''A steady barrage of criticism
against Communist countries and very little public criticism of what we shall
call friendly right-wing regimes doesn't mean we're not pressing,'' he said.
''We're pressing them very hard in private, but it's obviously diplomacy. It's
not public negotiations. It creates an insoluble credibility problem.''

Shultz Called 'Supportive'

Mr. Abrams says that in nations such as South Africa, the Philippines and South
Korea, the Administration has succeeded in various human rights cases. Moreover,
he added, Secretary of State George P. Shultz and his staff have been
''remarkably supportive,'' with Mr. Shultz personally raising human rights
issues in his recent talks with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko of the Soviet
Union.

Mr. Abrams had problems with Mr. Shultz's predecessor, Alexander M. Haig Jr. One
State Department official said that Mr. Haig regarded human rights as ''sissy
stuff, fancy pants stuff'' and often ignored human rights questions. Mr. Shultz
has increased Mr. Abrams's staff and personally visited the human rights bureau
to voice his commitment to its efforts.

Mr. Abrams generally arrives in his snug, sixth-floor office at the State
Department at 7:45 A.M., and tries to leave by 6:30 P.M. in order to spend some
time with his two small children. His wife, Rachel, is the daughter of Midge
Decter, the author and outspoken neo-conservative.

Once a Democrat, Mr. Abrams worked during the 1970's for two Democratic
Senators: as counsel to Henry M. Jackson of Washington and as chief of staff to
Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York. In the 1980 Presidential campaign, however,
Mr. Abrams toured the country speaking to Jewish groups in behalf of Ronald
Reagan and his approach to foreign policy.

Mr. Abrams says he has now permanently left the Democratic fold. Is he a
card-carrying Republican? ''Want to see it?'' he shot back with a laugh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Elliot Abrams

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JUSTICES DECLINE FLAG LAW APPEAL

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 582 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


The Supreme Court refused today to hear a constitutional challenge to a law that
makes deliberate mutilation of the American flag a Federal crime.

Only Associate Justice William J. Brennan Jr., who called the law ''the very
definition of a censorship statute,'' voted to take the case. Without comment,
the eight other Justices turned down an appeal by two members of the
Revolutionary Communist Party who were convicted and sentenced to eight months
in prison for burning an American flag that they had brought to a Federal office
building in Greensboro, N.C.

The law, passed by Congress in 1968 during the protests against the war in
Vietnam, prohibits ''knowingly casting contempt upon any flag of the United
States by publicly mutilating, defacing, defiling or trampling upon it.''

The two leftist party members, Teresa Kime and Donald Bonwell, argued that their
destruction of the flag was a form of political expression protected by the free
speech guarantee of the First Amendment and that any law that barred that type
of expression was unconstitutional.

Justice Department Opposed Case

The party members lost their appeal in the United States Court of Appeals for
the Fourth Circuit.  The Justice Department urged the Supreme Court not to take
the case, Kime v. U.S. (No. 81-6773). It said the law served an ''important
governmental interest,'' which it defined as ''preservation of the flag, not as
a mere chattel, but as the visible embodiment of the nation.''

Justice Brennan, in his dissent from the Court's refusal to hear the appeal,
said that the law ''is flagrantly unconstitutional on its face'' and that the
Justice Department's defense of it was ''clearly foreclosed by both precedent
and basic First Amendment principles.''

Justice Brennan said that the law did not punish flag mutilation in the
abstract, but only mutilation done deliberately to ''cast contempt'' on the
flag.

''Everything it might possibly prohibit is constitutionally protected
expression,'' he said. ''This censorship goes to the heart of what the First
Amendment prohibits.''

Appeal on Legal Fees Accepted

In other action today, the Court agreed to hear an appeal by the Environmental
Protection Agency from a decision ordering it to reimburse the Sierra Club and
the Environmental Defense Fund for $90,000 in legal fees. The two organizations
incurred the expense when they brought an unsuccessful legal challenge to the
agency's standards for sulfur dioxide emissions.

Along with a number of other Federal laws, the Clean Air Act, under which the
two organizations brought their suit, permits the trial court to award the
''costs of litigation'' to a party ''whenever it determines that such award is
appropriate.''

In this case, Gorsuch v. Sierra Club (No. 82-242), the United States Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia decided that even though the two
organizations lost their suit, they ''served the goals of the Clean Air Act''
and made ''substantial'' contributions to ''the public interest'' by bringing
the case. The court said that the award of attorneys' fees was ''appropriate''
within the meaning of the statute.

The Reagan Administration has tried in various forums to limit the award of
attorneys' fees to those who sue the Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
A WORLD RESERVE PLAN

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Oct. 18


Many factors have been advanced to account for what is now recognized as a
worldwide economic crisis. No doubt all have contributed, from the half-century
''Kondratieff cycle'' of technological progress, to wanton Government
overspending, to selfindulgence and labor intransigence, to oil prices.

But it is now clear that no economic theory and no country's management has had
a magic formula that protects against the epidemic. Moscow isn't trumpeting as
it did in the 1930's that this is the ''final crisis of capitalism,'' because
the Marxist-planned economies have done even worse.

Nor can any Western leader boast of more wisdom than neighboring countries or
predecessors. Somewhere in the industrial world every thesis is being tried, and
all are in trouble.

At the end of World War II the victors recognized how much national economic
rivalries in the prewar years had helped provoke conflict, and they set up a new
international system to prevent a repetition.  It was a way of admitting that
nobody could go it alone and prosper any longer.

The system worked remarkably well for a quarter-century. But that was mostly
because it wasn't as international as it looked. The U.S., with unchallenged
dollar power, ran it with general consent.

Now nobody is really running the system. Nobody, including the U.S., has both
the concentration of economic strength and internal discipline to maintain
healthy order in a trading world that has grown beyond the imagination of any
participant in Bretton Woods.  Economic power is dispersed, and interdependence
is real.

With hindsight, it can be said that control was lost in the attempts to cope
with the petrodollar crisis after 1973. The U.S. had already gone off the gold
standard in 1971, when the attempt to pay for the Vietnam War without squeezing
the home front caught up with it. The sudden shift of financial resources when
oil costs were quadrupled did the rest.

The U.S. was slow to understand that the effects went much further than gas
lines and a change to smaller cars. The new oil billionaires couldn't eat their
dollars any more than they could drink their oil.  So they sent the money back,
through investments and loans to Western banks.

''Recycling,'' pumping money even though the source had changed, was proclaimed
a success. The pattern was the same after the second oil shock. The banks kept
shoveling out money, debts kept mounting, and nobody paid much attention.

But the money no longer flowed smoothly. A vast ''Eurodollar'' market, beyond
control of any government or regulation, developed in response to the eagerness
to lend excess cash and the need to borrow. From a few billion dollars easing
the margins of the established system, it ballooned into the current pool of
over a trillion dollars.

For several years the money sloshed around, provoking wild currency fluctuations
that weakened major economies. Then the need to control inflation and the drying
up of new money sources brought high interest rates.

Now it has to be seen that the attempts to let the market take care of the
drastic upheaval in the circulatory system of the world's economic body left
deep scars, like a heart attack.

A few years ago, at a private meeting, one of America's most famous bankers
protested against criticism of the way banks were distributing funds,
willy-nilly, with little concern for coordinated growth needs. He said that, on
the contrary, banks were doing well and should be thanked for handling a crisis
that had stymied governments. Any thought of international oversight would
destroy their capacity, he said.

A former official answered tartly, ''That's just what your grandfather said when
we set up the Federal Reserve System in the U.S.''

Events have made the point sharper ever since. Now there is too little, not too
much, money being invested around the world. The lending boom got out of hand
without oversight. The borrowing bust is beyond the ability of any government to
manage reasonably.

As the U.S. came to see when it set up the Federal Reserve after a painful
Depression, there comes a stage in the size and complexity of economic affairs
when they can't be left to grow like Topsy. Some guidance and regulated support
is needed so that the distress and possible collapse of one part doesn't destroy
the rest.

That stage has been reached in the world economy. The World Bank, within strict
limits, can't provide it. The International Monetary Fund could do a lot more,
but it won't because the U.S. refuses.  Reaganomics holds that it knows what's
best, and need listen to no one.

There isn't going to be any worldwide economic authority any more than a One
World political authority riding herd on nations. That's surely for the best.
Differences are desirable as well as inevitable. But the time has come when real
monetary and credit cooperation is urgent. Everybody's paying now for the
failure to see that the time had already come with the first oil shock.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 20, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
New Book Says Johnson Had a Secret Romance

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 171 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 19


A biographer says that Lyndon B. Johnson, married at the time and an ambitious
Congressman, began a love affair in the late 1930's with the beautiful mistress
of the man who published one of his district's most powerful newspapers, it was
reported today.

According to the biography by Robert A. Caro, biography, ''The Years of Lyndon
Johnson,'' which is being serialized in The Atlantic Monthly magazine, the
former President and the woman, Alice Glass, met often at the estate of Charles
E. Marsh, then publisher of The Austin American-Statesman.

The romance, which blossomed in 1939, ended in the early years of Mr. Johnson's
Presidency, Mr. Caro writes. At one time, Miss Glass was married to Mr. Marsh.

The book says that Mr. Johnson's relationship with Miss Glass came to an end in
large part over differences she had with him about the Vietnam War, which she
considered one of ''history's horrors,'' according to the article.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 20, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A FOOTNOTE TO HISTORY

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 406 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 19


The Supreme Court's refusal this week to hear a challenge to a law making it
illegal to intentionally desecrate the American flag was a footnote to one of
the stormiest and, at times, one of the most hilarious debates in the history of
the House of Representatives.

The year was 1967, at the height of protests over American involvement in
Vietnam. Incensed over a series of flag burnings, Representative James H.
Quillen, Republican of Tennessee, introduced a bill to make it a crime to
knowingly desecrate the American flag.  He said that the legislation was the
most important he had ever sponsored.

On June 20 of that year, the Quillen bill reached the House floor.  During the
day-long debate, emotions ran high as members marched to the microphones to read
patriotic poems and vigorously denounce flag burners.

''Let's deal with these buzzards,'' said Representative L. Mendel Rivers,
Democrat of South Carolina.  Representative James A. Haley, Democrat of Florida,
suggested taking flag burners 2,000 miles out to sea, tying stones around their
necks, then dumping them overboard.

'Is This a Flag?'

But the highlight of the debate came when William Fitz Ryan, Democrat of
Manhattan, casually strolled into the House chamber, carrying a beach bag made
from material resembling the American flag. ''Is this a flag?'' he inquired.
''It's clearly red, white and blue and has stars on it.''

''That's not a flag,'' Representative Richard L. Roudebush, Republican of
Indiana, replied impatiently.  ''Then is this a flag?'' Mr. Ryan asked, digging
into his beach bag and producing a cigar to which a paper flag was attached.
''No, it's not,'' Mr. Roudebush shouted.  And so it went.  Not until later,
after passage of the bill, did the sponsors learn of one glaring defect.
Somehow, the word ''burning'' had been dropped from the ''flag-burning bill.''

It was a full year later that the Senate, acting on the Housepassed bill,
amended it to include the word burning. The amended measure was then sent back
to the House, was passed once again and subsequently was signed into law, the
law the Supreme Court sees no reason to pass judgment upon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Attacks Thai Plane

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 41 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Oct. 20


Vietnamese gunners opened fire on a Thai reconnaissance plane near the
Thai-Cambodian border today, but did not hit the aircraft, Thai military
officials said.  The plane returned to its base inside Thailand, the officials
added.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW SIHANOUKVILLE LURES CAMBODIANS HOME

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Oct. 15


At a bamboo temple in a Cambodian refugee camp north of here, a man in his 50's
waited with six other members of his family to be taken by Thai soldiers to a
village on the Cambodian side of the border.

The refugee, who had been in the camp, Khao I Dang, since 1979, had decided to
follow the example of many other refugees he had known. They had moved from Khao
I Dang across the border to a Cambodian village near Samrong.

The Cambodian refugee seemed happy to be going back to his own country. He had
decided on the step sometime after hearing Prince Sihanouk, the former Cambodian
head of state, speak movingly, during a visit to Khao I Dang last July, of
reclaiming Cambodia from Vietnamese domination.

The village the refugee was headed for, a cluster of settlements once called O
Smach, is now known as Sihanoukville, and it is the headquarters of an insurgent
faction, known as the National Army, that is loyal to the Prince. While he was
chief of state from 1960 to 1970, the Prince had given the name Sihanoukville to
the nation's main seaport, since then renamed Kompong Som.

New Houses Reported Built

A favorable picture of conditions at the new Sihanoukville was provided at the
temple by a monk, who said he had been there several times accompanying elderly
refugees. He said that it was easy to grow rice there, that corn, pumpkins,
eggplants and bananas were also being planted and that new houses were being
built.

But a Cambodian encountered outside the temple said he had heard it was
difficult to grow rice at Sihanoukville, and he had other adverse things to say.

Yes, he said, as many as 15,000 people had decided to go to O Smach after Prince
Sihanouk's visit. But their numbers are now trailing off, he added, and
thousands have changed their minds.

The Cambodian said that about 6,000 Cambodians had actually made the trip from
Khao I Dang to Sihanoukville, where about 14,000 people are now said to live. He
said that those who had left Khao I Dang had done so because they had grown sick
of the camp's restrictions, tedium, quarrels and confinement. He said they felt
they had little chance to be admitted to the United States or any other foreign
country.

He also said he had heard that at Sihanoukville the new settlers were prohibited
from cutting down big trees, which help conceal the village from Vietnamese
spotter planes. Worst of all, he said, the village has been hit even during the
rainy season by 130 Vietnamese rockets.

Security a Concern for Diplomats

Western diplomats and aid officials have also expressed concern over the safety
of the people at Sihanoukville.  They fear as well for the safety of an
estimated total of 300,000 other Cambodians who live in a string of villages and
unofficial refugee camps along the border - settlements that, like O Smach,
often harbor Cambodian insurgents prepared to fight the Vietnamese.

Such fears have grown as the dry season has approached. By next month, and
certainly by December, the firm roads that favor tanks, trucks and heavy
artillery are expected to allow the Vietnamese to stage attacks, as they did
last year, on positions held by thousands of anti-Vietnamese troops.

Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, said in Paris recently that he did
not expect Vietnam would launch a dry season offensive.  But he said that no one
could know what Vietnam's enemies would do.

Pol Pot Forces Are Active

Those enemies include about 30,000 guerrillas of the deposed Pol Pot regime,
5,000 troops of Son Sann's Khmer People's National Liberation Front, and perhaps
3,000 members of Prince Sihanouk's military faction, based at O Smach.

Sources at some Western embassies believe that Mr. Son Sann's troops have grown
to as many as 9,000 over the last few months.  Despite the denial by the
Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Thai and American intelligence sources say they
believe the Vietnamese are planning a dry season offensive.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CBS AGREES TO PAY IN TWO LIBEL SUITS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 948 words


CBS has settled two separate multimillion-dollar libel suits brought by public
officials against television stations it owns and operates in Philadelphia and
Chicago. The terms of the settlements were kept confidential.

But the producer of the purportedly libelous program in Chicago said last week
that the company had paid more than $100,000 to the plaintiffs, two police
officials in Gary, Ind. In the other case, a suit brought by Mayor William J.
Green, The Philadelphia Inquirer quoted City Hall sources as saying Tuesday that
the settlement was between a $250,000 offer by CBS and the Mayor's demand for
$400,000.

The settlements are unusual in that both involve public officials.  Over the
years, those officials have had limited success in pursuing libel cases because
of a 1964 Supreme Court decision in The New York Times v. Sullivan. That ruling
said that, to win a libel suit, officials had to show malice by proving that the
news organization either knew its charges were false or recklessly disregarded
whether they were true or false.

Gene P. Mater, senior vice president for policy for the CBS broadcast group,
said yesterday that the settlements, each reached on the eve of trial, did not
set a precedent and were not likely to inhibit news gathering. Decisions whether
to settle or to conduct pretrial and trial procedures that are often long and
costly will continue to be made on a case-by-case basis, he said.

Private Settlements Standard

The agreement by all sides not to disclose the settlement terms is fairly
standard in libel and other civil torts. A recent study said the record on
out-of-court settlements was so incomplete that it was not possible to conclude
authoritatively the average amount paid in libel cases.

For lawyers and the insurance companies that have to make the payments, recent
decisions about whether to go to trial have been influenced by well-publicized
cases in which juries have returned multimillion-dollar verdicts for the
plaintiffs. They include findings for Carol Burnett against The National
Enquirer, for a former Miss Wyoming against Penthouse magazine, and for the
president of Mobil Oil against The Washington Post.

Some lawyers say libel plaintiffs are encouraged to file suits if they know they
might be able to win money without the expense of a trial. To avoid that, some
news organizations, including The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal and
the Gannett Company, say they will not make a cash settlement to resolve a libel
case.

The Philadelphia case involved station WCAU-TV. In March it broadcast a report
that Mayor Green was the target of a Federal investigation. The Mayor and the
District Attorney denied the charge, and a day later the station retracted the
report and apologized to Mr. Green.

Despite the apology, the Mayor filed a $5.1 million suit against the station,
its reporters and CBS. Some details of the settlement are expected to emerge
next year when the Mayor files his annual financial disclosure statement.

Says CBS Asked Secrecy

Mr. Green said Tuesday that CBS had asked that the details of the settlement be
kept private. Mr. Mater of CBS declined to discuss who had asked for
confidentiality in either case.

The Chicago case involved a series of broadcasts by station WBBM in 1979 about
the acting police chief in Gary, Virgil Motley, and the head of the narcotics
unit, Simeon Colquitt. The broadcasts quoted a former Gary police chief and a
convicted drug dealer from Atlanta as saying the officials were reselling guns
and drugs their officers had confiscated. Mr. Colquitt and Mr. Motley denied the
charges and sued when WBBM refused to retract its story.

The producer of the broadcasts, Christopher Chandler, who has since left the
station, said the settlement was for more than $100,000.  Robert B. Hawk, a Gary
lawyer for the plaintiffs, said the settlement was ''a sizable amount.''

CBS is facing a $120 million libel suit by Gen. William C.  Westmoreland over a
documentary that said he had deliberately underestimated the size of the enemy
forces his troops faced in Vietnam. In another case, heading for trial early
next year, Col.  Anthony Herbert charges he was libeled in 1973 by a ''60
Minutes'' broadcast. That program challenged his account of having lost his
command in Vietnam for insisting that the Army follow up his reports of
brutality against civilians.

----

$3 Million Suit Dismissed

PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 20 (AP) -Citing the importance of freedom of the press, a
Federal district judge has dismissed a $3 million libel suit brought by three
Philadelphia policemen against The Washington Post.

Judge John Fullam said that although he sympathized with public officials who
might be the subjects of biased stories, press freedom was more important than
the protection of individuals.

Officers Raymond Casper, Roy Land and Lyle Sprague accused The Post of malice in
printing a 1979 article about police brutality. But the judge said the officers
had failed to prove malice or to show that the Post deliberately withheld facts
to embarrass the policemen. The officers' lawyer, Benjamin Paul, said he would
not appeal.

''All of us in public life, at one time or another, have been the subject of
publicity that was less than completely objective, and I do not take as entirely
at face value the assertion that all articles are written without any ulterior
motive at all,'' Judge Fullam said.  ''A newspaper and its reporters do not lose
their First Amendment protections merely beause plaintiffs sincerely believe
that they are biased.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BENEFICIARIES OF CENTRAL AMERICAN TURMOIL

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 486 words


To the Editor:

Wayne C. Smith's summary dismissal of the Reagan Administration's Central
American policy as a failure (Op-Ed Oct. 12) would be cause for concern were it
not that his policy alternative is based on an assumption of dubious merit: that
all the parties involved - directly or indirectly - want a swift resolution of
the turmoil in the area.

Most Americans probably do indeed wish for a peaceful settlement and an
attendant end to U.S. involvement. With the United States confronting myriad
urgent problems at home and abroad, there is an understandable tendency to
consign Central America to the nethermost pit. Then, too, there are the scars of
Vietnam.

But ritualistic propaganda blasts apart, there is no hard evidence that our
desire for a peaceful settlement is shared by the other side. Why should the
Soviets or the Cubans wish for peace in the area? It is in their national
interest to foster strife and instability, for if the U.S. gets more and more
deeply embroiled in Central America, it may, in consequence, be weakened by
internal division at home - as it was during the latter stages of the Indochina
conflict.

As for one of the parties directly involved, the Salvadoran guerrillas, their
leadership is at present dominated by leftist extremists who, as an article of
faith, would accept peace only if it led - immediately or within months - to
absolute power. Failing that, they want the civil war to continue - in the hope
that internal pressures may eventually compel the U.S. to end its involvement,
enhancing the guerrillas' prospects for a military victory.

Nicaragua's Sandinistas, their revolution gone increasingly sour, need an
outside ''threat'' to divert public attention from failed policies and economic
disarray; moreover, the doctrinaire wing of the Sandinist movement is
ideologically committeed to exporting its brand of revolution - and that can
best be done if Central America is in turmoil. Peace and a modicumn of stability
could prove to be insuperable obstacles to such messianic quests.

So the issue is not whether the Reagan Administration's Central American
policies are not working, as Mr. Smith contends. The problem is that no policy
will work so long as the other side profits more from conflict than from peace.

To be sure, there could be peace -on their terms, the peace of Vietnam. But one
doubts that Mr. Smith would want that; an overwhelming majority of Americans,
despite their qualms about our involvement in the area, certainly would not.

For it would be rank hypocrisy for us to champion democratic rule and
self-determination while allowing, by default, militant minorities to seize
power and install totalitarian dictatorships practically on our very doorsteps.
From the point of national security, it also would be an invitation to disaster.

MILAN B.  SKACEL, President, Chamber of Commerce of Latin America, New York,
Oct. 14, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon of a barrel

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 21, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CHARLES BLACK

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 109 words

DATELINE: PHENIX CITY, Ala., Oct. 20


Charles Black, a reporter who covered the Vietnam War from the soldier's point
of view, died Monday, apparently of a heart attack. He was 59 years old.

Mr. Black spent most of his career covering the military. As a columnist and
military reporter for The Columbus Enquirer in Georgia, he accompanied troops
from Fort Benning, Ga., to Vietnam six times.

His reports were more like letters home than traditional journalism.  The
survivors include his wife, Priscilla Black, who is city editor of The Columbus
Enquirer, and four children.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 318 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 22, 1982 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'THE SENDER,' PARAPSYCHOLOGICAL

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Weekend Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 465 words


''THE SENDER'' is a parapsychological horror film of such incoherence that one
can only look at it as if it were a piece of abstract art composed of easily
identifiable representations of reality.

At the center of the construction is a young man (Zeljko Ivanek), an amnesiac
who has been brought to a mental hospital after a suicide attempt. When his
pretty psychiatrist (Kathryn Harrold) tries to treat him, she begins to see
disgusting things that really aren't there - rats crawling over her bedroom
floor and blood running from faucets. She even meets and talks with the young
man's mother (Shirley Knight).

Very early the young man is diagnosed as a ''sender.'' Without being aware of it
sometimes or wanting to, he is able to send his own thoughts and nightmares into
the consciousnesses of others. Being around him is like living in a house with a
lot of dumb people who think it's amusing to jump out from behind doors
unannounced. It also messes up the movie since none of the awful things the
audience sees actually happen. Maybe. I don't know.

The movie, shot on location in Georgia and at the Shepperton Studios outside
London, has a kind of stateless quality, like the dispossessed hero. As ''the
sender,'' Mr. Ivanek is on the screen virtually from beginning to end, but he is
much more impressive in his tiny role as the homicidal hitchhiker in ''Tex.''
The other members of the cast are adequate.

''The Sender,'' which opens today at Loew's State 2 and other theaters, looks
pretty good. It's the first feature to be directed by Roger Christian, who won
an Oscar for his set decoration for ''Star Wars'' and was nominated for another
Oscar as the art director of ''Alien.'' Nick Allder did the elaborate special
effects and Thomas Baum wrote the screenplay, which includes a lot of silly
spook-film dialogue, including the line, ''Now I just want you to go home and
get some rest.'' Vincent Canby

A Bad Houseguest

THE SENDER, directed by Roger Cristian; writ- ten by Thomas Baum; director of
photography, Roger Pratt; edited by Alan Strachan; music by Trevor Jones;
produced by Edward S. Feld- man; released by Paramount Pictures. At Loews State
2, Broadway and West 45th Street; Orpheum, 86th Street and Third Avenue, and
other theaters. Running time: 92 minutes. This film is rated R.

Gail Farmer . . . . . Kathryn Harrold
Sender . . . . . Zeljko Ivanek
Jerolyn . . . . . Shirley Knight
Dr. Denman . . . . . Paul Freeman
Messiah . . . . . Sean Hewitt
Dr. Hirsch . . . . . Harry Ditson
Dr. Erskine . . . . . Olivier Pierre
Young Girl . . . . . Tracy Harper
Vietnam Veteran . . . . . Al Matthews
Nurse Jo . . . . . Marsha Hunt
Sheriff Prouty . . . . . Angus MacInnes
Nurse Reimbold . . . . . Jana Shelden
Policemen . . . . . Manning Redwood and John Stephen Hill
Dr. Warren . . . . . Monica Buferd


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of Zeljko Ivanek

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 318 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 22, 1982 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'FIRST BLOOD'

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Weekend Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 771 words


VIETNAM is to ''First Blood'' as rape was to ''Death Wish'': it's the excuse for
a rampage of destruction. Sylvester Stallone plays John Rambo, a former Green
Beret who wanders into a tiny town in the Northwest, is mistreated by the
sheriff, and spends the rest of the movie getting even. But unlike Charles
Bronson in ''Death Wish,'' or the heroes of all the sleazy spinoffs that that
film inspired, Mr. Stallone's Rambo isn't a cold-blooded killer. He's almost a
Boy Scout, and a phenomenal Boy Scout at that. ''First Blood'' concentrates not
on revenge, not on unmotivated mayhem, but on survival in the wilderness.

''First Blood,'' which opens today at the Cinerama and other theaters,
introduces a new side of Mr. Stallone. Since the days of his debut he has lost
some of his comic humility, as the ''Rocky'' saga itself has laboriously pointed
out. But there's no reason why he can't evolve into a top-flight action star,
especially since he seems so much more prepossessing physically than he is
verbally. Mr. Stallone has almost no dialogue in ''First Blood''; a final
sobbing speech, in which he explains why he has lashed out against the small
town, has him sounding even more incoherent than the screenplay warrants. But as
a tough, powerful, silent presence, he is unexpectedly commanding.

As directed by Ted Kotcheff, the movie has a crude but undeniable momentum.
After learning that an Army buddy has died of cancer (having been exposed to
Agent Orange), Rambo wanders dazedly through a town called Hope. The sheriff
(Brian Dennehy) nabs him. ''It's a quiet little town,'' the sheriff says. ''You
might say it's boring. But that's the way we like it, and I get paid to keep it
that way.'' He jails Rambo for vagrancy. Rambo promptly busts out, makes a
motorcycle getaway, and hides out in the woods, where the sheriff's men attempt
a stakeout. The town of Hope is boring no longer.

''First Blood'' is full of grueling-looking stunts, involving a helicopter, a
motorcycle, explosions, numerous trucks and a lot of heavy weapons (this
arsenal, which had to be imported to British Columbia where the movie was shot,
was stolen midway through filming). It is also one of those rare movies to list
in its closing credits the craftsman responsible for an exotic knife, not to
mention a dog handler and a rat wrangler.

The emphasis is clearly on toughness and versatility, as a battered, bloody Mr.
Stallone demonstrates a wide range of scouting skills, from building traps to
exploring a pitch-black cave; he is also able to slaughter wild animals and give
himself stitches. He corners the sheriff's men a number of times, and invariably
he is good-hearted enough to let them go. The movie tries hard to make sure that
Rambo will be seen as a tormented, misunderstood, amazingly resourceful victim
of the Vietnam War, rather than as a sadist or a villain.

''First Blood'' is ragged and flashy; it ought to be a big success with
audiences that value action for its own sake. And it has some appeal for other
viewers, too. There is no complexity to Rambo or anyone else in the story; when
a Green Beret commander (a stern, steely Richard Crenna) arrives on the scene
announcing ''God didn't make Rambo, I did,'' he's speaking with as much
primitive insight as the screenplay (by Michael Kozoll, William Sackheim and Mr.
Stallone) can muster. Yet the story also has energy and ingenuity.

It would have taken a lot more finesse and plausibility to make ''First Blood''
a dramatic story for everyone; instead, this winds up a simple, brutal adventure
of distinct but not universal appeal. However, it's a film with a number of
strengths, not the least of them its fierce, agile, hollow-eyed hero. Janet
Maslin

I Shall Repay

FIRST BLOOD, directed by Ted Kotcheff; screenplay by Michael Kozoll, William
Sackheim and Sylvester Stallone, based on a novel by David Morrell; director of
photography, Andrew Laszlo; produced by Buzz Feitshans; released by the Orion
Pictures Corporation. At the Cinerama, Broadway and West 47th Street; Orpheum,
86th Street and Third Avenue; Loews 83d Street, at Broadway; Greenwich, Seventh
Avenue and 12th Street, and other theaters. Running time: 97 minutes. This film
is rated R.

Rambo . . . . . Sylvester Stallone
Trautman . . . . . Richard Crenna
Teasle . . . . . Brian Dennehy
Mitch . . . . . David Caruso
Galt . . . . . Jack Starrett
Balford . . . . . Michel Talbott
Shingleton . . . . . David Crowley
Ward . . . . . Chris Mulkey
Preston . . . . . Don Mackay
Lester . . . . . Alf Humphreys
Orval . . . . . John McLiam
Kern . . . . . Bill McKinney
Pilot . . . . . Chuck Tamburro
Cathcart . . . . . Bruce Barbour

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 22, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FUNDAMENTALISTS FIGHT NEBRASKA OVER SCHOOL

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words

DATELINE: LOUISVILLE, Neb., Oct. 21


Rachael Robinson went to school today.  Clad in red, white and blue, she and 15
other children filed silently into the Faith Baptist Church, which houses their
school. At 8:30 sharp, they pledged allegiance to the American flag, then to the
Christian flag and then to the Bible.

The event was a temporary but significant victory for about 500 fundamentalist
Christians, led by representatives of Moral Majority, who descended on
Louisville this week to do battle with the State of Nebraska.

Their immediate goal, to reopen the Faith Christian School, was accomplished
Wednesday night when Judge Raymond Case of Cass County Court issued an order
permitting the school to reopen. The church had been padlocked and its pastor,
the Rev. Everett Sileven, jailed for defying a state law that requires schools
to use state-certified teachers.

Now the preachers and their supporters, savoring this first victory in a
five-year-old dispute, are pressing for a permanent suspension of the padlock
order and the release of Mr. Sileven, who is serving the second half of a
four-month sentence.

The confrontation here in this town of 1,000 residents has stirred bitter debate
in the state. It has split conservatives, who believe in obedience to the law,
from fundamentalists, who contend that Nebraska's law has put state
certification above their religion. It has earned Mr. Sileven and his supporters
the enmity of many in this community, who say the fundamentalists have
''disgraced'' the town and flouted the law.

In his ruling Wednesday, Judge Case said he was suspending his earlier order,
which closed the school and padlocked the church, because ''enforcement
personnel are insufficient in numbers to cope with the potential violence'' that
could have resulted from another effort to clear the church. On Monday night law
officers dragged 85 wailing, weeping, praying people from the church after they
refused to leave. The padlocking order had allowed the church to be reopened
temporarily for religious services.

Representatives of Moral Majority and the fundamentalists have been elated by
their initial victory.

Turns Into Victory Rally

A prayer meeting and pep rally at the church last night turned into a victory
celebration when the Rev. Greg Dixon of Indianapolis, who is national secretary
of Moral Majority, told 500 people jammed into the church that Judge Case had
suspended his order padlocking the church.

''It's good news, brothers, hallelujah!'' Mr. Dixon exclaimed, hoisting the
order above his head.  Those in the audience, mostly men sweating in three-piece
suits under hot television lights, leapt to their feet and roared ''amens'' of
approval. Cameras whirred as the preachers and supporters embraced and clapped
and cheered.

Earlier, the group heard a sermon by the Rev. Tim Lee of Oklahoma City. Mr. Lee,
a former marine who lost both legs while fighting in Vietnam, said the dispute
focused on whether Nebraska would be permitted to violate fundamental religious
freedoms and the constitutional guarantee of separation of church and state.

'Liberal Left-Wingers' Denounced

Wearing formal military attire, Mr. Lee wheeled his chair across the small
pulpit area and denounced, among others, Senator Edward M.  Kennedy, the black
activist Angela Davis, the actress Jane Fonda, ''baby-killers,'' ''queers'' and
other ''liberal left-wingers'' who he said were ''selling this country down the
drain.''

''I'm tired of that crowd running America,'' Mr. Lee declared, to a chorus of
''Preach it, brother!'' and ''Amen!'' ''I'd rather be dead than have Ted,'' Mr.
Lee screamed into a microphone. ''Mr. Kennedy killed that woman in his car. You
remember that. He is free tonight, but our preacher Mr. Sileven is sitting there
in his jail cell.''

''Murderers and rapists are walking the streets but our preacher is in jail,''
he concluded.  The fundamentalist mobilization here has been impressive by any
standard. Mr. Dixon said Moral Majority had spent more than $250,000 to help pay
court costs and to publicize the events in Nebraska.  Preachers from more than
15 states are now in Louisville, and more than 500 tickets were obtained by the
fundamentalists for President Reagan's rally today in Omaha.

Telephone Effort Mounted

The command center of this religious crusade is situated 10 miles down the road
from Louisville at the Marshall Drive Baptist Church.  There, preachers and
supporters have sat for hours at telephone banks rallying supporters accross the
country and keeping the press abreast of developments. Mr. Dixon says these
telephone efforts have resulted in more than 100,000 calls to the White House
this week.

''I'm hopeful that we'll receive some support from President Reagan,'' Mr. Dixon
said in an interview Wednesday.  ''This church, after all, is a Christian
embassy with diplomatic immunity,'' he said. ''Caesar has reneged on this
immunity. We must draw the line in Nebraska. We have made our stand here.''

Nebraska officials said more than 40 states had exempted church schools from
state-imposed education requirements. But Nebraska has required for many years
that teachers be accredited to insure educational quality.

High Court Refused Review

The church has contended that the school is part of its ministry and that the
state has no right to regulate it. But last year the United States Supreme Court
refused to review the church's appeal.

Today Judge Kate said the padlocking order could be reimposed on the church at
any time. The sheriff and local prosecutor privately expressed frustration at
the developments and the judge's new order.  Publicly they declined comment.

But residents of Louisville, who pronounce the ''s'' in their town's name, were
less restrained.  ''There's been trouble ever since that reverend came to our
community five years ago,'' Geraldine Peck, a longtime resident who works at the
local pharmacy, said, referring to Mr. Sileven.  ''Besides, most of the children
who attend that school don't even come from this town.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Nebraska (page A18) photo of people at prayer
meeting (page A18)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 22, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN ASSIGNS THE BLAME FOR RECOVERY DELAY TO FOES

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 804 words

DATELINE: OMAHA, Oct. 21


President Reagan, stepping up his appeals for patience in economically depressed
farm communities, charged today that ''voices of fear and doom'' in the
Democratic Party were threatening the chances of economic recovery.

''There is a psychological element to a recession,'' Mr. Reagan told 8,000
applauding listeners at a rally supporting the re-election of Gov. Charles
Thone. ''You have to ask of those critics in an election year: Do they really
want a recovery? Or would they be smiling broadly if things were getting worse
simply because it might seem politically advantageous to them?''

The audience shook the Omaha Civic Center with cheers and yells at Mr. Reagan's
attempt to throw the onus of the recession back onto the Democrats. Outside the
Civic Center, about 200 people protested Mr.  Reagan's economic policies and
called for a freeze on the buildup of nuclear weapons.

At one point in his talk the President mixed near-religious fervor with his
economic message in a state that his aides acknowledge is gripped with anxiety
because of plunging farm prices and income.

''There is a passage in the Psalms which says, 'Weeping may endure for a night,
but joy cometh in the morning,' '' Mr. Reagan said.  ''America has endured a
long terrible night of economic hardship. But now we are seeing the first
welcome bursts of sunshine, the dawning of a new day for our country.''

California Trip Called Off

Meanwhile, White House officials made a final decision not to have Mr. Reagan
travel to California next week, on the advice of strategists there that his
presence might hurt the chances of the Republican candidate for the Senate,
Mayor Pete Wilson of San Diego.

Instead, Mr. Reagan plans to finish his fall campaigning with a trip to North
Carolina Tuesday and travels later in the week to support Republican Senate
candidates in Montana, New Mexico and Nevada. White House aides also plan a
television speech by Mr. Reagan as the election approaches, most likely in a
five-minute commercial to be purchased by the Republican Party.

Here in Nebraska, Mr. Reagan was trying to transfer his personal popularity to
buttress Governor Thone, who is fighting a tough reelection campaign against Bob
Kerrey, a Vietnam War hero and businessman.

In common with many governors, Mr. Thone has had to seek tax increases this year
because the recession threw the state budget into deficit. Mr. Reagan praised
Mr. Thone as someone who ''stood by Nebraska through sun and storm.''

Interlocked Tax Rates

The President said Mr. Thone had been compelled to raise taxes because the state
income-tax rate was pegged to the national rate, which he and Congress reduced
last year. ''Those who said that he raised your taxes in doing that are lying in
their teeth,'' Mr.  Reagan declared.

His speech consisted chiefly of time-tested and frequently heard formulations
from other speeches, such as his television address last week. The audiences,
hearing them for the first time, roared its approval, however.

That was the reaction when Mr. Reagan declared: ''Our critics are saying our
economy is on its knees. Well, you know something, if the economy is back on its
knees, that's quite an improvement because two years ago it was flat on its
back.''

As he has many times, Mr. Reagan said his Administration had reduced the rate of
growth in Government spending, brought down inflation to about 5 percent,
brought interest rates down from 21 1/2 percent before he took office and
reduced taxes. He said unemployment was the last remaining obstacle.

As he had in central Illinois on Wednesday, Mr. Reagan appealed to the farm
community by trumpeting specific measures popular among farmers.

This morning, Mr. Reagan signed a bill that Congress had approved with
bipartisan support directing the Agriculture Department to dispose of stored
grain by converting it to fuel alcohol.

As he has in recent signing ceremonies for bipartisan bills, Mr.  Reagan thanked
only Republicans for their support. In a ''opportunity'' for television cameras
he indicated the measure had been a Republican bill.

Mr. Reagan also reminded listeners that he had lifted the partial grain embargo
imposed by former President Carter. And he repeated his assurances that the
United States would seek to sell the Soviet Union up to 23 million tons of grain
this year.

To counter charges of unfairness by Democrats, Mr. Reagan said the spending cuts
he supported removed from Government benefit rolls ''people who had no moral
right to be receiving benefits from the taxpayers.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 22, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
THE RESTLESS SPOTLIGHT

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: BRIDGETOWN, Barbados, Oct. 21


After a grand opening fanfare, little more has been heard about President
Reagan's Caribbean Basin Initiative. In the same way, the civil war in El
Salvador, the U.S.  quarrel with Nicaragua, the massacres in Guatemala have
faded from the news.

Each dominated the headlines not long ago. None is nearer to solution; some have
deteriorated further.  Despite its sense of global interests, the U.S. attention
span is both brief and narrow. That is partly a result of the television age. By
its nature, TV focuses mercilessly on one or two crises at a time, often
overdramatizing when there is pictorial action, finding it hard to follow
through and maintain a context.

It is as well that a decent interval of silence has been allowed to muffle the
provocative Administration statements early last year that the war in Salvador
was the test of Soviet-American relations, and that if support for the
guerrillas continued the U.S. would take its anger ''to the source'' in Cuba.

While they haven't been officially withdrawn, lack of repetition and a calmer
tone can be taken as a sign that the declarations no longer represent determined
policy. There have been other, ambiguous signs in occasional high-level meetings
with Cuban and Nicaraguan officials, although probes have produced neither
negotiations nor a clear U.S. position.

The new Secretary of State hasn't pronounced himself on these issues. Reporters
don't seem to have questions. If this means a reordering of priorities within
the Administration, putting East-West issues, the Middle East or
European-American relations ahead of the simmering Caribbean-Central American
problems, that is sound. If it means top policy makers and the public have lost
concern about the area, it is dangerous.

The brilliant Mexican writer Octavio Paz has said that ''North Ameri-cans are
always among us, even when they ignore us or turn their back on us. Their shadow
covers the whole hemisphere. It is the shadow of a giant.''

Robert A. Pastor, a National Security Council aide in the Carter Administration
who quoted these remarks of Mr. Paz, pointed out in The Atlantic Monthly that
practically all countries in the region blame the U.S. for their problems.

''Even those who cannot decide what political path to follow,'' he wrote,
''blame Washington for neglecting to send a clear signal. The psychology of
dependence is much more powerful than the reality.''

The reality is pressing enough. Distress on America's doorstep is not the sort
that will benefit from benign neglect and the erosion of time. Nor is it as
though the violence has abated. TV teams have a harder time getting footage of
mass murder in Guatemala than in Beirut, for example, but if the number of
victims is the measure of news, Guatemala is getting far from its share of the
spotlight.

Mr. Pastor argues that a serious domestic political conflict may be building
over Salvador. That would be the more likely if Congressional elections show
President Reagan is losing his ballotbox magic. The law requires the
Administration to certify that Salvador has made progress in curtailing
right-wing violence each time new aid appropriations are made. But the gap
between these assurances and the facts is more and more blatant. Salvadoran
extremists on right and left are gaining over hapless moderates who must remain
the only hope for a settlement.

At some point, Congress will refuse to go on pretending to be hoodwinked, as
with Vietnam and Cambodia. Then, without real progress toward a political
solution, time will run out on the Administration's capacity for diplomatic
maneuver.

Following the lurching spotlight, the public is likely to be surprised. But the
elements have been growing all along.  In such a passionately quarrelsome world,
it isn't easy to keep watching the margins where disasters are accumulating. The
news media, which tend to run in packs, can be held to account, though
difficulties of access, expense and presumed lack of public interest are at
least partly reasonable excuses for lack of persistence.

A few years ago a colleague asked, ''What ever happened to that war in
Eritrea?'' The answer was that the war never went away, but the reporters did.

News reports have a responsibility to sustain attention on problem areas that
threaten to nourish future crises. For example, few were made aware of the awful
deterioration of Lebanon between the outbreak of civil war in 1975 and the
Israeli invasion this summer.

The problem of perception and reality isn't new. One of the oldest philosophical
questions is whether a tree falling in the forest with no one to hear makes a
sound, or whether sound is only what registers on an ear. For modern America,
the reply has to be that forgotten issues haven't disappeared and must be
brought to mind even when the spotlight moves. What we don't know can still
hurt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 22, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BUSH, AT LEHRMAN LUNCH, ASSAILS CRITICS OF REAGAN

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 560 words


In an attack on what he called a national Democratic campaign of ''negativism,''
Vice President Bush said yesterday that those who opposed the Reagan
Administration were ''playing to the basest, scariest fears you can work up''
but offering no new approaches.

Speaking at a fund-raising luncheon for New York's Republican candidate for
Governor, Lewis E. Lehrman, Mr. Bush said this approach would not work. He said
voters would realize the successes of President Reagan's programs in cutting
taxes, bringing down interest rates and slowing inflation, and would reject past
approaches advocated by Democrats.

''They're doing it all over the country,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to the
Democratic candidates he had come across in campaign trips to 19 states. ''That
negativism is not going to win. They have no new answers.''

Suggestion Called Demagogic

Mr. Bush acknowledged that the current 10 percent unemployment rate was
unacceptable, but he termed ''demagogic'' the suggestion by Democrats that
President Reagan does not care deeply about the unemployed.

''They have but one politics and that is to play to the basest, scariest fears
you can work up,'' the Vice President told the 750 guests in the Grand Ballroom
of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.

He said Lieut. Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, the Democratic candidate for Governor, was
guilty of such negative campaigning. Noting that Mr.  Cuomo appeared to have a
two-point economic program, Mr. Bush said that point one was to ''tear down
Reagan'' and point two was to ''tear down Lehrman and his new ideas.''

''We need a governor who shares our President's vision that we can do anything
we set our sights on,'' said the Vice President, who praised Mr. Lehrman as such
a man.

Last night, Mr. Bush was the featured speaker at the 37th annual Alfred E. Smith
memorial dinner, a nonpartisan effort to raise funds for the 17 hospitals of the
Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York.  He was on the dais at the Waldorf with
Terence Cardinal Cooke, both gubernatorial candidates and a host of other
Republican and Democratic officeholders and candidates.

'A New Mood of Unity'

Mr. Bush told the audience that in his recent campaign travels he had detected
''a great underlying feeling of optimism'' and ''a new mood of unity'' that was
not there in the days of Watergate and the Vietnam War.

The earlier luncheon raised $1.01 million for Mr. Lehrman, who, campaign aides
said, expects to file a report today with the State Board of Elections detailing
the $10 million in campaign funds raised and spent so far. Of that, $7 million
was Mr. Lehrman's own money, said John Buckley, his campaign press spokesman.

Just as Mr. Bush sought to blunt Democratic attacks nationally, his younger
brother, Jonathan, an organizer of the luncheon, tried to blunt Cuomo campaign
charges that Mr. Lehrman was attempting to buy the race for Governor with heavy
use of expensive television advertising.

He told the guests their contributions would ''pay for Mr.  Lehrman's television
commercials,'' and lapsed into a dramatic pause. Then, in almost a stage whisper
that drew loud laughter, he added, ''The ones at 10 and 10:30 tonight.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Vice President Bush and Lewis Lehrman

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

20 YEARS AFTER MISSILE CRISIS, RIDDLES REMAIN

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1309 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


Twenty years ago today, President John F.  Kennedy publicly demanded that the
Soviet Union remove its missiles from Cuba or else. And for 13 days, until
agreement on their removal was reached, he thought that the chances of nuclear
war were 1 in 3 or even.

''Above all, the Cuban missile crisis is a vivid reminder that, unless the
superpowers act very carefully, they can set off a chain reaction leading to
nuclear war,'' Graham T. Allison, dean of the John F. Kennedy School of
Government at Harvard, remarked recently.

For 20 years, the middle course charted by Mr. Kennedy to bring about the
withdrawal of the missiles - neither direct military attack nor words alone -
has served as a model to his successors on how to handle crises. At the time,
this middle way was generally judged a brilliant success.

But the weight of historical opinion in books and articles since then has been
less kind. Historians and critics of the left have seen Mr. Kennedy's actions as
dangerously irresponsible, risking far too much to gain too little and adding to
foolish myths about toughness being the only way to deal with Soviet leaders.
Critics on the right have found Mr. Kennedy's actions inexcusably weak, a course
that caused the withdrawal of the missiles but left Fidel Castro firmly
entrenched as Cuba's leader, a springboard to complacency about the growing
Soviet threat.

The Mysteries Remain

Twenty years later, there is little new evidence to clear up the central
mysteries of the crisis:

- Why did the Soviet Union take the risk of putting the missiles into Cuba in
the first place?

- What caused Moscow to back down - American nuclear superiority, local
conventional military superiority, or an American compromise?

- What exactly did Washington and Moscow commit themselves to do and not to do
in ending the crisis?  The main lesson that senior Administration officials and
American diplomats spoke of over the years was the virtue of moderation. Do not
fire on Soviet forces but do not accept Soviet moves to alter the status quo as
an accomplished fact. Be firm and clear, but be sure to leave a face-saving way
out for Moscow.

To a generation of policy makers weaned on the Cuban missile crisis, the key to
success was to walk a path between all-out confrontation and acquiescence.

Middle Way Is Followed

This was essentially the way President Johnson steered the United States through
the Vietnam War - avoiding full military action that might compel the Soviet
Union and China to enter the war and refusing to accept a Communist takeover of
South Vietnam. The same general pattern was followed by Presidents Nixon and
Carter in dealing with new Soviet moves in Cuba in 1969 and 1978.

Even as policy makers were settling into this pattern, outside analysts and
historians began to rake over the experience to see ''what really happened.''
They reinterpreted the event to support particular views about the virtues of
arms control, or the untrustworthiness of the Russians, or the need for nuclear
parity, or the necessity for restoring nuclear superiority.

The question was asked again: Why did Nikita S. Khrushchev do it?  The historian
Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., a Kennedy aide, described the prevailing view within
the Administration: ''With one roll of the nuclear dice, Khrushchev might
redress the strategic imbalance, humiliate the Americans, rescue the Cubans,
silence the Stalinists and the generals, confound the Chinese and acquire a
potent bargaining counter when he chose to replay Berlin. The risks seemed
medium; the rewards colossal.''

In the memoirs attributed to Mr. Khrushchev, the Soviet leader said his move was
to protect Cuba and equalize nuclear abilities. But what risks did he really
believe he was running, and was his subsequent downfall caused at least in part
by his ''adventurism'' in Cuba? And was Fidel Castro a mere pawn or something
much more in this game?  There is no hard evidence on any of these matters.

Why Did He Back Down?

The even more provocative and still unanswered question is why did Mr.
Khrushchev back down? At the time of the crisis, the Kennedy Administration line
was that Moscow virtually had no choice, given American conventional military
superiority around Cuba and overall American nuclear superiority. Mr. Kennedy
had gone to the brink and the Russians had blinked, or so it was said then.

But in a book published after his assassination, Robert Kennedy revealed another
piece of the puzzle, previously suspected. He wrote that the Soviet Union had
been informed it was the President's intention to remove American missiles from
Turkey, but not as a trade for the removal of the missiles from Cuba. In a
recent article, a bevy of senior Kennedy aides confirmed this, saying it would
have been misunderstood and damaging to American security to have made this
public at the time. Thus, in one way or another, Moscow could also claim that it
emerged with gains.

In the article, the aides went still further: ''The Cuban missile crisis
illustrates not the significance but insignificance of nuclear superiority in
the face of survivable thermonuclear retalitory forces. It also shows the
crucial role of rapidly available conventional strength.'' In other words, as
some Administration officials argued at the time, a few nuclear weapons are
enough to deter; actual equality or even superiority counted for little.

But a scholar of the crisis, Peter W. Rodman of the Georgetown Center for
Stratetgic and International Studies, found this unconvincing. ''At the time,''
he said, ''the Administration was concerned that Khrushchev would retaliate in
Berlin, where the Soviet Union had conventional superiority. The fact that he
didn't attack Berlin must at least in good part be attributable to American
nuclear superiority.''

Settlement Terms in Doubt

As to the terms of the settlement, even these remain open to some doubt. The
President pledged not to invade Cuba. But was this pledge binding in view of the
fact that Mr. Castro did not allow inspectors on Cuban soil to verify the
removal of the missiles, as agreed by Washngton and Moscow? Susbsequent policy
makers have also noted that it is not unqualified, in the sense that it depends
on Cuban behavior as well.

What of the Soviet pledge not to place weapons with offensive abilities on Cuban
soil? The pledge, apparently, did not prevent Moscow from testing whether
Washington would allow Soviet nuclear submarines from docking in Cuba in 1969.
Nor did it stop the Russians from upgrading Cuban air power in 1978 by providing
MIG-23's.

Writing in the autumn issue of Wilson Quarterly, the historian Robert A. Pollard
said: ''Over the long term, no one 'won' very much from the 1962 missile crisis.
Contemporary observers perhaps exaggerated how close the superpowers came to a
holocaust. But the experience was sufficiently sobering so that Soviet and
American leaders have never since engaged in anything akin to nuclear
brinkmanship.''

There followed the establishment of the ''hot line'' to improve communications
in a crisis, the treaty banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere and the opening
of discussions on the control of nuclear arms. This was attended by an
acceleration of the arms race, particularly by the Soviet Union, whose leaders
vowed ''never again.''

Thus the widely held view that the legacy of the Cuban missile crisis seems to
be a somber one: a spark of hope and a lot more arms.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Kennedy and advisers discussing the
Cuban missile crisis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN APPROVES AMERASIAN ACCESS

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 352 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


President Reagan today signed legislation to make it easier for thousands of
Asian-born children of American servicemen to enter the United States, and he
bid them all ''Welcome home.''

In a ceremony in the Roosevelt Room of the White House, Mr. Reagan called the
legislation ''a major step of facing up to the moral responsibility which we
can't ignore.'' He spoke before the sponsors of the bill and a group of children
representing the Amerasians.

The President, acknowledging that many children left behind when the fathers
returned to the United States were ''ostracized,'' said, ''Instead of saying
welcome to these children, we should say, 'Welcome home.' ''

Congressional backers of the measure, which passed both houses just hours before
adjournment earlier this month, said the law was the first official United
States acknowledgment of children fathered by American servicemen since 1950 and
abandoned in Korea, Vietnam, Laos, Thailand and Cambodia.

More than 4,000 children of American servicemen were stranded in Vietnam alone
after the American withdrawal from Indochina in 1975.  Vietnam recently
permitted 36 of them to emigrate to the United States. Fifty-five more await
permission, and the others have not been documented yet as the children of
Americans.

Suffering Discrimination

Because of their mixed parentage, many of the Amerasian children have suffered
extreme discrimination in the lands of their birth.  They have encountered great
difficulty in trying to immigrate to the United States.

Under previous immigration laws, Amerasian children were allowed to apply for
entry only under the lowest priority of seven immigration categories. In most
cases, consideration of such applications has taken 10 years or longer.

The bill signed by the President provides for the children to immigrate under
the first and fourth categories, giving them the same priority for entry into
the United States as all other sons and daughters of American citizens.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Preisdent Reagan hugging Julie Tripp

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 23, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

COUPLE FIGHTS FOR THEIR VIETNAMESE CHILD

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 22


Lan Grady has not seen her 11-year-old son, Le Minh Tuan, since she left Vietnam
eight years ago, but she has had a letter from him.

''He say: 'I hear from my grandfather and grandmother that you are my mother and
you live in United States. I want to go live with you,' '' Mrs. Grady, a
Vietnamese, said. ''It almost break my heart.''

Since the first group of children born to Asian mothers and American servicemen
arrived in this country earlier this month, Mrs.  Grady and her husband Gary
have grown increasingly impatient about bringing Tuan to the United States.
Although the Gradys now have American entry papers and a copy of a Vietnamese
exit visa issued to the boy, bureaucratic procedures have thwarted their efforts
to speed his departure. The Vietnamese visa expires Tuesday.

Part of the problem is that Tuan's father, who was an Army medic stationed at a
Saigon field hospital, did not sign his birth certificate, so the boy is a
Vietnamese citizen who cannot emigrate as easily as Amerasian children who are
documented United States citizens.

Trying to Find Father

The Gradys, who were married in 1974 when the child was almost 3 years old, have
not been able to find Tuan's father.  ''The only thing I'd ask of the man is for
him to put his name on the birth certificate to get him out,'' Mr. Grady said.
''We all make mistakes.''

The Gradys have been trying to get Tuan to the United States for years.  ''This
has been a nightmare, trying to do this from 10,000 miles away,'' said Mr.
Grady, a Coast Guard yeoman first class.  Telegrams from the boy's Vietnamese
grandparents sometimes arrive garbled, and Mr. Grady said the agency at the
United States Embassy in Bangkok that handles departures of refugees from
Vietnam had taken up to a year to answer his letters.

State Dept. into Case

In a recent television appearance with Mr. Grady, H. Eugene Douglas, the
American coordinator for refugee affairs, said his office at the State
Department would look into the case. Laura Genero, his assistant, said in a
telephone interview Thursday that she had received a cable from the embassy
office, the Orderly Departures Program, saying Tuan's name was No. 1,169 on the
''F'' list, the fifth group to be given predeparture interviews by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

''They might not reach Tuan's case for another four to six weeks,'' she said.
She said that the agency had requested that the boy be included in the first
group that left Vietnam Sept. 30, then in a group that left Oct. 7.

''We don't know if they have been unable to find the boy, or whether they were
unable to break the boy's case out of the bureaucratic processing mill,'' Miss
Genero said.

''I think now he'll be here in a couple of months, but then we thought that a
couple of months ago,'' Mr. Grady said.  Mr. Grady met his wife when he was
assigned to clerical duties in Saigon from Jan. 1972 to Jan. 1973. After their
marriage, they said, they intended to bring the boy back, but because of the
paper work involved, Mr. Grady ran out of both time and money to pay the
Vietnamese lawyers. They left Tuan with Mrs. Grady's parents, whom they did not
hear from for three years.
When they did, Mr. Grady began appealing to numerous agencies for help. Michael
S. Nebeker, an official of the Pearl S. Buck Foundation, which has been helping
the Gradys, said he thought the Vietnamese wanted to solve the Amerasian problem
quickly, and he expects many more children to leave soon. ''They need to get on
with rebuilding their country, and this issue is standing in the way,'' he said
in a telephone interview from Pennsylvania.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DROP IN U.S. ARMS SPURS DEBATE ON MILITARY POLICY

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 3057 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23


In the last 30 years the United States has spent $2,300 billion on the military,
but the numbers of planes, ships, tanks, guns and most other nonnuclear weapons
in the nation's arsenal have declined.

There is disagreement about how serious the consequences of the decline may be.
One critic of past military policies calls the decrease in weapons a form of
''unilateral disarmament.'' Many senior officers who made the decisions to buy
fewer but more complex weapons insist that no other course was justified.

Focus on Untested Technology

The Reagan Administration plans to spend $1,500 billion more in the next five
years on the Defense Department even though the issue is politically sensitive
because of the economy.

But it envisions only relatively modest increases in the number of weapons.
Some critics doubt that even those goals will be achieved because weapon costs
have historically tended to outpace increases in military spending.

This 30-year trend of rising budgets and declining inventories of weapons,
however, is more than just a result of inflation, the costs of developing
nuclear weapons, and military operations in space. It also reflects a basic
doctrine of emphasizing the procurement of the planes, ships, tanks and other
military equipment that embody the highest available technology, which in many
cases is unproved and untested. That policy rapidly pushes up costs.

The continuing trend underlines an emerging debate over whether the military
should emphasize quantity or quality as it sets goals for buying weapons.

Pentagon critics contend that the military is increasingly confronted with a
numbers problem in which the armed forces would enter battle with
technologically sophisticated weapons but probably find them seriously
outnumbered by the opposing forces. For example, the United States is producing
only 10 percent of the number of tanks and airplanes it produced in the early
1950's.

The prevailing argument in the Pentagon is that the increasing complexity of
modern warfare demands the most sophisticated weapons and that, to a large
extent, technological superiority can offset an enemy's numerical superiority.

The disagreement may become an important factor in the debate over the
Administration's military budget, which, while setting a goal of a higher number
of weapons, continues to emphasize the purchase of technologically advanced
arms.

Because of worries about the national economy and discord over social equity in
Federal budget cutting, there may be more spirited Congressional debate about
overall military spending when the next Defense Department budget, for the
fiscal year 1984, is submitted in February. While some military specialists
would like to see the debate more precisely focused on how money is spent, even
a generalized argument about gross spending totals might affect the numbers
problem.

One of the critics of the present Pentagon policy, Senator Gary Hart, Democrat
of Colorado, contends that the emphasis on marginally useful but very costly
technology means that "ever lower numbers must be accepted."

"We have no quantity problem that is not one of our own making," said Pierre
Sprey, a former Pentagon official and military analyst who, like Senator Hart,
is prominent in the so-called military reform movement, a loose coalition that
advocates larger numbers of simpler weapons.

Lieut. Gen. John T. Chain Jr., the Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for plans and
operations, calls members of the reform group "fuzzy heads" and accuses them of
"doing a disservice to the country" and attempting to foist "plain vanilla
airplanes" onto the Air Force.

Declines in Equipment Persist

The Administration seems to be making the same gamble that admirals and generals
have consistently made in past decades: that the problem of declining military
inventories can be solved by an optimistic expectation of large and steady
increases in military budgets. That gamble has thus far never been won. Real, or
noninflated, increases in military spending have not been sustained for more
than three years at a time in the last 30 years.

Moreover, one of the most intriguing elements of the problem is evidence that
even increased Defense Department budgets do not seem to halt the steady decline
in available combat equipment and combat readiness.

Declining numbers of weapons, many analyst believe, might be of special
importance in the event of a large, conventional war in central Europe against
the numerous forces of the Warsaw Pact.

Concern about declining numbers centers more on conventional, "general purpose"
forces than on the nuclear forces. Although there are some quantity problems
associated with nuclear strategic systems, they are far different from thsoe
associated with conventional weapons, and the ability to suvive an enemy attack
is a greater concern that inventory totals. Moreover, spending on strategic
weapons is still less than 20 percent of the Pentagon budget.

The technological complexity of weapons has increased greatly over 30 years, and
to some extent that explains cost increases and the decline in overall numbers
of weapons. Critics argue, however, that technological complexity is not wholly
synonymous with military capability and deadliness. There is also disagreement
about the military prudence of swapping numbers for complexity.

Even the strongest advocates of high technology do not argue that numbers are
unimportant in the military environment of the 1980's.

The degree to which the size of the military arsenal has declined and its
relationship with the budget can be seen in an analysis of budget and other
Pentagon data, supplemented by outside studies and interviews with experts.

Surprisingly Stable Pattern

While military spending has fluctuated considerably from year to year, the
long-term pattern in "constant" dollars, adjusted for inflation, has been
surprisingly stable.

According to figures compiled by the Office of Management and Budget, $1,840
billion was spent on the military in the fiscal years 1962 through 1982, which
ended Sept. 30. This, the agency calculated, would total $1,660 billion in
constant 1976 dollars.

The average annual expenditure over those two decades was $78.95 billion in 1976
dollars. In the peak year of the Vietnam buildup, 1969, the constant dollar
figure for spending was $107.7 billion. In six years of post-Vietnam
anti-military backlash in Congress, the annual average hovered just below $70
billion. But from the $77.2 billion level of 1962 to the $76.6 billion level of
1981, the annual rates were far more constant than is generally realized.

But deliveries of actual weapons and other military supplies and funds available
for training, operation and maintenance, have tended to decline. In some cases
the decline was significant, in others it was drastic. In only a few categories
was it minor.

In the early 1950's the United States could produce about 6,000 tanks and 6,000
planes a year. By this decade the figures for both categories were closer to
600. the Navy said this year that it was losing fighter and attack aircraft to
age and attrition faster than it was taking delivery of new ones.

The Navy, which had 888 active-duty ships in 1965, now has 490.  Activeduty Air
force aircraft totaled 12,689 in the fiscal year 1964, but 7,194 this year.

The Army now has an inventory of 585 M-1 tanks and about 7,300 M-60 tanks. By
contrast, the Soviet Union increased its total tank inventory by 9,000 in the
last decade to more than 47,000, though many are older models. Experts agree
that the decline in numbers of cargo aircraft and amphibious ships in the last
10 years has seriously degraded the ability of the United States to move
military units to trouble spots.

For the fiscal year 1983, Congress has authorized the Air Force, Navy and Marine
Corps to acquire a total of 296 fighter and attack aircraft. The Pentagon
estimates that Soviet fighter production will total 1,300 this year. Soviet
tactical aviation consists of close to 4,000 fighters and attack aircraft
produced since 1972. According to the Joint Chiefs to Staff, the current
inventory of active and reserve Air Force fighters and attack aircraft is 2,148,
including about 800 aging F-4's that began coming into service in 1963.

General inflation does not come close to explaining the reductions fully.
Military costs have risen much faster than inflation. To cite some of the most
dramatic cases, the cost of avionics, or electronic instrumentation, on fighter
aircraft has increased 40 to 50 times in 30 years, the cost of jet engines 15 to
20 times. Cost increases in commercial jet aircraft, on the other hand, have
been far less dramatic.

Some conservative spokesmen have tended to blame Congressional and White House
budget cuts, particularly in the post-Veitnam era, for the decline in military
inventories. Less money does mean fewer weapons, but there seems to be little
congruence between budget levels and annual delivery of weapons to the four
armed services.  Deliveries have declined steeply while, as the budget office
figures show, spending has been relatively stable.

A report by 24 senior National Guard officers, made public this year, said that
in constant 1982 dollars the Air Force was able to procure 1,415 aircraft in
1955 by obligating $6.9 billion, but that $9.4 billion in constant dollars
procured only 407 aircraft in 1980.

The critics' conclusions seem to be buttressed by the case of tactical air
power, which enjoyed a favored status in the 1970's.  Spending in this category
went up by an annual average of 10.4 percent with inflation discounted. But the
total number of fighters and attack aircraft, including many that are getting
too old, slightly declined, as did the annual procurement rate.

Along with the reduction in numbers of weapons has come a downward trend in
training, operational readiness of equipment and other measurements of military
readiness.

Annual flying by regular Air Force pilots, according to the 1982 Almanac issue
of Air Force Magazine, dropped from 6,028 hours in 1964 to a low of 2,596 hours
in 1980 and is estimated at 2,800 hours in 1982. According to a different study,
this amounted to 16 hours a month for each pilot in 1979. In the Israeli Air
Force, in contrast, pilots fly 25 to 30 hours a month.

Munitions Used Less in Training

As the complexity and costs of missiles and other sophisticated munitions have
gone up, experts say, they are fired less and less often in training.

The high unit cost of weapons, which reduces the number purchased, has also
tended to divert funds from the operations and maintenance budget.

Franklin C. Spinney, an official in the plans, analysis and evaluation division
of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, wrote a long analysis of weapons
acquisition policies in 1980, called ''Defense Facts of Life,'' that has been
much admired in the military reform movement.

His paper suggested that even ''the price of low readiness'' has been sharply
increased by high-cost, high-technology weapons. An F-15 fighter, for instance,
costs about twice as much an hour to fly as an older F-4. One possible solution
to the numbers problem is to attempt to overwhelm it with higher spending. There
is evidence that such heavy spending is one method that the Administration
intends to employ.

Each quarter, the Pentagon is required to submit a Selected Acquisition Report
giving revised estimates of the current and lifetime costs of most expensive
weapons systems.

In May the Congressional Budget Office did a detailed analysis of the report
from last December because it reflected the advanced fiveyear planning of
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and his staff. The report estimated that
the total cost of 47 major weapon systems, from development through
obsolescence, would be $454.8 billion.

The office noted that this was ''the largest quarterly increase in total S.A.R
costs ever reported - $150.1 billion in current dollars, a 50 percent increase
over the preceding quarter.''

About $99 billion of the increase was attributed to ''net quantity increases''
in planned purchases. Of that amount, $66.2 billion was earmarked for increasing
purchases of just three models of fighter aircraft: the Navy F-14 and the Air
Force F-15 and F-16. Purchases of those models were to be increased by 1,567
aircraft, which will come to about $42 million a plane in current dollars.

This plan, however, will not increase fighter inventories by 1,500 aircraft
because these purchases will be made over the entire production cycle of the
aircraft and will be offset by the retirement of older planes through
obsolescence and attrition. The plan also rests on an assumption that Congress
will vote such large increases.

Finally, the history of the Selected Acquisition Reports indicates that the cost
estimates will probably be revised upward every year.  In his 1982 annual report
to Congress, Mr. Weinberger said, ''To improve combat readiness over the longer
term, we must direct our technology toward obtaining weapon systems that can be
procured in greater numbers.'' This was a reference to an alternative solution,
to buy more affordable weapons relying on state-of-the-art technology rather
than on revolutionary technology.

But General Chain, in an interview, reflected the prevailing military attitude,
which makes such goals difficult to achieve.  Although he is a leading spokesman
for the high-technology, ''quality'' approach, he does not deny that a numbers
problem exists.

''The Soviets are producing, plus or minus, 1,300 fighters a year,'' he said.
''Next year we have in our budget 180 fighters'' for the Air Force.

''If we get into real numbers of what I need to go get the Soviets, it is a lot
more,'' he said.

Emphasizing Quality First

Nonetheless, he argued: ''It doesn't do just because the Soviets have 100
airplanes for me to build 100 inferior airplanes. I can't just fix the quantity
problem without matching it with quality. If I have a choice between the two, I
have got to err on the side of quality -but not take it to extremes.''

Critics of General Chain's view assert that he is going to extremes.  In a
report earlier this year entitled ''Vista 1999,'' a committee of Army and Air
National Guard officers, most of them generals, recommended a number of policies
for the rest of the century for both their reserve units and the armed forces as
whole. The report angered and stunned many regular officers and Pentagon
officials because of the degree to which the committee accepted major arguments
of the ''military reformers'' and others who hold that the armed forces need
more weapons that are less sophisticated.

At one point, the report said that ''a major factor compounding'' the military's
problems was ''the current trend of purchasing highcost, high-technology systems
that have uncertain reliability and significant difficulties of maintenance.''
At another point it called for industrial competition to develop more
''austere,'' simple and less expensive tactical aircraft.

Of the numerical inferiority problem, the report said: ''Despite claims to the
contrary, this problem cannot be answered by 'force multipliers' which rely
heavily on high-technology systems of questionable reliability. A more realistic
answer to the number of Soviet fighters likely to be found in the battle area is
more friendly fighters.''

Almost all parties to the debate agree that much of the present high cost of
fighter aircraft grows out of attempts to achieve the ability to shoot down
enemy planes with radar-guided missiles at many miles beyond visual range.

There are doubts that long-range missiles, in contrast to shortrange,
heat-seeking missiles such as the AIM 9-L Sidewinder, will really work in
combat.

Change in Combat Rules Doubted

There are also doubts that the ''rules of engagement'' permitted in wartime will
permit the use of beyond-visual-range weapons because of the danger of shooting
down friendly planes. Until now almost all air combat has required visual
identification.

Asked if he thought beyond-visual-range rules would ever be permitted, General
Chain said, ''Oh, absolutely.'' The Vista report, however, said, ''Rules of
engagement of previous wars haven't allowed these shots, and it seems unlikely
that that they will ever be permitted other than on a case-by-case basis.''

Almost nobody disagrees that aircraft such as the F-15 and F-14 and the new Army
tank, the M-1, have many excellent military characteristics. However, the
''simplicity'' school tends to argue that it is the more simple, proved parts of
the systems that have made them highly effective, not the emerging technology
that adds so much to costs and reduces numbers.

General Chain argued that procuring ''cheap, throwaway fighters'' would lead to
defeat.  But the reform spokesmen say that while the most advanced fighters such
as the F-15 and F-14 are clearly superior in one-on-one contests, military
exercises show that superiority is not demonstrable in the ''many-on-many
melee'' combat that would probably ensue in a war with the numerous Soviet
forces.

The Vista report said there was mounting evidence that ''projected combat
exchange rates'' for high-cost fighters ''bear no resemblance to realilty.''

''One versus four or one versus six isn't a good place to be no matter how great
a fighter you happen to be flying.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph of military spending (Page 56) photos of tanks and
jets (Page 56)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CYNTHIA PROPPER SETON, NOVELIST AND ESSAYIST

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 450 words


Cynthia Propper Seton, a novelist and essayist, died yesterday of acute leukemia
in Northampton, Mass. She was 56 years old and lived in Northampton.

Reflecting on marriage in her second book, ''A Special and Curious Blessing,''
Mrs. Seton wrote that ''it was good to be married because it protected me from
the ignorance in which I had been reared - an ignorance about the possibilities
of human relationships.''

It was a sense of these possibilities that infused Mrs. Seton's writing. Like
Jane Austen, to whom she was often compared, she wrote comedies of manners whose
light tone hid a more serious intent.

Critics praised her precise, elegant prose, which she said was modeled on
Gibbon, George Eliot and Proust. She taught herself French so she could read
Proust in the original.

Many of her novels concerned affluent, middle-aged women who found themselves
dissatisfied with the life they had built. But she eschewed feminist rhetoric,
substituting a graceful and ironic style laced with compassion for women
struggling to find expression and for the men in their lives.

Mrs. Seton once told an interviewer: ''I want to write about husbands who may be
obtuse, but who are not brutes, and remind their wives that there is a great
deal to hang in there for. And I want to take the middle-aged woman and evoke
her refusal to be demeaned, to honor it with a serious acknowledgement.''

Mrs. Seton was born Oct. 11, 1926, in New York City. She graduated from the
Fieldston School and received her B.A. degree from Smith College in 1948.

For 12 years, Mrs. Seton wrote a regular column for The Berkshire Eagle of
Pittsfield, Mass. Her first book was a collection of the columns and was
followed by two volumes of essays discussing the problems of family life and
marriage against the backdrop of the Vietnam War.

In 1971, she turned to fiction with the publication of ''The Sea Change of
Angela Lewes.'' Her third novel, ''A Fine Romance,'' was nominated for the
National Book Award in 1976. Her last novel, ''A Private Life,'' was published
in April.

Mrs. Seton was in demand as a lecturer on literary and feminist issues. She
taught at the Indiana Writers Conference and contributed book reviews to several
publications.

She is survived by her husband, Dr. Paul Seton of Northampton.; her mother,
Charlotte Propper, also of Northampton; a son, Anthony, of San Francisco; and
four daughters, Julia, of London; Dr. Margarret Seton-Jacobson of Osceola, Ark.,
and Jennifer and Nora, both of Cambridge, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS;
CBS Is Sorry

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 6; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 129 words


Politicians have a tough time proving libel, not necessarily because so much of
what is said about them is true, but because the law makes it tougher for
''public figures'' to collect. It was a bit surprising, then, when CBS settled
out of court last week with Philadelphia Mayor William J. Green. Mr. Green
charged that CBS libeled him in March when it reported that he was under Federal
investigation. The settlement reportedly fell between a $250,000 CBS offer and a
$400,000 demand by Mr. Green. In any case, it was a pittance next to the $120
million Gen. William C. Westmoreland is asking in his claim that CBS libeled him
in saying he lied about enemy troop strength in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of William Green

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR WHOM ALFRED NOBEL CREATED A PEDESTAL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 273 words


To the Editor:

While it's true that the Nobel Peace Prize is held by such hawks as Begin and
Kissinger, that the Nobel Foundation overlooks many scientific contributions and
that the literature prize is capricious, the idea expressed in your Oct. 15
editorial ''A Nobel Address,'' namely that the prize should be turned down, or
that individual merit oughtn't be celebrated, is silly.

Great persons enjoy attention and recognition, and they deserve financial
windfalls, just like commercial persons (whom your newspaper spares no space
promoting and crediting).

You cite Auden as one deserving belleletrist overlooked for the prize, in favor
of Scandinavian and other writers of less historic importance. I knew Auden well
when he was eligible. He wanted the prize, and said so. He had ''spies'' in
Stockholm who kept him informed on his status there. He told me he didn't get it
because he didn't speak out against American policies in Vietnam while he was an
American citizen. And then, he didn't live to be 80 - the real reason he didn't
get it.

I want one, too. Over the years, in resisting commercial temptations and
pursuing literary and scientific goals, the very notion of the recognition
conferred by the prize has been a reinforcement to my dedication.

Meanwhile, friends of mine have gone on to early commercial success. I'm a
competitive human being, and think this business of poets receiving their
recognition after death is a dirty deal.  Consider the Nobel an
affirmative-action program for truth-and-beauty types, and stop being so
sanctimonious.
MICHAEL NEWMAN, New York, Oct. 15, 1982.

The writer is a poet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUSAN SONTAG: PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE

BYLINE: By Charles Ruas; Charles Ruas is writing a book on trends in
contemporary American fiction.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2876 words


''ASUSAN SONTAG READER,'' composed of selections Miss Sontag made from the two
decades of her work, has just been published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux. I
recently spoke with her about the ''Reader,'' her work in general and the
controversial speech she made last February in New York. At a Town Hall rally in
support of Poland's Solidarity movement, Miss Sontag criticized the American
left's attitude toward Communism, unleashing a wave of attacks against her from
all political factions from the extreme left to the extreme right, and feelings
are still running high.

''I think that the problem at Town Hall was simply that I was breaking ranks,''
she explained. ''The real story about Town Hall is that the writers who came
there didn't do anything. They just came as a good deed. Gore Vidal and I had
been chatting in the greenroom, and he saw that I had something written, and he
said, 'Oh, I don't have anything written - I don't even know what I'm going to
say.' He was first on the program, and he got up and told a couple of Reagan
jokes. His first sentence was 'My heart is cool, but my head is empty.' I didn't
stay past my own contribution, but I heard that Doctorow, Vonnegut and Ginsberg
also said nothing. Of the writers, I think I was the only person who said
anything. I said something I wasn't supposed to say, and I knew what I was
doing. I knew I would be booed and I would make some enemies there. The idea of
it is you were supposed to be a good guy and be mobilized for the pro-Poland
rally on Feb. 6 and the antinuclear rally on June 12. I didn't want to do that
anymore. That was deeply resented, and that was the first wave of reaction on
the part of the so-called left.''

Miss Sontag and I were sitting at the table on which she works in a spare white
room on the top floor of her brownstone duplex.  ''What I am saying is so
obvious, but it's never too late to say the truth, and it's important to have
people argue the truth. I think that a very large portion of the left has
underestimated the wickedness of the Communists. It's a mistake I shared from
the early 60's, when I went to Cuba and was terrifically impressed with the
Cuban revolution (which was not then even Communist), through the invasion of
Czechoslovakia in '68. One forgets that the period between '63 and '68 was one
of impressive liberalization in the Soviet Union. Solzhenitsyn won the Lenin
Prize. Well, all of that was ended by the decision to invade Czechoslovakia. So
my political views began changing 14 years ago.

''The statement at Town Hall that was considered the most insolent and
provocative was: Imagine the preposterous case of somebody who read only the
Reader's Digest between 1950 and 1970, and somebody else who read only The
Nation between 1950 and 1970. Who would be getting more truth about the nature
of Communism? There's no doubt it would have been the Reader's Digest reader,
and for a specific reason, which I'm sorry I didn't explain, because that too
has been misunderstood. It's because the Reader's Digest was open to a lot of
immigrant writers and their testimony about life in the Soviet Union.''

The scope of the response to her speech took Miss Sontag entirely by surprise.
''I have gotten so many grotesque attacks as a result of this Poland speech;
they're violent, sneering, vituperative in a way which is very different from
expressing strong disagreement. I'd never been the object of it before. I have
been persuaded, rather reluctantly, that some of this publicity is just the
inevitable kind of nastiness that people unleash on you when they feel you have
gotten too much approval. They just wait for you to become a target, and there
are a lot of people out there just waiting to jump in. It's not as if they're
seriously disagreeing with views, they just say in effect, 'Let's get her.' ''

Suddenly she laughed and exclaimed, ''All of this politics is taking up too much
time, and what I really want to do is get back to my novel.'' It's out of
character that she has not replied to her attackers more extensively, because
she enjoys a debate. But, pointing to the stacks of books and papers surrounding
us, she said, ''At the moment I have to admit I am writing a long essay on
intellectuals and Communism. That's what these books are.I'm not going to reply
to any of these attacks, because they are totally silly, but I do feel I have
something to say. The subject of the essay is the whole history of people having
some kind of double standard. I hope I'll be able to do it, and that's the last
I'll ever want to say on the subject.''

She leaned back in her chair, smiling, and cupped her hands behind her neck.
''Writing well is the best revenge.'' When Roger Straus, her publisher, proposed
doing ''A Susan Sontag Reader,'' she at first refused. ''I felt what I imagine a
painter feels. I'd like to have another show, but I don't think I'd like to have
a retrospective. The convention of a 'Reader' is, after all, for writers whose
work is finished. Not only don't I think of my work as finished, I think of
myself as only a little way past the starting point, which may sound odd, since
I've been publishing for close to 20 years.''

At any rate, in looking over her early essays ''Notes on Camp'' and ''Against
Interpretation,'' she reacted with contradictory feelings, which made the
process of selection difficult. ''On the one hand, the early pieces have that
'first voice' from which I have since evolved. Then there are other moments, of
course, when it seems, oh, God, you just do it over and over again. You try to
make it different, but it is always the same thing. Both are true; both prove
that I am in flight from my past work. That's part of the problem: to open your
writing to more and more things. At least in my case I certainly don't feel that
I want just to have the same repertoire all my life.  But I don't know, it's
very mysterious.'' The actual selection for the ''Reader'' was made very
rapidly. ''I know I wanted to remind people that the first book I ever published
was a novel, and I'm quite fond of my two novels.'' Included in the ''Reader''
are 17 chapters of ''The Benefactor'' and the end of ''Death Kit,'' excerpts
that stand by themselves.

She continued: ''I've written an enormous amount, I always thought I was going
to write, and the only question was how well would I do it. Certainly I never
felt consciously or unconsciously that there was any conflict between my
vocation and being a woman. Writing is the one art, perhaps, where there are a
great many first-rate women.  So that's the one activity where one would
probably have, even in the benighted bygone days, the least problem.

''I know that many women have a problem with ambition, or in pursuing a vocation
in a single-minded way. They seem to internalize some kind of inhibition. They
don't seem able to mobilize their energy. Well, it can be a problem for anyone.
I certainly know men who can be described that way. I never thought, There are
women writers, so this is something I can be. No, I thought, There are writers,
so this is something I want to be.''

HER first venture into publishing now seems incredibly naive to her. ''When I
first finished something I thought was publishable, I simply took it to a
publisher. I made a list: Farrar, Straus & Giroux was my first choice in 1962,
because they had published 'The Djuna Barnes Reader'; second was New Directions,
but somehow I had the impression they were less accessible; and third was Grove
Press, because they were publishing Beckett. It was ridiculous!'' she said and
laughed. ''I really didn't even know what a literary agent was. I simply took
the manuscript of 'The Benefactor' in a box and left it at Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. Two weeks later I got a call, and they gave me a contract and published
it. So I'm in the unique position of having published nine books while staying
with the same publisher. I still don't have an agent, so Farrar, Straus & Giroux
is in fact my agent. My first editor was the late Cecil Hemley, then Robert
Giroux, and starting with ''Under the Sign of Saturn,'' my editor has been David
Reiff, who also happens to be my son. Someone said to David, 'Don't you think
you're mixing church and state?' But I'm very pleased with the arrangement. I
have great confidence in Mr. Rieff's judgment.''

With her essay ''Notes on Camp,'' she began a public dialogue that has continued
throughout her career and has made her oral pronouncements almost as well known
as her writing. ''I find myself in a very ambivalent relationship to this
dialogue. Of course, I want readers, and I want my work to matter. Above all I
don't just want the work to be good enough to last, I want it to deserve
survival.  That's a very great ambition because one knows that 99.9 percent of
everything that's written at any given time is not going to last. I am perceived
as a controversial writer. That's not the way I perceive myself. But maybe I'm
wrong; maybe they're right. I just wish that they'd read more and react less. I
do want to contribute to some kind of dialogue, but I don't want to be caught in
that dialogue.''

An example of this conflict is the professional photographic world's reaction to
her book ''On Photography.'' ''There is always an ostensible subject and a
metasubject,'' she explained. '' 'On Photography' is a complicated account of a
lot of different ways in which one can think about the presence of photographic
images; ultimately it's about the modern world, about consumerist consciousness,
about capitalism; it's about all sorts of moral and esthetic attitudes that
photography seems the most extraordinary and rich example of.''

While her involvement with photography remained intellectual, Miss Sontag's
interest in films led her to become a film maker. ''I write the script, I
conceive of all the shots and determine how it looks, and I work with the
composer to make the music, and I direct the actors, and I edit the film. I do
all those things myself from beginning to end, so that it is the creation of a
work in terms of images and sound, as the writing of fiction is a creation of a
work in language.'' Yet the two feature films she made in Sweden in 1969 and
1971, ''Duet for Cannibals'' and ''Brother Karl,'' caused her a crisis when she
realized that she had become an expatriate and possibly alienated from her
fundamental aspirations. ''I thought: Where am I? What am I doing? What have I
done? I don't seem to be a writer anymore, but I wanted most to be a writer.''

IN 1975 a second crisis occurred when she was hospitalized for cancer, which led
her to write ''Illness as Metaphor,'' an impassioned attack on the cultural
myths that have developed around certain diseases and, as in the case of cancer,
have placed upon the patient the double burden of suffering from the disease and
bearing the guilt of the disease as a psychic manifestation. ''Becoming ill,
facing one's own death, being in the company of people who are suffering
terribly - and many of them dying - for several years is, of course, a watershed
experience. You are not the same person afterwards. I was told that very likely
I was going to die. I didn't die, I was lucky. But the fact is that I have
survived, that I am not now ill. I'm in a remission, and perhaps that means I am
cured. It doesn't mean I can cancel that experience. One is on the other side of
something that changes your relation to life, that brings you close to death in
a such a way that you can never come completely back.

''And it has changed a lot of things for me. In some ways it has been a
strengthening experience. It's like any one of the great emergencies that bring
out the best and worst in people, and that's very impressive. I saw it in other
people, not just in myself - other people with the most extraordinary amount of
courage, intelligence beyond anything that they were capable of before. It's
also weakening, because you realize in a very painful way your own mortality and
once again the extent of all this needless human suffering, which enraged me,
which is why I wrote 'Illness as Metaphor.' '' The book was met with general
admiration, and it won the National Book Critics Circle Award.

''Illness as Metaphor'' does not appear in the ''Reader,'' but the most serious
omission for Miss Sontag herself is ''Trip to Hanoi,'' which was written in
1968, when writers like Mary McCarthy, Muriel Rukeyser and Denise Levertov also
made the trip as a protest against the war.

Asia has always been important to Miss Sontag, whose parents were ''old China
hands'' and had settled in Tianjin, where they were in the fur trade. Therefore
she was actually conceived in China, but out of medical precaution, her mother
returned to New York to give birth. The first lie that Miss Sontag remembers
telling was to her classmates in the first grade, when she claimed to have been
born in China. Her parents had decided against taking her back, so she grew up
in the United States. From old photographs her mental picture of her parents is
of ''their playing Gatsby and Daisy inside the British Concession.''

HER childhood home in New York City was filled with Chinese curios that
''colonialists collect.'' She learned to use chopsticks as an infant and
remembers being told by her parents' Chinese friends that she looked Chinese.
Her father died of tuberculosis in China when she was 6. As a child she even dug
a hole in the front yard to tunnel her way to China. By the time she was
officially invited by the Chinese Government to visit China, she was six years
older than her father at his death. As she wrote in ''Prospect for a Trip to
China'' about the emotional pull of her father's absence: ''I still weep in any
movie with a scene in which a father returns home after a long, desperate
absence, at the moment when he hugs his child. Or children.''

''Trip to Hanoi'' is about her larger interest in the Far East and ''the culture
shock that one feels going to Asia for the first time.'' She has since visited
China twice, Vietnam once more and Japan three times. ''Trip to Hanoi'' is held
against her, she says: ''I am represented as having been a Communist and having
written these very fatuous, uncritical things about Vietnam. By and large the
book concerns the impossibility of knowing anything about the North Vietnamese
and what the truth is.'' She wishes she could have included ''Trip to Hanoi,''
if only as a gesture of defiance against the present piecemeal rejection of the
60's and growing cultural conservatism.

The final essay in the ''Reader'' is about Roland Barthes but entitled ''On
Writing Itself'' because the exploration of his work brought her back full
circle to the preoccupation of her earliest writing. ''One of the things that I
have been thinking about all my writing life - it's in 'The Benefactor,' it's in
'Notes on Camp' - is the question of what the esthetic way of looking at the
world is.  At the time I was writing 'Notes on Camp,' I felt the deepest
ambivalence towards the subject. I understand the sensibility, it's partly my
sensibility, but I also repudiate it. I love and honor Barthes's work, but that
kind of ambivalence is in the essay too.  I'm arguing with myself, making the
best case for these ideas and trying to go beyond them. It's really an essay on
what writing is, and Barthes is the example. I feel that I finally have
understood what prose is, and what language is.

''I want to write fiction which is not solipsistic, in which there is a real
world that is not just a depressed world of someone very pained, as so much
contemporary fiction is. I think that the novel is far from being exhausted. On
the contrary, a lot of it hasn't ever been explored. I'm trying to do something
in a mixed form. I have letters, excerpts of journals, dialogues, anecdotes. The
example of this freedom of form is Milan Kundera's 'Book of Laughter and
Forgetting.' ''

BARTHES, before his accidental death two years ago, was turning from writing
criticism to commenting on his own writing and especially to creating a final
synthesis in a work of art. The intellectual's responsibility to create an
artistic synthesis is a tradition in France. ''Although Barthes longed to make
this jump to art,'' Miss Sontag said, ''I don't think he was capable of it,''
because creating a work of art is ''a different kind of letting go and a
different kind of rigor.''

And speaking of the career of Paul Goodman, whom she admires, she said, ''The
essay form is very powerful. If you practice it long enough, it will take over.
Goodman's fiction, which was extraordinary, became less and less good. The essay
voice will silence the fiction voice.'' Aware of this conflict within some
writers, she sees herself differently: ''I do consider myself, however reticent
in practicing it, in some respects primarily a fiction writer. But, obviously,
all these things are for me to do rather than talk about.'' Her own sense of the
progress of her work is always that of ''a break with past work'' in order to be
set free for future work ''on a superior level.'' In this spirit she sees the
''Reader'' both as a summation and a release.

''Now,'' she concluded, ''I'm up to something else.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Susan Sontag

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 24, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS;
FICTION

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words


1 1 4 SPACE, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) The story of the
American space program told through fiction.

2 2 8 MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $15.95.) The hidden truth
behind a woman business tycoon's rise to power.

3 3 8 THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Crown, $15.95.) Continuing the
saga of human survival at the dawn of civilization begun in ''The Clan of the
Cave Bear.''

4 4 9 E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL STORYBOOK, by William Kotzwinkle. (Putnam's,
$6.95.) Abridged, profusely illustrated version of the novelization of the
current film.

5 5 5 CROSSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) A clandestine
trans-Atlantic romance survives the stresses and strains of World War II.

6 6 12 DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.

7 7 9 LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Three decades in the
lives of a coterie of members of the international glitter set.

8 11 3 CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$13.95.) The operator of a c ounterterrorist agency finds himself high on an
assassination list.

9 8 3 MAX, by Howard Fast. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The birth of the American
film industry in New York at the turn of the century.

10 13 2 FOUNDATION'S EDGE, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $14.95.) The struggle to
keep civilization alive in a crumbling empire: fourth volume of s.f. stories in
''The Foundation Trilogy.''

11 9 21 THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Linden Press, $15.95.) A
sequel to the author's ''Kane & Abel,'' in which two children of those
antagonists marry one another.

12 12 32 THE PARSIFAL MOSAIC, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $15.95.) Michael
Havelock saves the world from nuclear extinction.

13 10 2 SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) From soldier
in Vietnam to right-wing television superstar: the career of an evangelist.

14 14 7 19 PURCHASE STREET, by Gerald A. Browne. (Arbor House, $14.95.) A loving
couple set out to bring down a Mafia operation that ''respectable'' bankers have
taken over.

15 23 THE MAN FROM ST. PETERSBURG, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $14.50.) A Russian
terrorist collides with his own romantic past, during a mission to Britain on
the eve of World War I. .)

NONFICTION
1 1 13 LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $22.50.) Ways to
add years to your life and life to your years: a popularly written
medical-science book.

2 2 40 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) An
exercise book for women, seasoned with the film star's philosophy of physical
well-being.

3 4 37 WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE, by Harold S. Kushner.  (Schocken,
$10.95.) Comforting thoughts from a rabbi.

4 3 27 LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia. (Holt/Slack, $13.50.)
Inspirational talks by a University of Southern California professor.

5 5 4 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson.
(Morrow, $15.) How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work as
well as your own.

6 6 4 THE G SPOT, by Alice Kahn Ladas, Beverly Whipple and John D. Perry. (Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, $11.95.) Recent discoveries about human sexuality.

7 10 2 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK FOR PREGNANCY, BIRTH AND RECOVERY, by Femmy
DeLyser. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Advice from a colleague of the film star.

8 7 8 INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick. (Morrow, $17.50.) The scandal at
Columbia Pictures and Wall Street's part in it.

9 8 3 ATLANTIC HIGH, by William F. Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Log of a
trans-Atlantic crossing aboard a luxurious ketch.

10 11 30 NO BAD DOGS: The Woodhouse Way, by Barbara Woodhouse. (Summit, $12.50.)
Advice on training dogs by a British expert: tie-in to a television series.

11 9 2 LANA: The Lady, the Legend, the Truth, by Lana Turner. (Dutton, $14.95.)
The film actress's autobiography.

12 12 15 PRINCESS, by Robert Lacey. (Times Books, $16.95.) The life of the
Princess of Wales in words and pictures.

13 3 WEIGHT WATCHERS FOOD PLAN DIET COOKBOOK, by Jean Nidetch. (New American
Library, $13.95.) A new collection of nearly 600 recipes.

14 1 AND MORE BY ANDY ROONEY, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Atheneum, $12.95.) A new
collection of essays by the journalist and television commentator.

15 3 MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR, by Judith Martin.
(Atheneum, $19.95.) Etiquette prescribed by an amusingly bossy lady.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 1,600
bookstores in every region of the United States.

FOOTNOTES

There is some shuffling on this week's hard-cover fiction list, but no new
title; and the one new title on the nonfiction list, ''And More by Andy
Rooney,'' neatly replaces ''A Few Minutes With Andy Rooney,'' which last week
was in 13th place and had appeared on the list a total of 45 times. The new
runner-up to the nonfiction list is James Bamford's ''The Puzzle Palace: A
Report on America's Most Secret Agency,'' the National Security Agency. Philip
Taubman in the Book Review said that ''Mr. Bamford has performed an important
public service in this impressive book.'' One could go on and on reporting the
triumphs of that fat cat Garfield. For instance, on Oct. 10 there were five
Garfield titles on the trade paperback list. But things can always get better.
This week there are six, and our datawatchers report that they account for 41
percent of all the top 15 trade paperback sales. The new runner-up to the
mass-market paperback list is F. Paul Wilson's ''The Keep,'' which concerns
''something high in the Transylvanian Alps'' that is killing Nazi soldiers
during World War II. What is it that ''has awakened from centuries of darkness
to suck the life from living souls again''? Something not nice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SOME CRIMINAL RECORDS SENT OUT BY F.B.I. ARE FOUND TO BE INACCURATE OR
INCOMPLETE

BYLINE: By DAVID BURNHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 24


Congressional researchers have found that almost half of a sample of criminal
history records that the Federal Bureau of Investigation sent to the police,
state agencies, banks and other institutions throughout the United States were
incomplete or inaccurate.

In a report made public today, the researchers said this and other problems
found in the system of Federal, state and local agencies that collect,
distribute and use criminal records have raised ''difficult questions'' about
how the system should be managed and controlled.

The report says that before Congress authorizes a national computerized system
of record-keeping and distribution, it should consider the impact the system
would have if it were misused or if incomplete or inaccurate records were
distributed.

The researchers at the Office of Technology Assessment, an arm of Congress,
examined the maze of more than 64,000 criminal justice agencies that hold and
exchange more than 15 million records of individuals who have been arrested at
some time.

Records Have Wide Impact

Because criminal history records are used by different parts of the criminal
justice system and by other institutions, their completeness and accuracy have a
far-reaching impact on many aspects of life.

The report emphasized that a national computerized system to exchange criminal
records would provide more complete and timely information and thus could be
expected to improve such processes as criminal investigations, police booking,
bail decisions and presentence investigation. But it urged Congress to consider
the many other less obvious effects before deciding whether overall legislation
was needed to govern operation of the system.

One subject of concern is what happens when outsiders use criminal history
records. More and more, the researchers found, the records are being used by
state licensing boards, employers and many other civil institutions to decide
whether an individual should be permitted to practice a profession, be hired or
be admitted to a training program.

The report said criminal records may be properly used to screen individuals who
might pose a risk to co-workers, other citizens or the safekeeping of valuable
assets. But because so many Americans have been arrested at some time and
because their records often do not indicate the case was resolved, the question
of their use warrants Congressional consideration, the report said.

36 Million Said to Have Records

It said the best estimate was that 36 million Americans, nearly 30 percent of
the total work force, had criminal records held by Federal, state and local
repositories and ''thus were potentially exposed to employment disqualification
because of an arrest record.''

But of the 36 million, the report continued, 35 percent had no arrest for a
serious crime and only one arrest for a minor crime; 24 percent more had more
than one minor arrest but no major ones. Thus, less than half of the total, 41
percent, had been arrested for a serious crime. Serious crimes, by the F.B.I.
standard, include murder, rape, robbery, burglary, felonious assault and auto
theft; minor ones include other felonies and misdemeanors such as drunkenness
and lesser assaults.

Another problem was the degree of accuracy and completeness of the records,
which generally originate with local police agencies but are collected and
distributed by two separate F.B.I. systems. In 1979 researchers for the Office
of Technological Assessment took a sample of 333 records, about half from each
system, and compared it with the local records.

In one of the systems, 29.6 percent of the sample records contained no final
disposition of the case, and an additional 20.2 percent of the records contained
information on disposition, charges or sentences that was inaccurate. In the
sample from the second F.B.I.  system, 27.2 percent contained no disposition and
19.4 percent were inaccurate.

Thus, according to the report, a total of 49.8 percent of the sample of one
F.B.I. system and 46.6 of the other were incomplete or inaccurate.

The report also recommended consideration of the potential that a computerized
system could be used to monitor or track ''the lawful activities of individuals
or organizations.''

Surveillance of Past Cited

''To understand this concern,'' the report said, ''one must remember that the
debate over the national computerized criminal history system began in the late
1960's and early 1970's, when the F.B.I. was engaged in domestic politial
intelligence and surveillance activities with respect to, for example, civil
rights and anti-Vietnam War leaders and groups.''

The report noted that as of September the Justice Department had agreed to a
Secret Service request to place in the F.B.I. computer systems those persons
considered a threat to officials guarded by the service. That would mean the
gathering of intelligence data on ''individuals not formally charged with a
criminal offense,'' it said.

Other questions the report said Congress might want to consider included who
should exercise policy control over the operation of a computerized system, what
kind of criminal records it should handle, what standards of completeness and
accuracy should be required and the extent to which the records should be
available to outsiders.

Although the report contained no comment from the F.B.I., bureau officials last
summer strongly objected to an earlier draft of the report on several grounds,
noting that at least some of its underlying research was out of date. The
officials in charge of the study defended the quality of the research.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DRAFT REGISTRY CASE ENMESHES U.S.

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1373 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 24


The Reagan Administration's method of prosecuting a relative handful of the
524,000 youths who have violated the draft registration law, in hopes of scaring
others into compliance, has run into a tangled legal problem and an angry
Federal judge in Los Angeles.

The legal problem grows out of the fact that the Administration has so far
prosecuted only those nonregistrants who have proclaimed themselves draft
resisters publicly or notified the authorities directly.

The Administration calls this ''passive enforcement.'' Civil libertarians and
antidraft groups call it unconstitutional ''selective prosecution'' of those who
have exercised their First Amendment rights to petition the Government and speak
freely.

There are also disputes about the Administration citing executive privilege and
lack of relevance as grounds for refusing to surrender White House documents and
other evidence concerning its method of choosing which nonregistrants to
prosecute.

Balking at Meese Testimony

On Monday, according to White House officials, the Administration will renew its
rejection of a demand by District Judge Terry J.  Hatter Jr. of Los Angeles for
testimony by Edwin Meese 3d, the Presidential counsel, about meetings he
attended on the subject of prosecuting nonregistrants.

A 1978 law requires all men born in 1960 and subsequent years to register with
the Selective Service within 30 days of their 18th birthday. Intentional failure
to register is a felony punishable by up to five years in prison and a $10,000
fine. The law is designed to speed implementation of the military draft in the
event that Congress reinstitutes it.

Justice Department officials reiterated that they would enforce the law
vigorously, despite a report last week by a study group of highlevel
Administration officials, including Mr. Meese and Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger, that there was no need for a draft in the foreseeable future.

The Selective Service estimates that 524,000, or about 6 percent, of the more
than 9 million eligible men have not registered. Most have been quiet about it.
A few have publicly proclaimed themselves conscientious objectors to military
service. All 13 of those indicted so far fall into the latter category,
according to antidraft groups.

Asserts Politics a factor

''We believe that there was a conscious effort within the Government to select
out of the 500,000 for prosecution a group of people who chose to exercise their
First Amendment rights while they resisted, and only those people, and that they
did this for political reasons,'' David Landau, a lawyer with the American Civil
Liberties Union here, said in an interview last week.

He said this was unconstitutional discrimination.  The Government has denied any
illegal discrimination, saying that the ''passive enforcement'' approach had
initially been dictated by the difficulity of identifying the nonregistrants by
any other method. Only a tiny fraction of the 524,000 could possibly be
prosecuted in any event.

A new phase of ''active enforcement'' against quiet nonregistrants, many of whom
have now been identified through use of Social Security records, is in the
works, Joan Lamb, spokeswoman for the Selective Service, said in an interview
Friday.

She said none of these people had yet been prosecuted because of administrative
delays. But Mr. Landau and others say they have evidence that ''blatantly
political'' factors, including a desire to avoid widespread press coverage of
trials and antidraft demonstrations, have influenced the choice of defendants.

Wide Discretion to Prosecutors

Given the very broad discretion that the courts have traditionally accorded
prosecutors in choosing whom to prosecute, it seems somewhat improbable that
many draft resisters who have defied the registration law will be able to win
acquittal by arguing that the Administration acted improperly in choosing them.

But it is not impossible, perhaps. The convictions of some draft resisters on
similar charges were reversed during the Vietnam War on the basis of rulings
that they had been singled out for selective prosecution because they had been
vocal.

And while three resisters have been convicted so far under the new registration
law and none acquitted under the ''passive enforcement'' program this year, the
allegations of ''selective prosecution'' have been upheld in a preliminary
ruling by Judge Hatter in a fourth case. That case is in pretial proceedings
that are scheduled to resume Monday.

Judge Hatter has ruled that defense lawyers have made out a ''prima facie case''
that the Government illegally discriminated against David A. Wayte, a
21-year-old former Yale University philosophy student from Pasadena, who has
been a vocal draft resister.

Letter Among the Evidence

The evidence that brought the judge to this conclusion included the draft of an
unsent letter, dated March 2, from the Justice Department to the Selective
Service. It asserted that under the passive enforcement program, ''the chance
that a quiet nonregistrant will be prosecuted is probably about the same as the
chance that he will be struck by lightning.''

David J. Kline, the author of the draft, warned that this could lead to
''adverse judicial decisions based on defendant claims of selective
prosecution,'' and undermine the Government's purpose of winning enough fast
convictions of violators to induce others to register.

Judge Hatter has indicated he will dismiss the charges against Mr.  Wayte unless
the Government can prove it acted properly in his case.  He has ordered that Mr.
Meese and other officials be made available to testify about meetings they
attended and that unexpurgated copies of White House and other documents be
surrendered to him so that he can rule on the Administration's claim of
executive privilege.

Last week, the Justice Department filed a response that angered Judge Hatter by
sharply rejecting his criticisms and complaining that his ''appetite for more
and more irrelevant disclosure of sensitive information has become insatiable.''
The department said that all documents to which the Government claimed executive
privilege had been surrendered to the judge, with only the plainly irrelevant
portions censored, and that this should satisfy him.

Warns of Contempt Proceedings

Judge Hatter warned Justice Department lawyers that he might hold them in
contempt if they repeated such sharp criticisms of his demands for evidence. But
he also said he would give the Government a chance to appeal his evidentiary
rulings before taking any final action in the case.

A White House spokesman said Friday that the Administration would stick to its
refusal to provide testimony by Mr. Meese, who the Administration says was not
involved in choosing who would be prosecuted.

But the spokesman added that the Administration had not decided whether to
retreat from its refusal to provide the judge with uncensored copies of the
documents.

Although the number of nonregistrants remains almost 20 times as large as the
entire population of all Federal prisons, the Selective Service says the total
has declined from a peak of about 675,000 in recent months and that 117,000 of
the 524,000 who have still not complied are members of the National Guard or
military reserve units who apparently did not realize they had to register.

John Russell, a Justice Department spokesman, credits the passive enforcement
program with prompting some registrations and predicts the ''active
enforcement'' program will produce many more when it gets under way.

''It's a pretty chilling thing to get a letter from a United States Attorney in
your area that spells out an offense that carries five years in prison and a
$10,000 fine plus the stigma of a felony conviction,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM CRYPT IS STILL EMPTY

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 454 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 24


Between the tombs of the unknown soldiers of World War II and the Korean War at
Arlington National Cemetery is a crypt that has remained empty for nearly a
decade.

The crypt, covered with bricks, was excavated to hold the remains of an
unidentified soldier from the Vietnam war. But to this day the Pentagon has
resisted filling it.

In World War I, the armed services recovered some 1,600 American bodies for whom
no identities could be established. There were 8,500 unknown dead in World War
II and another 850 unknowns in the Korean conflict. But specialists at the
Defense Department's Central Identification Laboratory in Honolulu have been
able to identify the remains of all but four of the 140 sets of unidentified
remains from Vietnam.

Some veterans have urged the Pentagon to fill the crypt and thus complete the
Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, one of the most revered war monuments in the
nation, an austere but stirring marble and granite memorial atop a lazy Virginia
hill. The Honolulu forensic specialists, however, still are trying to identify
the final four sets of remains.

''As long as there's a reasonable chance that we can identify the remains, we'll
continue to try,'' said an Army spokesman. ''The cases are open.''

Guarded Around the Clock

The regulations governing the unknown soldier tomb were set by Congress. Only
the body of an American who served in the armed forces in Southeast Asia in the
Vietnam era can be placed in the tomb, which is guarded around the clock by
elite sentinels from Fort Meyer, Va., who march 21 steps to the south, pause and
march 21 steps to the north.

The first unknown was buried in Arlington after four unidentified Americans were
exhumed from military graves in the fields of France and placed in identical
coffins. One of the coffins was selected randomly and entombed on Nov. 11, 1921.

But advances in forensic science, and the fact that an unusually large number of
engagements in Vietnam involved only small arms, limited the number of unknowns
from the nation's most recent war.  There were relatively few cases of
mutilation so severe that identification was impossible.

The National League of Families has taken issue with those who have asked that
the Vietnam tomb be filled. ''We don't want to do anything as long as there is a
chance that the identity of the final remains can be found,'' said Ann Mills
Griffiths, executive director of the group, which represents kin of those
missing in action in Vietnam. In the meantime, the white marble slab that is to
be placed above the Vietnam crypt remains in storage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 25, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Calendar

BYLINE: By Marjorie Hunter

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 647 words


Monday

This last crucial week before the election is likely to bring both good news and
bad news for the Reagan Administration, with the release of a number of monthly
indicators and indices that signal the state of the economy. Some of the figures
are likely to show at least some improvement over the previous month, largely
because of the decline in interest rates. But the general prediction of a number
of economists is that the new figures, as a whole, will not show that broad
economic recovery has begun. President Reagan, meanwhile, will make campaign
forays this week into four states, North Carolina, Montana, Nevada and New
Mexico, in an effort to rally Republican support at the polls.

Agent Orange: Senator John Heinz, Republican of Pennsylvania, and Representative
Thomas J. Downey, Democrat of Suffolk, discuss an inquiry by the General
Accounting Office into a study by the Veterans Administration of the effects on
health of Agent Orange, the defoliant widely used in Vietnam. Noon, EF-100,
Capitol.

Steel Curb: Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige and David Roderick, chairman of
the United States Steel Corporation, will brief the bipartisan Senate Steel
Caucus, composed of senators from steelproducing states, on the agreement last
week by European Common Market nations to reduce their steel exports to the
United States.  12:45 P.M., 2221 Dirksen Senate Office Building.

Tuesday

The President will fly to Raleigh, N.C., to meet with Republican chairmen from
Southeastern states. While there, he will present the Medal of Freedom to Kate
Smith, the singer, who has been ill for some time.

Nuclear Freeze: Dr. Edward Teller, who played a key role in the development of
the hydrogen bomb, will discuss the bomb and a nuclear freeze. Noon, National
Press Club.

Consumer Prices: The Labor Department will release the September Consumer Price
Index, the most closely watched measure of inflation.

Wednesday

The Census Bureau issues a report on the September export-import merchandise
activity. The nation's trade deficit soared to a record $7.1 billion in August
and the new figures will be watched closely to see whether there has been some
decline.

Bargaining: The Labor Department reports on major collective bargaining
settlements in recent months, providing a signal as to whether there has been
some moderation in wage increases.

Roosevelt: Mr. Reagan will play luncheon host to officers of the Theodore
Roosevelt Association and members of the Roosevelt family to mark the beginning
of a yearlong observance of the 125th anniversary of the late President's birth.
The gold Nobel Peace Prize medal awarded to President Roosevelt in l906 will be
presented by the association for display in the Roosevelt Room at the White
House.

Thursday

The President leaves for a two-day campaign swing with stops in Montana, Nevada
and New Mexico.  Energy Exit: Secretary of Energy James B. Edwards will make one
of his final public appearances as a Cabinet member before leaving Nov.  5 to
become president of the Medical University of South Carolina.  Noon, National
Press Club.

Christmas: The Postal Service issues this year's Christmas stamps.  Savings: The
Federal Home Loan Bank Board issues report on September activity in the
hard-pressed savings and loan institutions.

Friday

The Commerce Department will report on the September index of leading economic
indicators, a clue as to whether the economy is moving out of the recession.

Farm Prices: The Department of Agriculture will report on mid-October farm
prices, figures that may confirm complaints by farmers that they are receiving
low prices.

Saving Paper: The Library of Congress and the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration discuss a deacidification preservation process to extend the life
of book paper to 600 years. 10:30 A.M., Goddard Space Flight Center.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PROPOSED CATHOLIC BISHOPS' LETTER OPPOSES FIRST USE OF NUCLEAR ARMS;
Excerpts from letter, page A22

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1661 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


A committee of Roman Catholic bishops made public a proposed pastoral letter
today asserting that nuclear weapons could destroy the world and calling any
first use of those weapons irrational and immoral.

''We find the moral responsibility of beginning nuclear war not justified by
rational political objectives,'' the bishops said.  For years the United States
and allied policy of ''flexible response'' has held that nuclear weapons might
be needed to stop an overwhelming conventional attack by the Soviet Union. The
Reagan Administration has vigorously upheld that policy.

First Statement of Opposition

If adopted by the National Conference of Catholic Bishops, the pastoral letter
would be the bishops' first sweeping statement opposing nuclear arms. The
letter, which will be debated by the nation's 300 bishops at an annual meeting
here next month, would also shift concern for arms reduction from the periphery
to the core of the church's social ministry.

The bishops' Committee on War and Peace also adamantly opposes firing nuclear
weapons at civilian targets. Some Soviet cities are included as targets in
current United States military planning.

''No Christian can rightfully carry out orders or policies deliberately aimed at
killing noncombatants,'' the proposed letter says.

Doubts on Deterrence Concept

On a wider plane, the committee raised serious doubts about the concept of
deterrence that has been fundamental to United States policy for several
decades.

The letter contends that ''the nature of the deterrent in the nuclear age has
raised the most severe moral questions.'' The bishops argued that deterrence
itself might not be permissible as long as it rested on an immoral use of
nuclear weapons in retaliation, particularly if they were fired at cities.

They objected equally to the addition of nuclear weapons to the deterrent force
that could be used in a first strike and therefore, they said, would be
potentially destabilizing. They said the MX intercontinental missile ''might fit
into this category.''

''We cannot approve of every weapons system, strategic doctrine or policy
initiative advanced in the name of strengthening deterrence,'' they said.

Immediate, Verifiable Freeze

While the greater portion of the proposed letter was devoted to opposition to
nuclear weapons, the committee supported an immediate and verifiable agreement
to halt the testing, production and deployment of new nuclear weapons. They also
supported deep cuts in the arsenals of the United States and the Soviet Union.

Further, the bishops urged that a comprehensive test ban treaty be negotiated
and recommended that all parties remove nuclear weapons from border areas and
strengthen their controls to prevent inadvertent use of nuclear weapons.

After the debate at the bishops' meeting, the letter will be voted on and
published next year. While no official would predict the outcome of the vote,
officials said privately that the basic ideas were likely to be accepted because
of the extensive work of the committee and the prestige of its leader,
Archbishop Joseph L.  Bernardin of Chicago.

In the proposed letter, which is aimed not only at American Catholics but the
entire nation, the bishops contended that the destructive power of nuclear
weapons presented basically ''new moral issues.''

'Threaten the Created Order'

''In the nuclear arsenals of the United States or the Soviet Union alone, there
exists a capacity to do something no other age could imagine: We can threaten
the created order,'' the bishops said.  ''Today the destructive potential of the
nuclear powers threatens the sovereignty of God over the world He has brought
into being. We could destroy His work.''

The bishops suggested that their proposed stand was rooted in the teachings of
the Second Vatican Council called by Pope John XXIII and based on recent
statements by Pope John Paul II in Hiroshima and the United Nations. They noted
what they called ''the re-emergence of support for a pacifist option.'' That has
led in recent years to support by the bishops for unconditional amnesty for
those who resisted the draft in the Vietnam War and for permitting conscientious
objectors to select wars they would fight and wars they would reject.

The bishops referred to traditional Catholic teaching on just wars, but asserted
that ''contemporary nuclear strategies push the moral limits beyond the
permissible.''

The version of the pastoral letter made public today was a revision of a draft
circulated last spring after a year of deliberation by the committee. That draft
drew written dissents from Administration officials, including Defense Secretary
Caspar W. Weinberger and President Reagan's national security adviser, William
P. Clark.

Catholic officials said that those dissents were included in the 700 pages of
comments received by the committee but that they apparently had little effect on
the revised version, other than softening the section on deterrence.

Administration officials have said they were concerned that the pastoral letter,
released just a week before the November Congressional elections, would add fuel
to the antinuclear movement and would particularly provide support to advocates
of a freeze on nuclear weapons.

While resolutions calling for a nuclear freeze are on several state and local
ballots to be voted on next week, the issue so far has been important in only a
few Congressional races. But advocates of a freeze, more of them Democrats than
Republicans, have said they expected the issue to become more lively in coming
months.

Administration Stand on Freeze

Although the draft statement favors an immediate but verifiable freeze, the
Reagan Administration has always opposed an immediate freeze on the ground that
it could not be verified on the other side. At the same time, the letter calls
for negotiating deep cuts in the arsenals of both superpowers. Such a negotiated
reduction has been the Administration's counter to those advocating an immediate
freeze.

In the proposed letter, the bishops were clear in their intentions: ''We seek to
encourage a public attitude which sets stringent limits on the kinds of actions
our government will take on nuclear policy in our name.''

Catholic officials said the proposed letter was being circulated to the nation's
bishops and would be sent soon to officials of the Reagan Administration and
others who had been interviewed or had commented on the earlier draft.

A spokesman for Terence Cardinal Cooke said the Archbishop of New York had not
yet seen a copy.  ''It's one of those things the cardinal would want to give
pretty thorough thought,'' said the Rev. Edwin F. O'Brien, the spokesman.  ''I
don't think he'll have anything to say on it'' until after the full conference
debates the letter.

Issues 'Christians Cannot Ignore'

Anticipating demands that church leaders refrain from seeking to influence
public policy, the bishops contended: ''Questions of war and peace have a
profoundly moral dimension which responsible Christians cannot ignore.'' They
went on to say, ''We reject, therefore, criticism of the church's concern with
these issues on the ground it should not become involved in politics.''

Catholic officials said the pastoral letter, once published, would not be
binding on Catholics. Catholics will be obliged to consider the bishops'
teaching seriously, but each person must be governed by his own conscience, they
said.

On the question of first use of nuclear weapons, the bishops said: ''We do not
perceive any situation in which the deliberate initiation of nuclear warfare, on
however restricted a scale, can be morally justified. Nonnuclear attacks by
another state must be resisted by other than nuclear means.''

That was similar to the position recently taken by former Defense Secretary
Robert S. McNamara; McGeorge Bundy, the former national security adviser; Gerald
Smith, former arms control director, and George F. Kennan, former Ambassador to
Moscow.

They have urged the Reagan Administration to pledge that the United States would
not be the first to use nuclear weapons. Administration officials, however, have
contended that Soviet forces might overrun Western Europe unless nuclear weapons
were used to stop them.

Attacks on Civilians Opposed

On attacking civilians, the bishops said, ''Under no circumstances may nuclear
weapons or other instruments of mass slaughter be used for the purpose of
destroying population centers or other predominantly civilian targets.''

Mr. Clark, in his comments to the committee on the first draft, asserted that
''it is not our policy to target Soviet civilian populations as such.'' But the
Pentagon's Defense Guidance, which provides strategic direction to the armed
forces, lists as prime targets political and military leaders and the Soviet
industrial and economic base, much of which is in cities.

On deterring war, the bishops said, ''If deterrence exists only to prevent the
use of nuclear weapons by others, then proposals to go beyond this objective to
encourage war fighting capabilities must be resisted.''

The Administration, however, has set out to acquire the capability to fight a
protracted nuclear war by investing heavily in MX missiles and B-1 bombers,
which would attack Soviet missiles and other military targets, and a
communications apparatus intended to enable national leaders to control such a
conflict.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

G.O.A. SAYS AGENT ORANGE TESTS ARE INADEQUATE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


Physical examinations for veterans of the Vietnam War who fear that exposure to
Agent Orange may have imperiled their health are often inadequate, the General
Accounting Office said today.

Moreover, the Veterans Administration's computerized registry into which the
results of the exams are stored is so unreliable that the system should be
scrapped, the G.A.O., an investigative arm of Congress, said after a
two-and-a-half-year study.

Agent Orange, a chemical defoliant, was widely used by American forces in
Vietnam to destroy crops and cover used by enemy troops.  Its use was suspended
after tests indicated that it caused cancer in laboratory animals.

So far, more than 95,000 Vietnam veterans have gone to Veterans Administration
hospitals for the exams out of concern that exposure to the herbicide is
damaging their health or causing birth defects in their offspring.

Lawmakers Express Outrage

The report on the examination progam was made public by Senator John Heinz,
Republican of Pennsylvania, and Representative Thomas J.  Downey, Democrat of
Suffolk County, who expressed outrage at the findings.

''It's an appalling operation, for the most part,'' Mr. Downey said at a news
conference. ''It's astonishing to me that a government agency behaves that
way.''

Senator Heinz said in a written statement that the investiation exposed
''negligence and callousness,'' and called the way the examinations were
administered ''a national disgrace.''

In response to the report's findings, the Veterans Administration said the
G.A.O. exaggerated the problem and used out-of-date data to reach its
conclusions.

The Congressional investigators sampled records of 1,258 medical exams and found
that the exams were thorough in only 36 percent of the cases. Only 10 percent of
the records completely documented the veteran's medical history, the report
said.

13,199 Claims Denied

The report found that 14,236 claims had been filed by veterans for
service-connected disabilities that the servicemen attributed to Agent Orange.
The veterans agency denied 13,199 and found that some other factor caused the
disability in the cases where it did award compensation.

Robert P. Nimmo, retiring administrator of the veterans agency, restated the
agency's position that not enough was known to blame Agent Orange for any
disorder except chloracne, a severe skin condition.

An invesigation comparing the health of 5,000 Vietnam veterans exposed to the
spray and 5,000 men of the same age was ordered by Congress three years ago, but
the veterans agency has not yet started it, blaming technical problems.

Recently, under Congressional pressure, the agency agreed to let the Centers for
Disease Control in Atlanta take over the project.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

OUR JOB-CREATING WARS

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 122 words


To the Editor:

This is in response to the Oct. 21 letter by Lawrence P. DeBoer Jr., ''Ten
Presidents and 'Their' Jobless Rates'': The unemployment decrease of 23.0
percent under Roosevelt occurred during World War II, Truman's 1.0 increase
during the Korean War.  Kennedy's 0.9 and Johnson's 2.3 decreases had the
Vietnam War as a factor. Carter's 0.1 decrease had no war.

Considering that four out of five Democratic Presidents had wars to help reduce
unemployment, and that the Republican Presidents did not, one wonders why Mr.
DeBoer, to use his words, brought the subject up.

Surely he does not fault President Reagan for not having a war to help solve the
unemployment problem.

SEYMOUR FOGEL, Bronx, Oct. 21, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 5, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1276 words


TIME was, not too long ago, when a school administrator could be crucified as
subversive for advocating the teaching of world affairs. Well into the 1950's,
isolationists denounced one-world idealism as ''globaloney.'' But times have
changed. The American Association of School Administrators (A.A.S.A.) and New
York State Education Department have just demonstrated, independently, that the
schools are ready for the once-suspect ''global education.'' Both urged
principals to integrate a world view into the curriculum.

The powerful administrators' association this month published a manual, ''Global
Education: A Personal Experience,'' which it offers along with slides and tapes.
Gordon M. Ambach, New York's Commissioner of Education, has circulated a
position paper on ''Education for a Global Perspective'' and invited comments
from educators to help the Board of Regents to endorse a workable program.

Why the sudden interest? As America's role in the world has changed, a void has
been created by an educational provincialism that fails to help students look
effectively beyond their country's horizon. This hurts the United States in its
diplomatic and business interests and limits the career opportunities of many
young people.

Ever since the President's Commission on Foreign Language and International
Studies in 1979 published its condemnation of those deficiencies, including what
it called a scandalous neglect of foreign languages, the new needs have been
reassessed. James A.  Perkins, the commission's former chairman, has continued
to urge educators to give American education that missing international
dimension.

The new approach is a far cry from the one-world dreams of the days after World
War II. ''Recent happenings have highlighted the interdependence of the nations
of the world,'' says Doris Sutherland, assistant director of the A.A.S.A.'s
project. ''The impact of U.S.  policy regarding the Soviet pipeline, the NATO
alliance, and Japanese-American relations are current examples of how small our
globe has become. There is an urgent need for students to become aware of global
issues and to prepare to deal with these realities.''

The New York State proposal also points out the international nature of ''the
search for knowledge in all fields, including the sciences and humanities.'' It
describes changing world conditions, with ''America's economic might challenged
by smaller, more aggressively competitive nations, making it more urgent not
only to learn about our competitors but also to review how we produce, manage,
and market our goods.''

Both documents stress that except for foreign languages - which have their own
slot in the curriculum, preferably beginning in the elementary grades - global
education should not be added as a separate subject to the already overcrowded
school day. It ought to be merged with the existing programs at appropriate
points. For instance, the world is to be let in when the teacher deals with such
issues as inflation, the balance of payments, refugees, unemployment, food
production, air pollution, energy, transportation, communications and, of
course, human rights.

Instead of a new course, the school administrators call for a new perspective.
For example, in dealing with the problems of population growth, a world view can
tell students that it took from two million to five million years for the world
population to reach its first billion, in approximately 1800. The second billion
was reached in about 130 years, by 1930; the third billion, in 30 years, by
1960; and the fourth billion in just 15 years, by 1975.

Today, a study of American farming is incomplete without an understanding of its
impact abroad, and, in return, on the American economy.

What are some of the extracurricular methods recommended by the A.A.S.A. to
advance the cause of global education? The manuals suggest a schoolwide
''country of the month'' feature, selecting the particular country with a view
to focusing on the locality's recent immigrants or the school's foreign
students. Music from that country might be played between classes; embassy or
airline personnel and foreign business representatives can be invited to assist.

Other suggested activities are the study and staging of elections as they are
run in other countries and under other political systems, or setting aside an
afternoon for foreign-type sports.

The manual lists organizations which cn help schools in their efforts, such as
Global Perspectives in Education and the Foreign Policy Association, both in New
York City, and it also provides examples of successful approaches:

In Farmington, Mich., the curriculum builds from a second-grade study of ''human
needs - food'' to ''world hunger - focus Africa'' in high school.

In Prairie View, Ill., public schools incorporate global perspectives in all
major subject areas. For instance, when mathematics deals with currency, money
from other countries is included and compared.

Atlanta has established a school to focus on international education. Its North
Fulton High School, a prototype of such schools springing up in many parts of
the country, requires four years of a foreign language and stresses
international communications, technology, and diplomacy as part of its regular
courses.

The move to global education is not without its pitfalls.  Conservative
community pressures or a highly charged atmosphere in times of international
crises can lead from objective study to indoctrination. A suggestion in the
administrators' manual to translate the pledge of allegiance into other
languages as an exercise in international education could distort rather than
enhance understanding. It might be more enlightening to have students try to
find out how other countries and cultures actually deal with patriotic symbols
and rituals. Moreover, unless teachers combine knowledge with sensitivity,
global education could merely perpetuate old cliches.

Such obstacles need not block the way to effective global education, provided
(as the manual stresses) local school leaders are committed to it and gain the
support of teachers, parents, school boards and communities. Recent history
leaves no doubt about the need. The tragedy of Vietnam, the debacle in Iran,
public debate over grain exports to the Soviets, the general ignorance about the
relationship between the sources of oil and the American economy - all
illustrate that ignorance is indeed dangerous.

When the crisis in Iran occurred in the midst of the deliberations of the
Commission on Foreign Languages and International Studies, Mr. Perkins, its
chairman, and several members met with a highranking State Department official
to call attention to the need for better education in the ways of other
countries and people. The official responded that Iran was merely ''an
intelligence failure.'' The commission agreed with the term, but it had in mind
a different intelligence and a different failure - the kind the school
administrators and Commissioner Ambach want to eliminate through better
knowledge.

(Information about the project may be obtained from the A.A.S.A., 1801 North
Moore Street, Arlington, Va. 22209).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 27, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. ASSEMBLY REJECTS EFFORT BY IRANIANS TO EXPEL ISRAELIS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 404 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 26


The General Assembly sidetracked Iran's last-minute challenge to Israel's
membership and voted today to accept the report of its Credentials Committee.

A confrontation was averted when Assembly delegates voted 75 to 9 with 31
abstentions to accept a procedural motion by Finland to halt debate without
putting an Iranian amendment to the report to a separate vote.

Yehuda Z. Blum, the Israeli delegate, said that ''the forces of irrationality
and lawlessness had been thrown back.'' He said the effort ''only wasted the
time of the General Assembly.''

Said Rajaie-Khorassani, the Iranian delegate, said ''a procedural conspiracy''
had stopped Iran's efforts to expel Israel. He added that Iran would continue to
try to have Israel expelled and called for ''the revival of the principles of
morality in the United Nations.''

Earlier, Arab and Moslem delegates had voiced confidence that a satisfactory
compromise had been worked out when a letter expressing reservations about
Israel's credentials was signed by 43 countries, including Iran. The letter was
sent to the President of the Assembly, Imre Hollai of Hungary.

Today Arab delegates made no attempt to hide their displeasure with Iran's
breach of that agreement. After consultations last night and early today, Arab
representatives agreed to support the move to shelve the Iranian amendment. The
Jordanian delegate, Hazem Nuseibeh, said the letter of reservation was
sufficient and that the Iranian initiative would only create an unwanted
confrontation.

In meetings of the Arab League and the Islamic Conference, some delegates had
argued repeatedly that expulsion would threaten growing support for the
Palestinian cause in the United States and bring American withdrawal from the
General Assembly.

The nine nations voting against the Finnish motion to halt the debate were
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Cuba, Grenada, Iran, Libya, Nicaragua and
Vietnam.

Earlier today, King Hassan II of Morocco, addressing the Assembly, repeated what
he said after talks with President Reagan this week. He said the key to the Arab
peace plan announced in Fez, Morocco, last month was paragraph 7, which calls on
the Security Council to guarantee ''peace among all states of the region,
including the independent Palestinian state.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 27, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

RICHARD JESSUP, 57, AUTHOR OF 'CINCINNATI KID'

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section D; Page 25, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 512 words


Richard Jessup, author of ''The Cincinnati Kid'' and many other novels, died of
cancer on Friday in Nokomis, Fla. He was 57 years old.

Born in Savannah, Ga., on Jan. 1, 1925, Mr. Jessup spent his early years in and
out of a local orphanage before running away to sea as a merchant seaman. In an
interview in 1970 he said that he had read himself around the world, ferreting
out English-language bookshops at each port of call and reading a book a day
while at sea. In 1948 he left the sea behind and began a career as a full-time
writer, averaging 10 hours a day at the typewriter. He designed and built a home
in Connecticut, where he lived until moving to Florida a few years ago.

Several of his novels drew upon his experiences at sea; one of them, ''Sailor,''
about a youth who signs on as a merchant seaman and sails around the world, was
described in The New York Times as a seafaring novel ''written with salt spray
and affection.''

Mr. Jessup wrote more than 60 books, most of them paperback originals about
crime (''A Rage to Die''), detectives (''Cry Passion''), Indians (''Commanche
Vengeance'') and adventure (''The Deadly Duo,'' about an American reporter who
tries to foil a murder on the Riviera). He wrote under several pseudonyms,
including Richard Telfair, and he also wrote radio shows and television scripts.


Book Becomes a Movie

His best known work, ''The Cincinnati Kid,'' published in 1964 in hardcover and
later made into a motion picture with Steve McQueen, Edward G. Robinson, Ann
Margaret and Tuesday Weld, was highly praised in The Times. ''Mr. Jessup has
brilliantly enlarged the microcosm of the gambling table, to make it a genuine
setting for a novel,'' said the reviewer. ''Within its circle, men act out again
and again their commitment against the gratuitousness and terror of fate. Some
turn into machines that bleed inside. And others come to know finally that they
are human beings.''

Mr. Jessup attributed much of his outlook to a chance meeting with Albert Camus
in Marsailles in 1945, during which they drank together for hours and the
philosopher impressed upon the 20-year-old seaman his existential philosophy.

Mr. Jessup wrote the book and the screenplay for ''Chuka,'' about the lone
surviver of a massacre by Arapahoe Indians in the 1870's.  The movie starred Rod
Taylor, Ernest Borgnine and John Mills. Mr.  Jessup also wrote ''Foxway,'' a
novel published in 1971 about a psychologically distraught young combat veteran
of Vietnam. His last novel, ''Threat,'' published last year, also dealt with a
Vietnam veteran, this one who was working his way through Columbia University by
robbing bookies in an effort to raise ransom money for his twin brother, a
prisoner of the North Vietnamese.

Mr. Jessup is survived by his wife, the former Vera Berlin, whom he married in
South Carolina in 1944, and his daughter, Marina, of Mexico City.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Jessup

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 28, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

2 Marines Drown in Japan

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 79 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Oct. 27


Two Marine Corps veterans of the Vietnam War drowned while trying to cross a
small but deep stream in Okinawa during a reconnaissance training mission,
United States military authorities said today. They were identified as Sgt.
William A.  Dibblee, 23 years old, of Spokane, Wash., who was said to have
drowned while trying to help Cpl. Jose F. Hernandez, 32, of El Paso, Texas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE AND DEBATE;
MAJOR QUESTION IN ELECTIONS: BLAME FOR STATE OF ECONOMY

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 3014 words


Who is to blame for the country's economic problems? That is an important
national issue in Tuesday's elections.

By Leonard Silk

President Reagan and his supporters contend that the Republican Administratin
inherited the problems and has taken bold and decisive actions to solve them.

The Democrats maintain that the policies adopted by the Administration and
supported by the Republicans in Congress are at fault for the depth of the
recession. If those policies are continued, the Democrats argue, the nation will
face economic disaster.

What follows is an attempt to sort out the various assertions and
counterassertions and to put the matter in perspective.
The Background

Mr. Reagan certainly inherited from earlier administrations a serious problem:
how to achieve steady economic growth, price stability and low unemployment
simultaneously.

Unemployment and inflation seemed to alternate, in the early postwar period,
like opposite ends of a see-saw. But after the mid-1960's, the average levels of
both inflation and unemployment moved upward together, from one business cycle
to the next, in a new economic disease that came to be called "stagflation," a
combination of economic stagnation and inflation.

Successive Administrations pursued policies aimed either at fighting stagnation
and inflation.

Characteristically, Democratic administrations, with heavier support from labor,
put greater stress on reducing unemployment, while Republican administrations,
with a larger constituency among businessmen and the well-to-do, focused more on
stopping inflation.  Thus, the Eisenhower Administration underwent three
recessions from 1953 through 1960. Richard M. Nixon, who lost to John F. Kennedy
in 1960, felt that it was the third Eisenhower recession that cost him the White
House on his first try. The average unemployment rate in 1960 was 5.5 percent.
The rate of inflation that year was 1.5 percent.

President Kennedy had pledged ''to get the country moving again.'' When Congress
resisted increasing public spending to stimulate the economy, he turned to tax
reduction. He was assassinated before his in 1964, and the economy surged.

By the end of 1965 the unemployment rate had fallen to 4 percent, then regarded
as equivalent to full employment. The Vietnam War buildup was beginning, and
inflation loomed, since a rapid growth in Government and private spending would
not call forth enough additional production to meet the demand.

Johnson Resisted Tax Increase

Mr. Johnson resisted a tax increase for more than two years, partly to avoid a
major debate on the costs of the Vietnam War, partly to insure against
Congressional rejection of his Great Society program.

His refusal to choose between the guns of Vietnam and the butter of the Great
Society set the economy on an inflationary course that still persists. But in
the final year of the Johnson Administration, 1968, inflation was still moderate
by present standards: 4.7 percent. And the unemployment rate was only 3.6
percent.  President Nixon started out by trying to rein in the economy
gradually, depending chiefly on slow monetary growth, but the rise in
unemployment to 6.2 percent, together with the rise of inflation to 6.1 percent
in 1969, alarmed him, as did Republican losses in the midterm elections of 1970.

He was determined to prevent the economy from costing him the White House in
1972, as he thought it had in 1960. On Aug. 15, 1971, he announced his new
economic program, which included a freeze on wages and prices, devaluation of
the dollar, a cut in taxes to stimulate business and, with the help of a
cooperative Federal Reserve Board under the chairmanship of Arthur F. Burns,
rapid monetary growth.

The economy boomed, prices were stable under the controls and Mr.  Nixon was
re-elected. But after the election, when wage and price controls were lifted,
rapid inflation broke out.

At the same time, a world boom added to inflationary pressures on commodity
prices. In October 1973 the Arab members of the on the United States. Oil prices
soared, and the Consumer Price Index climbed to double-digit levels. Preoccupied
by Watergate, President Nixon never made a strong response to the energy threat.
In 1974, unemployment averaged 5.6 percent, and inflation reached 12.2 percent.

Gerald R. Ford, who became President after Mr. Nixon's resignation in August
1974, tried to bring inflation under control by fiscal and monetary tightening,
and in 1975, under the impact of the deepest recession in 35 years, unemployment
averaged 8.5 percent. Inflation fell to 7 percent.

In 1976, an election year, Mr. Ford was hesitant to try to pump up the economy.
For the year, unemployment averaged 7.7 percent, but inflation came down to 4.8
percent.

Jobless Rate Brought Down

Jimmy Carter, on taking office in January 1977, made a reduction in monetary
policy, he brought the jobless rate down to 5.8 percent in 1979.

But one consequence of that course was a rise in the inflation rate. Consumer
prices climbed by 6.8 percent in 1977, by 9 percent in 1978 and then, in 1979,
under the additional impact of the second oil shock, by 13.3 percent, higher
even than the rate in 1974.

To fight inflation and defend the dollar, then under heavy pressure in
international markets, Mr. Carter, in July 1979, named Paul A. Volcker, the
president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, who was regarded as a strong
anti-inflationist, to the chairmanship of the Federal Reserve Board. Mr.
Volcker, in the fall of 1979, proclaimed that he would pursue a doctrine of
''operational monetarism,'' focusing on controlling the money supply rather than
interest rates.

Strict monetary control aimed at bringing down inflation put the economy into
recession. In 1980, an election year, the jobless rate summer, the decline in
unemployment did not come soon enough to help Mr. Carter's electoral prospects.
The unemployment rate was still at 7.4 percent when Ronald Reagan assumed the
Presidency.

But the inflation rate, despite tight money and interest rates that rose to
then-record levels, came down very slowly to 12.4 percent in 1980 from 13.3
percent in 1979.

Fighting 'Economic Dunkirk'

Mr. Reagan came to office calling for a radically different policy to rescue the
economy from what his aides called ''an economic Dunkirk.''

Was the situation that critical? Certainly the American economy had performed
worse in the 1970's than in the 1960's or the 1950's, if judged by inflation,
unemployment or productivity growth. An analysis by John L. Palmer and Isabel V.
Sawhill of the Urban Institute shows that inflation, measured as the percentage
increase percent in the 1960's and 112 percent in the 1970's.

The rate of economic growth in the 1970's, though about one-third slower than in
the 1960's, was almost as rapid as in the 1950's.  ''Real'' gross national
product, total output adjusted for inflation, rose by 36 percent in the 1970's,
as against 49 percent in the 1960's and 38 percent in the 1950's.

Productivity, measured as output per hour in the private business sector, slowed
markedly in the 1970's; it rose by just 15 percent in the decade as against 33
percent in the 1960's and 32 percent in the 1950's.

Part of the reason for the slowdown may have been the economy's absorption of a
greater proportion of the population into the labor force, as a growing number
of women and of youngsters born in the postwar baby boom sought jobs. Total
employment in the 1970's rose 27 percent as against 20 percent in the 1960's and
11 percent in the 1950's.  By the same token, unemployment ran higher in the
1970's, averaging 6.2 percent, as against 4.8 percent in the 1960's and 4.5
percent in the 1950's.

But with more people employed and bringing home income, the American standard of
living, defined as the percentage increase in per capita income, after
adjustment for inflation and taxes, rose by 23 percent in the 1970's, slower
than the 35 percent gain in the 1960's but faster than the 15 percent gain in
the 1950's.

The Reagan Record

President Reagan's chief claim for the success of his program is that it has
stopped inflation. Indeed, the Consumer Price Index rose by just two-tenths of 1
percent in September, making the annual rate of increase in the first nine
months of 1982 4.8 percent, the same as in 1976, the final year of the Ford
Administration.

But the unemployment rate has climbed to 10.1 percent, the highest To what
extent is the Reagan economic program responsible for the decline in inflation
and for the recession and the rise in unemployment?

The rate of inflation had been coming down before Mr. Reagan took office, as a
result of the worldwide oil glut, falling commodity prices and the recession of
1979-80. By the second quarter of 1981, the rate of price increase was down to
9.8 percent.

But the steep Reagan recession certainly shoved the inflation rate down a lot
faster.  The Reagan Administration did not set out deliberately to cause a
recession to check inflation. On the contrary, its original economic program was
intended to attack both stagnation and inflation by a combination of massive
''supply side'' tax cuts, to spur economic growth, and support for a restrictive
Federal Reserve policy of slowing the growth of the money supply, to check
inflation.

But this two-pronged attack on unemployment and inflation did not Sharply rising
interest rates in the first half of 1981 thrust the economy into recession so
hard on the heels of the Carter recession as to seem almost like a relapse.

The slump has pushed down not only inflation but also, to a lesser extent,
interest rates, raising hopes of an economic recovery in 1983. Thus far,
however, signs of the recovery are scarce.

The outlook for business capital spending remains ''dismal,'' a description used
by Norman Robertson, chief economist of the Mellon Bank of Pittsburgh. Profits
in steel, oil and many basic industries are down. The manufacturing industry is
operating at less than 70 percent of capacity.

Businesses are still struggling to bring down their inventories, but thus far
declining sales have prevented a cleanup of surplus stocks.

Worries Over Business The most worrisome aspects of the present slump are the
high rate of business failures and the strained balance sheets, with high debt
ratios, of many corporations.

Many banks are carrying heavy amounts of ''problem'' loans, and the world
financial system is burdened by an enormous volume of national debt, much of it
owed to private banks.

The stock and bond markets have surged forward in response to lower interest
rates. However, uncertainties remain over whether the Federal Reserve means to
push interest rates still lower by accommodating growing Government and private
debt, or whether, as Mr. Volcker has insisted, it means to go on fighting
inflation by holding to its fundamental course of restricting monetary growth.

Anxieties in the markets still focus on the Federal budget deficits. Returns for
the fiscal year 1982, ended Oct. 1, show a record deficit of $110.7 billion. The
prospective deficit for 1983 is estimated at $155 billion by the Congressional
Budget Office. And the estimates that the 1984 deficit could exceeed $200
billion.

Financing such Government deficits in the face of rising credit demands of
business and consumers, once recovery begins, could prevent strong and steady
economic growth in the years ahead.

The Administration's newly appointed chief economic adviser, Martin Feldstein of
Harvard, says he finds it ''not unreasonable'' that the economy will grow by 2.9
to 3.9 percent in 1983, the private consensus of economists. But that rate of
growth would still imply an unemployment rate of about 9 percent next year.

The Reagan Solutions

Mr. Reagan has been campaigning for Republican candidates by urging voters to
''stay the course.'' It is not entirely clear which course he means, since the
President, over the opposition of his supply-side supporters, backed
Congressional legislation to increase taxes by $99 billion over the next three
years, to narrow the budget deficit.  Basically, however, Mr. Reagan has held to
his original course. He strongly opposes rescinding the third installment of the
1981 tax cut, which would reduce personal income taxes by 10 percent next July
1. He is holding out for a change in the tax law, already enacted, that would
reduce personal income tax rates, beginning in 1984, to offset the effect of
inflation.

Mr. Reagan is also resisting efforts to curb the military buildup, scheduled to
add 7 percent or more annually to the military budget, after inflation. And he
still wishes to scale back social expenditures, provoking Democratic charges of
''unfairness'' in his program.

A report by Mr. Reagan's advisory committee on Social Security, headed by Alan
Greenspan, is due by the end of the year, but, whatever its recommendations, the
prospect of significant cuts in the politically sensitive areas of Social
Security and Medicare is dubious.
without either rescinding the next income tax cut or raising other taxes, which
Mr. Reagan said would take ''a palace coup,'' the likelihood remains for big
budget deficits for at least the next few years. And these will create
continuing problems for the Federal Reserve and the financial system.

Democratic Solutions

The Democrats contend that if the Administration stays on this fiscal-monetary
course, it could drive the economy into another depression.

Seeking to respond to the Republican charge that they have no alternative to the
Reagan course, some Democrats have sought to put together a new program aimed at
regenerating national economic growth by an approach different from the
Administration's supply-side tax cutting.

A Democratic Congressional group headed by Representative Timothy development,
increasing training programs for workers, rebuilding public works such as roads
and bridges and investing more in energy resources. The Wirth group would also
establish a council of public and private officials to build ''broad support for
national initiatives.''

Other Democrats are widely dispersed along a political spectrum ranging from old
liberals, laborites and New Dealers to Southern conservatives, the ''boll
weevils'' who on economic policy have been closer to Mr. Reagan than to
mainstream Democrats.

Despite their differences, however, most of the Democrats favor social programs
of benefit to their constituencies among organized labor, the ''working poor''
and the aged or ailing poor, welfare recipients, blacks and other minorities.
The party has offered no answer to the question of how to finance Social
Security.

By and large, the Democrats support growth in military budgets but would trim
the rate of increase advocated by Mr. Reagan.  rigidly monetarist and as a prime
cause, along with mounting deficits, of high interest rates, which have hurt the
housing, auto and many other industries and cost millions of workers their jobs.


Analysis

The chronic problem of how to arrest inflation and reduce unemployment at the
same time has yet to be solved by the Reagan Administration. Inflation moved the
electorate toward the Republicans in 1980; unemployment in 1982 appears to be
exerting a polar tug toward the Democrats.

The greater interdependence of the world economy has made it more difficult than
ever for a single nation, even the United States, to act alone to attack one
problem to the exclusion of the other. In using tight money and high interest
rates to stop inflation, the Administration caused unemployment to rise not only
at home but also abroad, as other nations raised interest rates to protect their
currencies.  High rates in the United States also made the dollar so dear as to
hurt American exports, endangering major industries, wiping out jobs and
increasing pressures for protectionism. High unemployment worldwide endangers
the entire economic and monetary system.

Likewise, for a single nation to try to attack unemployment simply by
stimulating internal demand can also be perilous, as the Carter Administration
found in 1979 and the Mitterrand Government in France and the Trudeau Government
in Canada have since learned. Solving unemployment and inflation together will
require greater international policy coordination.

It will also require each nation to do more than periodically expand demand,
then contract it, tighten money, then loosen it, or set the money supply on
automatic pilot, no matter what happens to interest rates and the economy.
Specific policy tools are needed to reduce structural unemployment, restrain
inflationary pressures from labor, cartels or other interest groups and
encourage productivity growth.

The political process in the United States has not produced a diverse and
balanced program for dealing with the complex economic problems facing all
modern industrial societies.

Until it does, the political pendulum between fighting unemployment and fighting
inflation seems likely to go on swinging awhile longer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Graph of the state of the economy under six presidents
(Page A 24)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

QUICK ACTION VOWED ON AMERASIANS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 28


Attorney General William French Smith said here today that the Reagan
Administration would act ''just as quickly as we can'' to carry out a new law
that permits the Asian children of American fathers to go live in the United
States.

After a visit Wednesday to two of Thailand's camps for Indochinese refugees, Mr.
Smith also said he would speed up and expand the local operations of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service so that it could determine faster which
refugees were eligible for admission to the United States, and could then get
them there sooner.

Thailand's Prime Minister, Gen. Prem Tinsulanonda, and other officials have said
publicly that the United States and other Western governments are falling behind
in their promises to take more refugees off Thailand's hands.

Mr. Smith added, however, that public resistance in America to accepting
countless refugees had grown stronger. And he said he had talked today with
General Prem about making ''a major effort'' to return unsettled refugees to
their countries of origin, ''including Vietnam if possible.''

23-Day Asian Trip

In an interview, the Attorney General also said that ''it is a very nice
question'' what ''repatriation'' means in a place like Cambodia, where thousands
of people have been encouraged to return to insecure border areas under the
control of Cambodian guerrillas opposed both to the regime in Phnom Penh and to
Vietnam's military occupation of most of the country.

Mr. Smith and ranking members of the Justice Department, including the
Commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, Alan C. Nelson, are
on a 23-day trip to Japan, Hong Kong, Thailand, Pakistan, Italy and France for
talks on narcotics trafficking as well as refugees.

The main obstacle confronting Amerasian children wanting to leave Vietnam, the
Attorney General said, is likely to be the Hanoi Government. But he said he
hoped the children could now leave by a faster and ''more efficient process''
than many had left through Vietnam's ''orderly departure program.''

The new United States law, signed by President Reagan this month, allows
Amerasian children in South Korea, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Thailand to prove
without any accompanying declarations by their fathers that they are half
American and should therefore be eligible for admission to the United States.
The law empowers the Attorney General to make such determinations, and the
Reagan Administration is formulating the law's rules and regulations.

Dealings With Hanoi an Issue

Mr. Smith said he did not know yet just how the United States would deal with
Vietnam, where there are estimated to be from 8,000 to 25,000 or more Amerasian
children. Washington has practically no formal contact with Hanoi.

The new law makes no provision for the admission of a child's mother or
half-siblings. Several American officials who have worked with Vietnamese
Amerasians and their families have expressed private doubts over the willingness
of mothers to sign over their children to voluntary agencies or foster parents
in the United States, as the new law requires. Very few American fathers have
claimed their Vietnamese children and fewer still have asked to take them into
their homes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. AGAIN URGES HANOI TO PULL OUT OF CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 527 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 28


By an overwhelming vote, the General Assembly called on Vietnam today to remove
its 180,000 troops from Cambodia and permit Cambodians to choose their own
government.

For the first time in the four years that the Assembly has issued this appeal,
the number of nations in support rose over the 100 mark to 105. Only 23, mostly
from the Soviet bloc and its allies, were opposed, and 20 abstained. The vote
against Vietnam started at 91 in 1979 and has climbed year by year.

The larger vote this year is credited to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's
former ruler, who has agreed to head an opposition coalition that includes the
forces of the deposed Pol Pot. In the past some nations held back in fear that
the only alternative to Heng Samrin was Pol Pot, accused of killing up to three
million of his countrymen. Mr. Heng Samrin was installed as Cambodia's ruler by
Vietnam in January, 1979.

Some Southeast Asian envoys, the main architects of the Cambodian drive here,
believe the expression of hostility by most of the world will in time make
Vietnam more flexible and ready to negotiate.  However, one Asian diplomat whose
country has dealt with Hanoi doubted that Vietnam would be moved by anything
except force.

Total of 60,000 Guerrillas

He argued that the anti-Vietnamese coalition would have to inflict more
punishment before Hanoi is moved. Mr. Pol Pot has about 40,000 guerrillas in
western Cambodia. The coalition partners, Prince Sihanouk and Son Sann, his
former Prime Minister, command perhaps another 20,000.

Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, has already visited Singapore,
Malyasia and Thailand - three of the five members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations - and is due for talks with the other two, the
Philippines and Indonesia.

But after his talks, diplomats found little flexibility in Hanoi's position,
that the authority of Mr. Heng Samrin is, in the phrase of the Soviet Union, an
''irreversible fact.''

Today's resolution, strongly supported by the United States and China, does not
mention Vietnam by name but calls for ''the withdrawal of all foreign forces.''
This is the formula the world body invariably applies to invading troops from
the Soviet Union and its allies, although Israel, South Africa and others are
named when they are accused of aggression.

Opening the Cambodian debate, Le Kim Chung of Vietnam charged that China was
behind the resistance to the regime in Phnom Penh and that Peking's aim was to
weaken Vietnam in pursuit of ''hegemonist policies.'' Hanoi's delegate said that
peace would come to the area if Peking stopped arming Mr. Pol Pot's guerrillas
and signed a treaty of nonaggression and nonintervention.

Closing the discussion, Tommy T.B. Koh of Singapore warned that unless Vietnam
pulled out, ''it will begin to cast an avaricious eye on the other states of
Southeast Asia.'' He urged Hanoi to negotiate and reminded Vietnam that the
occupation and war had left its ''economy in shambles.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
TIME TO GO BIPARTISAN

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 28


The Reagan Administration has gone on the defensive, facing a general
recognition that its throbbing slogans worked no magic at home or abroad.

For the moment, the idea of a bipartisan approach to some longterm problems
remains a dirty word around the White House. Next Tuesday's elections are the
single issue. But then all the questions will come pressing back: nuclear
questions, defense budget questions, alliance questions.

The greatest complaint about the U.S. abroad is the sense of inconsistency in
its relations with the rest of the world. Lack of continuity troubles its
partners more than practically anything America does or doesn't do.

This is a perception, because the actual changes in policy have not been so
great. They couldn't be. There are real limits. Even bedrock conservatives
advising the President say they have to explain to ideological friends outside
that they haven't trimmed their sails for lack of determination but to seek the
possible.

Still, perception of drastic policy shifts impending after each election have
done damage. At the start of an administration, politicians can't resist rousing
speeches to show how different they will be from predecessors. And they try,
until they stumble on the facts of sharing the planet with a lot of other
people.

It hasn't always been that way. After Pearl Harbor, a basic foreign policy
consensus was developed that enabled the U.S. to shape and lead the postwar
world successfully for a quarter-century. That didn't just happen. President
Roosevelt and his successors worked hard at it. The consensus broke down over
Vietnam, and partisanship has been sharpening ever since.

But there are people in the Government who realize what every businessman knows:
policies have to be planned for the long term if they are to achieve anything.
In a democracy, that means they must have broad support that will outlast the
vagaries of politics. A bipartisan foundation is needed that still leaves plenty
of room for argument on specifics and reacting to inevitable unforeseen events.
Without such a foundation, however, leadership amounts to shouting to the winds.

Whatever happens Tuesday, President Reagan has two more years to steer the
nation, perhaps longer. But if he wants to lay an enduring policy base, he will
have to start immediately on a new tack of bipartisanship. The strange coalition
that elected him is breaking up. Now he must seek the mainstream.

There are some urgent practical questions. American diplomats are trying to
negotiate an agreement with allies on principles to govern East-West trade for
the rest of the century. They are about to negotiate new rules for trade with
the non-Communist world that will probably last as long. They are seeking a
settlement in the 40-yearold Middle East war, and fumbling with what could
become as grave a problem in Central America.

Most important of all, they are talking at the Russians about the strategic
balance and watching Russians and Chinese grope for an accommodation that could
change that balance.

These are not issues on which accords can be reached without confidence in the
commitment of the partners. For America's allies it means confidence that
policies defined will last beyond the next election or two or three. And only
wide domestic political support, in both parties, can achieve that.

Some of the President's advisers are urging him to move in this direction. It is
the only way to restore harmony in the alliance. The weight of the advice will
be strengthened if Tuesday's results show that the opposition is gaining, even
though the national economy is the major issue for electors who are seldom aware
of how much the state of the nation depends on the state of the world.

But it won't be easy for Mr. Reagan to show the flexibility, the acceptance of
compromise that can enable him to put into effect a bipartisan foreign and
defense policy. It is surprising how many of the people in his Administration
point out that first he would have to achieve a consensus among Republicans.
Some senior officials even say they think it would be easy enough to get the
Democrats on board if the Administration could solve its Republican problem.

That problem lies in the nature of the Reagan coalition, including as it does
neo-conservative intellectuals and hard-line right-wingers as well as moderate
Republicans and workers. The White House is ultra-sensitive to conservative
criticism that it has veered from the dogma. These people are among Mr. Reagan's
friends, and they claim - not really correctly -that they put him in office.

They are not interested in bipartisanship on anything. Nor will they concede
that their theories don't work. So they will have to be left behind, on the
margin that has always been their home, if a stronger base for American policy
is to be built. But otherwise the country is condemned to dangerous drifting in
a stormy world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 30, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam War Memorial Nears Completion in Capital A construction worker on a
pathway in front of the V-shaped war memorial in Washington. Dedication
ceremonies for the memorial are scheduled for four days, starting Nov. 10. The
memorial has aroused controversy over its design and whether it is for Vietnam
veterans or the war dead listed on it.

BYLINE: United Press International

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 2; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Quake in North Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 65 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 30


A strong earthquake shook a region near Vietnam's northern frontier with China,
the Vietnam News Agency reported today. The agency said the quake struck
Wednesday and registered 6.6 on the Richter scale, setting off tremors that were
felt in most parts of northern Vietnam. It gave no reports of damage or
casualties.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A REAGAN ALUMNUS SPEAKS OUT;
IT'S TIME FOR A HARD LOOK AT DEFENSE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1971 words


Murray L. Weidenbaum resigned as chairman of President Reagan's Council of
Economic Advisers last August and returned to teach at Washington University in
St. Louis. The following excerpts were taken from his first major policy speech
since returning to private life, presented last Friday at the annual policy
conference of the Center for the Study of American Business at Washington
University.
AT a time when, alas, economist jokes are in vogue, I would like to a dd my
favorite wisecrack about our profession: If all the economistsi n the world were
laid end to end, it might be a good thing.

This sour remark is instigated by my having to listen to, and occasionally
participate in, what seem to be endless debates on whether the budget deficits
really matter, and, if so, on what arcane basis of measurement. I finally have
found a short cut that reconciles the great intellectual wisdom of our
profession with the practical concerns of participants in and observers of
financial markets. Thus, I conclude that deficits do not matter, but that
Treasury borrowing and money creation surely do.

Having disposed of this weighty subject so quickly ... let us turn to the
second-largest category of budget outlays, national defense.  There is a
broad-based agreement on the need to expand United States national defense
spending. Both the Carter and Reagan budgets projected significant growth in
defense spending in real terms for each of the five fiscal years 1982-86.

As would be expected, there has been considerable discussion and disagreement
over the specifics of the buildup, including the question of how rapid an
expansion in military spending is desirable. But none of this is a debate
between hawks and doves.

Among the specific questions raised is the economic feasibility of the currently
contemplated schedule of military outlays. As the Council of Economic Advisers
stated in its annual report accompanying the President's 1982 Economic Report:
''Any economic effects ... must be assessed in the context of the overriding
need for maintaining the level of national defense spending necessary for
national security.'' Moreover, the 1981-82 recession has resulted in such
substantial amounts of excess capacity in American industry that, at least for
the next year or two, there is likely to be adequate industrial capacity to meet
military and civilian needs.

But it is useful to look beyond, to the middle of the decade, when significant
economic growth may coincide with the peak of the military buildup. In such
circumstances, capacity questions would arise.

The Council's annual report deals with that eventuality, pointing out three
results of the defense buildup that can be anticipated:

* The substantial transfer of resources in the durable sector to defense
production may increase relative prices in some of the affected industries. Both
the Department of Defense and private purchasers may have to pay more for goods
from these industries. This premium is likely to increase with the size of the
defense budget.

* Increased demand may produce delays in the delivery of military goods.
Delivery timetables that seem realistic today may, in some cases, become
obsolete as producers try to accommodate both the defense buildup and rigorous
expansion in civilian investment at the same time.

* Some temporary crowding out of private investment may occur.  Defense
procurement uses many of the same physical resources needed for private
investment in civilian durables, and the Defense Production Act gives defense
priority in the marketplace. Some private companies may turn to foreign sources
while others may cancel or postpone plans for expansion. Along similar lines, a
private economic consulting organization, Data Resources Inc., has stated that
the concentration of the planned military increases in the procurement and
research and development implies weapon production growth rates more rapid than
those which occurred at the peak of the Vietnam buildup. Moreover, the current
expansion occurs after a decade of steady reductions in the defense industrial
base.

D.R.I. goes on to note that, with the implementation of significant investment
programs in both plant and equipment and skilled labor forces, the problems of
price pressures, bottlenecks and crowding out of civilian demand ''could be
constrained to isolated instances.''

Over the six-year period 1982-87, double-digit increases in annual output are
estimated by D.R.I. for many industries ranging from semiconductors to
computers. Their conclusion is that these uncertainties about the capabilities
of the defense industrial base ''will continue to cloud decisions regarding the
defense budget.''

There has never been a period of sustained growth in real defense spending since
1948 at the pace now planned. A more recent D.R.I.  study concludes that the
projected requirements for such large increases in defense output raised
''obvious'' questions about the ability of industry to meet them without adverse
implications in terms of costs and deadlines. A variation of that theme appears
in a recently released study by the Department of Commerce which reminds us that
defense expenditures do not affect all industries equally, but have ''highly
concentrated industrial impacts.''

THE Commerce Department examined a different time period than D.R.I., but its
conclusions are similar. For most of the 58 major defense supplying industries
it studied, the Department of Commerce reported that existing capacity is
sufficient to supply projected military and civilian demands through 1985.
However, the department said that, should further capacity expansion not take
place in some of these industries, meeting projected 1985 requirements would
mean using outmoded, economically inefficient capacity which would increase
costs and prices.

For example, requirements for lead smelting and refining are projected to rise
by 12 percent from 1979 to 1985, but economically efficient capacity is
estimated to decline by 4 percent. Likewise, requirements for brass, bronze and
copper foundries are shown to increase by 32 percent, but economically efficient
capacity to rise by only 25 percent.

The Commerce study reported some of our basic metal processing industries will
likely increase their dependence on foreign sources of supply in order to meet
the stepped-up military demands. For example, the electrometallurgical products
industry met 27.6 percent of its needs with imports in 1979 and is expected to
increase that to 45 percent in 1985. Likewise, zinc smelting and refining is
anticipated to increase its import dependency from 33.4 percent in 1979 to 45
percent in 1985.

It is ironic to note the matter-of-fact way in which the Commerce Department
reports such increased foreign dependence for some of the key defense-producing
industries. On many other occasions, the hoary national security argument is
trotted out to justify a host of subsidies to sectors of the economy far less
closely related to defense output.

Drawing attention to the economic impacts of the contemplated expansion of
military outlays does not call in question the desirability of the expansion,
but rather its feasibility and cost.  An implicit assumption arises from these
concerns: Any adjustment of scheduled defense outlays to conform more closely
with expected domestic production capabilities would result in slowing down the
rate of increase in defense spending in the next few years and thus lower the
projected deficits.

In responding to the concerns over the continuing large Federal deficits
projected for the next several years, I have emphasized the desirability of
another hard look at the spending side of the budget. Unlike another round of
tax increases, restraining Government expenditures is entirely consistent with
the efforts of President Reagan to strengthen the private sector by reducing the
size of Government.

THREE major areas of the budget appear to be promising candidates for further
pruning of outlays - above and beyond the Administration's existing efforts to
ferret out low-priority and postponable items and to curb waste, fraud and
abuse:

1.The so-called entitlements. These open-ended commitments on the budget range
from Social Security and Medicare, to welfare and veterans' pensions. In the
short run, reductions could be made in the generous formulas for computing
annual cost-of-living increases contained in many of these programs.

More fundamental changes could be made by recognizing the great extent to which
many of these ''social insurance'' programs have taken on a subsidy or welfare
aspect - e.g. providing benefits far more generous than those that would result
from basing the benefits solely on employee-employer contributions plus earnings
on those contributions. Making benefits subject to income taxes as is now done
with private retirement benefits would reduce the next subsidy payment.

2.The Defense budget. Official projections of future military outlays in real
terms have risen successively during the last two years from 5 percent to 7
percent to 9 percent or more per annum.  There seems to be little justification
for the economic feasibility of this sharply upward movement.

Intensive analysis should be given to the military budget, comparable to the
tough-minded attitude taken quite properly toward many civilian spending
activities. Surely, reducing cost overruns and bottlenecks in defense production
will help maintain the necessary support for the strengthened national defense
needed in the dangerous world in which we live.

Because of the potential capacity problems, a given cutback in military spending
would actually result in less than a proportional reduction in real procurement
military outlays. This would come about because of reduced price pressures on
military purchasing generally.

3. Imbedded subsidies. Advocates of smaller Federal budgets typically focus on
entitlements and/or defense spending because these are the two largest
categories. However, it does not take a great deal of research to discover a
third category, ''all other.''

Contrary to widespread belief, not all of this part of the budget is social
programs, nor has all of it been cut to the bone. Generous subsidies for dairy,
tobacco farmers and sugar producers quickly come to mind. There is no serious
justification for these subsidies and many others like them in other departments
of the Government. Such special benefits to specific segments of the society are
in the budget simply because of the political muscle of the special interest
groups supporting them. The Congressional Budget Office has prepared
comprehensive listings of potential budget cuts that could be made.  All that is
lacking is the will to cut more.

On reflection, we need to realize that at times - such as earlier this year -
the failure to curtail Federal spending leads to pressures for tax increases.
Given the outlet for rising deficit financing, if we are to avoid further
reversals of the Administration's most welcome tax cuts, more of the existing
sacred cows in the budget should be taken out of pasture and led to slaughter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Murray Weidenbaum

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IMAGES OF ISRAEL;
by Terence Smith;
Terence Smith, the editor of The Times's Washington Talk Page, was bureau chief
in Jerusalem from 1972 to 1976.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3435 words


Micha Bar-Am was slouched in an easy chair in a Manhattan apartment, rubbing his
eyes with the knuckles of both forefingers, as if to erase the fatigue of four
months of photographing the war in Lebanon. He was in town for the opening last
month of an exhibition of his photographs, titled

''Israel Diary: 1956-1982,'' currently on display at the International Center of
Photography. Bar-Am's pictures, among the best to come out of Israel in the last
25 years, reflect the complexities and contradictions that are so often lost in
the daily drumbeat of news coverage out of the Middle East.

The show, which runs until Nov. 14 at the splendid mansion-turnedmuseum on upper
Fifth Avenue, has been scheduled for more than a year. But as late as the week
before the opening, it was uncertain whether events in Lebanon would permit
Bar-Am to attend. He made it, but at age 52, with five Middle Eastern wars
behind him, he is taking longer to decompress than he usually does.

His fatigue is a mixture of jet lag, he says, and all the doubts and emotions
stirred by the invasion of Lebanon, the siege of Beirut, the massacre in the
Palestinian refugee camps and the tumult in Israel that still continues.

''Like many Israelis, I am more confused than ever,'' he says slowly in his
lightly accented English. ''There's so much soulsearching going on in Israel
now. The whole episode in Lebanon has forced us to come to grips with many
things that we have avoided for a long time. I mean real issues, like the fact
that the the heart of the Middle East conflict really is the Palestinian issue.
That's easy to say, perhaps, but a succession of Israeli Governments and the
bulk of the Israeli people have managed to avoid that fact until now. The
Palestinians are not just Israel's problem, of course; the Arab governments have
never really dealt with them either. But Lebanon has forced us to confront the
issue.''

Micha Bar-Am is really two people: a deeply committed Israeli and a fiercely
independent journalist. I watched both aspects of his personality at work during
my tour in Jerusalem. We covered scores of stories together, from Sharm el Sheik
in the Sinai to the Golan Heights, stories that sometimes reflected poorly on
Israel. It made no difference to Bar-Am; he was as tenacious in uncovering the
truth, say, about Israel's occupation policies on the West Bank as he was in
pursuing a story in which Israel looked good. He fought time and again with the
Israeli censors and military authorities over pictures they felt would harm
Israel's image abroad, arguing that if the pictures conveyed the truth, there
was no escaping them. More often than not, he won the argument. he best of
Bar-Am's pictures tell a great deal about the diversity of a complicated
country. Those elements are often lost in the routine news coverage of Israel,
especially when the news comes in emotional cascades as it has in the months
since the invasion of Lebanon last June. In tumultuous periods like this, the
image of Israel that emerges on the television screens and front pages of the
Western press tends to be monochromatic, all guns and no flowers, as if the
totality of the nation were represented by the footage of Israeli tanks rolling
into Beirut. The tanks are real, of course, but so is the serenity of the Judean
Hills in the evening or the stark beauty of the Negev.

In fact, the popular image of Israel has always been oversimplified. In its
early glory days, beginning with the struggle for independence and ending with
the 1967 war, the portrait painted in much of the world's press was wildly
romantic: the sturdy, upright pioneer kibbutznik making the desert bloom. After
the Six Day War, when David became Golaith in the minds of many, the popular
image gradually changed. News coverage focused on grim scenes of occupation,
Arab rioting on the West Bank and in Gaza, violent demonstrations within Israel
itself.

Both images, of course, are overdrawn. Israelis were neither so virtuous in the
early days as the prestate Zionist propaganda portrayed them, nor are they, as a
people, as brutal and warlike as the footage from Beirut might suggest.

The Bar-Am photographs in the current exhibition and on these pages span the
last quarter-century and cover all but eight years of the life of the modern
state of Israel. Most important, they reflect the paradoxes that are part of the
reality of Israel.

The picture of the two Orthodox men, for example, turning their faces from the
marching troop of women soldiers is a wordless reflection of the continuing
struggle between the Orthodox and secular communities in Israel. It is a
conflict that is rarely in the headlines, but genuinely affects everyday life.
The men in the photograph appear to be on their way to the Western Wall,
Judaism's holiest shrine, to pray. The women, striding confidently in the
sunshine, vaguely sexy in their trimly cut uniforms, represent the aggressive
modernism that the Orthodox are determined to resist in their own lives. So the
men avert their eyes from the women, and perhaps from the camera as well.  If it
were as simple as that - two communities living quietly side by side - there
would be no problem. But, in fact, the Orthodox and secular elements in Israel
have been locked for years in a struggle to impose their mores on each other.
Witness, for example, the recent bitter fight over whether El Al, the national
airline that is currently facing liquidation, would be permitted to fly on the
Jewish sabbath, from Friday evening to Saturday evening. The conflict between
the Orthodox, who opposed such flights, and the secular, who saw them as a basic
expression of a modern society, had grown so bitter in recent months that,
before the El Al strike last August and the airline's subsequent problems, the
Government had decided to ground flights on the sabbath.

Similarly, the picture of the woman sunbathing topless on a Sinai beach in front
of the veiled Bedouin woman and her camel reflects another cultural collision
that was part of the reality of life in Israel for the last 15 years. When the
Israelis occupied Sinai in 1967, they opened that vast and wonderful wilderness
to mass tourism for the first time in its long history. At Passover and other
holidays, hundreds of thousands of Israelis and foreign visitors flocked to the
beaches along the Gulf of Aqaba.

For the 50,000 Bedouins accustomed to a primitive, tribal life in Sinai, it was
a cultural shock of the first order. The Bedouins adapted quickly, as they
always have over the centuries to wave after wave of conquering armies, but
still the change was tremendous.  Before long, the pickup truck replaced the
camel as the favored mode of transportation and status symbol among young
Bedouin men. The transistor radio brought Western music to the most remote
canyons and oases.

Generally, the Israelis and Bedouins got on well together. Bar-Am recalls an
encounter between an Israeli Army officer and a Bedouin tribesman that suggests
that they reached a mutual appreciation of each other's ways fairly early in the
occupation. It was in l967, not long after the Six Day War. The officer and the
tribesman were talking quietly over coffee around a campfire on the beach. ''You
don't honestly mean to tell me that you don't smuggle hashish and other items
from over there,'' the officer said, gesturing toward the Saudi coast

just across the Red Sea. The officer knew that Sinai has long been a thriving
route between Saudi Arabia and Egypt for Bedouin smugglers.  The tribesman
seemed about to issue a ritual denial, but then he smiled and waved an arm at
the forbidding granite cliffs of the Sinai mountains. ''Look at those rocks,''
he said. ''What kind of living do you think we can make from them?''

Now that Sinai has been returned to Egypt, the Israelis no longer have such
ready access to the wilderness that served as a kind of escape valve for so many
of them over the last 15 years. But commerce may soon accomplish what wars never
could. The Egyptians, hungry for foreign currency, are now issuing visas on the
spot to Israeli tourists and encouraging them to return as paying guests.
''There is even talk of a casino,'' Bar-Am says.

But the final Israeli withdrawal from the settlements in northern Sinai last
April, depicted in the photograph of the young boy clinging to his mother's leg
as she is dragged away by soldiers, was a bruising experience for Israeli
society. It was an ideological battle between those Israelis who value land over
peace and those who believe peace is impossible without returning the land.

The photograph of one of the 104 hijacked hostages embracing his family after
the rescue from the Entebbe Airport in Uganda symbolizes another extraordinary
moment for Israel. The success of that mission on the night of July 3, 1976,
lifted the nation out of the depression that had weighed it down since the 1973
war. ''It was a fantastic high for all of us,'' Bar-Am says. ''It proved there
were almost no limits to human imagination and bravery - to fly to the heart of
Africa and come back with the hostages. The hijacking and terrorist incidents in
that period had made us all feel hopeless. Now, with this one adventure, the
whole thing turned around. The glow lasted a long time.''

Another photograph - the Arab mob hurling stones in the alley of the Old City,
taken last April - represents a continuing problem for Israel. Fifteen years
after the Six Day War, Jerusalem is united physically, but divided emotionally.
And the hostility has intensified since the invasion of Lebanon.

A patrol of border policemen, armed with weapons, tear gas, riot shields and
helmets, was just behind Bar-Am as he shot this picture.  Recalling the moment,
he said: ''You could feel the helplessness on both sides. It's obvious in the
faces of the Arabs, but the border policemen share it as well. They know that if
they shoot their rubber bullets or use the tear gas, it will only make it worse.
So the two groups chase each other through the alleys, knowing there is no end
to it.''

Harsh as it is, that scene is part of the reality of Israel today.  It
represents one aspect of the complex, sometimes contradictory society that is
too often presented in one-dimensional terms in the news reporting from the
area. Bar-Am's gift is that he can convey the shading, as well as the black and
white, and make the picture whole.  ''One of the first pictures I had published
abroad in the 1950's,'' said Bar-Am, sitting in the Manhattan apartment, ''was a
romantic picture of a young woman soldier, very blonde and pretty, looking into
the distance. A German editor saw it and published it in his magazine in
Hamburg. Why? Because it symbolized to him what he thought the new state was all
about, the 'new' Jew, the Israeli. The girl was real, of course, but was the
picture reality? Certainly not in the way the editor saw it.

''The reality of Israel today is harder to convey than ever. We're in a very
self-critical phase right now. But how do you photograph that? The images coming
out of Beirut are so much more powerful than the soul-searching, even if the
soul-searching is more important in the long run.''

One recent occasion, Bar-Am said, accurately reflected the inner turmoil. It was
the giant demonstration of an estimated 350,000 to 400,000 Israelis - nearly 10
percent of the entire population -which took place in Tel Aviv on Sept. 25. The
crowd had gathered to demand that the Government appoint an independent
commission to look into Israel's role in the massacre of hundreds of
Palestinians in two Beirut refugee camps by Christian Phalangists the week
before.

''I left Beirut that day at noon,'' he recalled, ''and drove straight to the
rally. I photographed the crowd, but I didn't get the picture that really told
the story. I wanted to get a sense of the huge mass of people and the
spontaneity that drew them together. And that's very hard to get in a picture -
or even on television.'' In 1936, when Micha was 6 years old and living in
Berlin, where he was born, his father, Max Anguli, had what he called a
''premonition'' of what was to come for Jews in Germany. He moved his family to
Haifa in Palestine.

Haifa was a mixed city in those British Mandate days, and Micha grew up playing
with Arab and Jewish children, learning Hebrew in school, Arabic in the streets,
and remembering his native German. He is fluent in all three languages today, as
well as in English and French.

His father, who had immigrated to Germany from Odessa before World War I,
established an ice-manufacturing business in Haifa, and the family lived
comfortably for a year until, in the midst of the communal rioting that racked
the cities of Palestine in those years, the factory was burned to the ground by
an Arab mob. The family was devastated financially. But, Micha recalls, ''I
never heard my father blame the Arabs for what happened or speak an angry word
about them.  The only important thing for him was that his children were growing
up in Palestine.''

When he was 12, without consulting his parents, Micha took his Hebrew name,
Bar-Am, which means ''son of the people.'' And when the war of independence
broke out in 1948, he joined the Palmach, the elite strike force of the Jewish
underground.

In 1949, Bar-Am was one of the founding members of the kibbutz Malkiya, on the
Lebanese border. It was there, and at kibbutz Gesher Haziv a few years later,
that be began borrowing cameras to experiment with photography. ''I had dreamt
about photography for years,'' he said. ''I remember reading Life, Look and the
European photojournalism magazines and being enormously impressed by their
impact. It seemed a wonderful way to express yourself.''

Seven years later, he left the kibbutz, determined to make an independent living
as a photographer. He joined the staff of the official Israeli Army magazine,
Bamahane, a weekly which, then as now, reaches into nearly every Israeli home.
During the next 10 years, his assignments included the 1956 Sinai campaign, the
trial of Adolf Eichmann in 1961 and trips to Africa, Nepal, Vietnam and Burma,
where the late Prime Minister David Ben Gurion traveled for one of his
meditative retreats. In 196l, he married Orna Zmirin, a sculptor who was born on
kibbutz Kinnereth, by the Sea of Galilee.  Micha describes her as a
''blue-blooded Mayflower kibbutznik.'' They have two sons, Barak, 15, and
Nimrod, 12.

Bar-Am, who is on special assignment for The New York Times in the Middle East,
became associated with Magnum Photos Inc., the photographers' cooperative, in
1967 and teamed up to cover the Six Day War with Cornell Capa, the former Life
photographer. His friendship and close cooperation with Capa, who is now the
director of the International Center of Photography, led to several exhibitions
and books published in the United States and Israel. Last year, after
contributing to some 19 books about Israel, Bar-Am published ''The Jordan,'' the
first book in which he was the sole author and photographer.

Bar-Am began serving in 1974 as an adviser on photography to the Israel Museum
in Jerusalem and later the Tel Aviv Museum and the Museum of the Jewish Diaspora
in Tel Aviv.  War has been a subject and photographic theme for Bar-Am
throughout his career, as it inevitably would be for any modern Israeli
photojournalist. He covers wars not because he loves them, but because his
chosen ''lifetime assignment,'' as he puts it, is Israel. When that country is
at war, it totally absorbs the nation and people.

His operating principle on the battlefield can be expressed in two words: ''Be
there.'' He likes to quote Robert Capa, the great combat photographer and
Cornell Capa's older brother, who once said: ''If your pictures are not good
enough, then you were not close enough.''

Bar-Am has always gotten close to the action, sometimes to the bewilderment of
his countrymen. ''In the 1973 war,'' he recalls, ''I went with a commando unit
that was trying to relieve one of the Israeli outposts along the Suez Canal that
had been surrounded by the Egyptians. As we set out, one of the officers asked
me: 'Why the hell do you have to come with us?' I didn't know what to answer. I
just felt I had to be there. When we came back from the operation, which was not
successful, one of the young soldiers at the rear camp, an 18-year-old just
drafted into the army, looked at me and said: 'Look, you are a combat
photographer, so you have to be here. I understand that. But why do I have to be
here?' ''

This is not to suggest that Bar-Am is oblivious to what is going on around him,
a kind of an automaton with a shutter attached. I have seen him stopped cold by
events, such as the massacre of Israeli schoolchildren in the village of Maalot
in May 1974.

We arrived at the scene of that day-long siege at about 8 A.M. and waited at
separate vantage points until shortly before 6 P.M., when the Israeli soldiers
finally stormed the school where more than 100 children were being held by
Palestinian terrorists. The shrieking and the carnage that followed were awful.
We rushed the building along with everyone else and then stopped, frozen, as the
21 dead and 66 wounded children were carried out on stretchers by soldiers and
rescue workers who were near hysteria themselves. I looked at Micha after a
minute. He had stopped taking pictures. For a moment he just stood there, amidst
the chaos, staring and shaking his head.

Another occasion when his shutter stopped was the first day of Adolf Eichmann's
trial. ''Eichmann was sitting there in his bulletproof glass cell,'' Bar-Am
recalled. ''I aimed the long lens at him, but I was also listening. This is
something I don't always do when I take pictures. Sometimes I shut myself off
from the outside world. But on this occasion I was as eager as everyone else to
hear what Eichmann would say about the charges against him. When he stood up and
said, 'In the spirit of the allegation, I am not guilty,' my heart missed a
beat. It was very difficult to digest, and at that split second I couldn't
react. I didn't click the shutter.''

After covering five Arab-Israeli wars, or five chapters of the same war, Bar-Am
said: ''It becomes tougher to stomach personally. In Lebanon, during the
heaviest bombardments, we were often unable to get to the scene. Sometimes we
watched from the relative luxury of the top of an apartment building or a hotel,
because you couldn't get closer to the action. It gave you time to think about
what you were seeing. And when I thought about it, I couldn't make any sense of
it at all.''

''Photography has to do with real things,'' Bar-Am said. ''It cannot be
completely abstract. For me, the challenge is to shoot a picture that tells the
whole story of an event, not just what is happening in front of the camera
during the split second the shutter is pressed. If it is done right, it suggests
what happened before the picture was taken and what is likely to happen next.

''I believe very strongly in the power of still photographs, as opposed to film.
They remain stamped on one's memory, much more than thousands of feet of film.
In American history, think of the still photographs that came to symbolize an
event: the Marines at Iwo Jima; Robert Capa's pictures of the landing in Europe;
Eddie Adams's famous picture of the South Vietnamese police chief shooting a
Vietcong officer. You never forget them.

''If a photograph lives on in the minds of people, long after the newspaper has
been destroyed,'' Bar-Am said, ''then you have achieved something great.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of women and children (page 53) photo of Orthodox
Jews (page 44) photo of Arab women gathering oranges (page 44) photo of boy
clinging to his mothers leg (page 43) photo of Egyptian worker carrying plywood
(page 43) photo of mob of youths throwing rocks (page 42) photo of scene at
Entebbe photo of women bathing in sunshine

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN INSURGENT OF THE MIND

BYLINE: By James Atlas; James Atlas is the author of ''Delmore Schwartz: The
Life of an American Poet.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2328 words


A MARGIN OF HOPE An Intellectual Autobiography.  By Irving Howe.  352 pp. San
Diego and New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95.

One of the few advantages of growing older is the privilege of writing one's
memoirs, and the generation of writers known as the New York intellectuals has
lately seized this advantage with a vengeance. Never known for its reticence,
this voluble, combative group, quiescent during the last two decades, is once
again enlivening the scene, hastening to give testimony before it's too late -
even before old age has quite set in. William Barrett's ''The Truants,'' the
memoirs of Lionel Abel that have been appearing in Commentary, and now Irving
Howe's ''A Margin of Hope'' are the work of men still vigorous enough to argue
their side of things with considerable energy; their memories of the 30's and
40's possess the same polemical edge that distinguished them in those turbulent
decades, when it seemed as if every issue of Partisan Review carried some
fervent symposium on ''The Situation of American Writing,'' ''Our Country and
Our Culture,'' ''Religion and the Intellectuals'' - what Philip Rahv once called
''the big issues.''

For those doing the remembering, the big issues haven't gotten any smaller over
time, and the debate over who thought what and when is just as feverish as ever.
In the latest issue of Partisan Review one can read a Talmudical refutation by
William Phillips, the magazine's editor, of certain passages in Mr. Barrett's
book, and every new memoir is greeted with reviews eager to sort out what really
happened. But for those who tuned in late, I recommend Mr. Howe's
straightforwardly titled essay, ''The New York Intellectuals,'' published in the
late 60's and still the best guide to the actors in this minor but absorbing
episode in American literary life. (It can be found in his collection, ''Decline
of the New.'')

To begin with, who were these intellectuals? My scorecard tallies with Mr.
Howe's: ''The leading critics were Rahv, Phillips, (Lionel) Trilling, (Harold)
Rosenberg, Abel, and (Alfred) Kazin. The main political theorist was (Sidney)
Hook. Writers of poetry and fiction related to the New York milieu were Delmore
Schwartz, Saul Bellow, Paul Goodman, and Isaac Rosenfeld. And the recognized
scholar, and also inspiring moral force, was Meyer Schapiro.'' That Mr. Howe
doesn't number himself among them is more than a modest gesture; born in 1920,
he belongs to a somewhat later generation and figures as a sort of disciple. By
the time he came of age, Partisan Review had already acquired a significant
influence as a forum for the political and literary issues of its day: the
struggle between Communists and independent socialists, the proper attitude
toward World War II, the effort to reconcile radical politics with the notion of
a cultural elite implicit in Modernism.

If this seems like a rather dry agenda now, it certainly wasn't then. Dedicated,
however informally, to the idea of socialist revolution, the New York
intellectuals were faced in the 30's with Stalin's purges, a development that
transformed their world, ending their romance with Russian politics and
shattering their revolutionary hopes. And as for their allegiance to the great
Modernists -Joyce, Eliot, Kafka, Proust - it may seem strange to us now that
writers every college freshman is expected to know were once a source of excited
discovery, but in those days the work of assimilation, what Rahv called ''the
Europeanization of American literature,'' had only just begun.

TILL, it's not ideas that give our lives meaning but what those ideas represent,
and for the children of immigrant Jews - a constituency largely synonymous with
the New York intellectuals - socialism was ''not merely politics or an idea,''
Mr.

Howe notes in ''A Margin of Hope.'' ''It was an encompassing culture, a style of
perceiving and judging through which to structure their lives.'' They saw
themselves as insurgents of the mind, a cosmopolitan avant-garde, and it was
this vision that gave drama to their experience. Marxism and Modernism were
attractive because they represented a way out of the stifling, parochial milieu
they had grown up in, a means of establishing their independence.  ''New York
dreamed of leaving North America and merging with Soviet Russia,'' Saul Bellow
observes with his usual acerbity in ''Humboldt's Gift,'' recalling the charged
atmosphere of the 30's; and it was the figure of the 19th-century Russian
intellectual, alienated, without affiliation, more at home in cafes than in
universities, that the New York intellectuals hoped to emulate.  Politics was a
means, not an end -a means of liberation from the Bronx.

A means, and a style: For many of the New York intellectuals, radicalism was
simply a component of the adversary stance, an exercise, a mode of argument. For
others, it eventually gave way to its opposite, a disenchantment with the left
that has fostered such phenomena as Commentary (in its new reactionary guise),
The Committee on the Present Danger and other forums dominated by intellectuals
who saw the error of their ways and converted to a fanatical anti-Communist
stance. But for Mr. Howe, politics has always meant one thing: socialism. ''Only
radicalism seemed to offer the prospect of coherence, only radicalism could
provide a unified view of the world,'' he recalls of his early political fervor,
and it is to his credit that in the four decades since then he has, virtually
alone among his generation, held to that view. From the days when he sat around
the City College cafeteria debating the Stalinists, handed out Young People's
Socialist League pamphlets and orated on Harlem street corners, wrote editorials
for Labor Action and debated the Young Communist League in crowded meeting halls
down to the contentious 60's, when he challenged the tactics of the New Left,
Mr. Howe remained committed to the possibility of socialism; and even now, in a
time when radical politics is largely a memory, he continues to make a case for
socialism ''on moral grounds,'' calling for a ''fresh radical humanism'' to
revive the ideals he has struggled for throughout his life.

It would be easy to dismiss this vague utopian aspiration as naive, but Mr. Howe
is so conscious of its naivete that one loses heart; ''A Margin of Hope'' is (to
some extent unwittingly) a more devastating epitaph for the socialist movement
in this country than Norman Podhoretz or any of the other new right-wing
ideologues could ever hope to devise. From beginning to end, it is a story of
cultural innocence and narrow vision, disappointment and defeat, a chronicle of
feuds and petty factionalism so dispiriting that a reader of my generation comes
away wondering how this dedicated band of intellectuals had the stamina to
pursue a course that condemned them to exist forever on the margins of society,
denied even the hope of influence or power.

READING Mr. Howe's account of the debates between Trotskyites and Communists,
Y.P.S.L. and Y.C.L., the Shachtmanites and left-wing Socialists, one's eyes
glaze over; for all his efforts to animate the ideological battles of those
years, to give them character and drama, they seem as futile as the skirmishes
described in Isaac Rosenfeld's 1947 story, ''The Party,'' in which a faction
called The Ennui Club resolves to challenge those who control the Party by
''spreading the yawn'' - immobilizing the opposition through procedural
strategies designed to induce boredom: ''And when capitalism had fallen asleep
... we would seize power (presumably with the help of black coffee) and
establish socialism in our time!''

Mr. Howe alludes to the Rosenfeld story in ''A Margin of Hope,'' and his
awareness of how limited that world really was, how insular and self-absorbed,
redeems what would otherwise be just another dreary rehearsal of obscure
political feuds among the intelligentsia. Quick to admit his own provincialism,
he chides his City College comrades for their unworldliness - ''Tests of
reality? Buffetings of the outer world? No aspiring theoretician in the
abundance of his pride would concede an inch to such coarse pragmatism'' - and
acknowledges that their political disputes were ''charades of struggle,
substituting rituals for the battles we could not join in the outer world.'' For
all their fervor and dedication, they knew their cause was chimerical, more a
way of belonging to the world than a way of changing it.

The mark of their exclusion was, of course, that they were Jews, and it is his
bewilderment over this troublesome identity that gives Mr. Howe's memoir its
pathos. The son of an impoverished pants presser in the Bronx, he experienced
early on that yearning for culture that is American Jews' version of the Grail.
''The life of culture could be a high calling'' - that was the message Mr.
Howe's generation got from books. ''What excited them was the idea of breaking
away, of willing a new life. They meant to declare themselves citizens of the
world and, if that succeeded, might then become writers of this country.''

Charged with aspiration, Mr. Howe made the familiar pilgrimage through an
American literary vocation, making all the stops: He contributed to Partisan
Review, became a book reviewer for Time, wrote ambitious literary essays,
eventually got a teaching job at Brandeis, edited Dissent, and is now a
professor at the City University of New York. Not the most dramatic life,
perhaps, but Mr.  Barrett managed in ''The Truants'' to make good on his
subtitle - ''Adventures Among the Intellectuals'' - by giving a sense of the
passions and motives that animated his contemporaries, and having strong
opinions about them. Mr. Howe, a forceful polemicist and literary critic, is
strangely timorous in ''A Margin of Hope,'' turning every interesting event in
his life into an occasion for dutiful rumination on his themes: what it means to
be a Jew, a socialist, a writer.

HIS world is populated with a suspicious proportion of ''goodhearted people'':
''a fine old woman named Ruth,'' ''a booming Falstaffian character,'' a
university president who raised money ''with a skill it would have taken a heart
of gold not to admire.'' (Does he mean ''heart of stone''?) He is often
''moved,'' he feels ''residual affection'' for Hannah Arendt, despite a feud
that lasted for years. There is no anger in this benign world of Mr. Howe's, no
malice or treachery, only good feelings all around. An obedient liberal, he
agonizes over the women's movement, brooding about the ''deep sense of hurt''
these ''ardent young women'' have suffered.  Who can argue with that? But is his
well-meant angst the whole story?

Perhaps it's Mr. Howe's hapless efforts at description - one man is ''a
roly-poly theoretician,'' another ''a vast bear'' -but there isn't a single
believable character in this book. The most elusive character of all is Irving
Howe himself. His subtitle makes it clear that he didn't intend his memoir to be
a confession, and there's no reason why it should have been; after all, there
are enough people blurting out their stories these days. But he is so willfully
elusive, intimating marital problems and mid-life crises only to let the matters
drop, that one finally cries out in exasperation: So what happened! What was
this ''fumble toward self and sex'' all about? What did your ''fantasies of a
grand metamorphosis'' at 41 consist of? Why didn't you and your father get
along? ''There is the value of tact,'' he writes, ''but also the value of
candor.'' Yet he persists in arousing our curiosity without ever satisfying it.

''AMARGIN OF HOPE,'' despite its title, could scarcely be a less hopeful book.
Ours has been an age ''unique in its terribleness,'' he sums up, an age we can
only regard with ''bewilderment, fright, and awe.'' Even the renewal of radical
politics in the 60's was a lamentable development. Deploring the tactics of the
militant left, he accuses its leaders of infantile posturing and writes off the
whole episode as ''ineffectual playacting.'' But for those of us who lived
through it, that decade was just as charged with possibility as the 30's were
for Mr. Howe. To be sure, there were excesses, incidents of brutal conduct, rude
challenges to authority, but the generation Mr. Howe decries played a
significant role in the civil rights movement and in bringing the Vietnam War to
an end. He belittles the dissident youths of the era as a bunch of unruly kids
who were ''really trying to satisfy formless religious hungers'' - even though
he has just confessed a few pages earlier that his own ''reconquest of
Jewishness'' coincided with the demise of socialism as a force in American life.
Was Mr. Howe's religious hunger so different from theirs? And were the student
radicals who infuriated him any more contentious and ignorant than Howe's
Y.P.S.L. crowd in the City College cafeteria? People in the 60's read books too.

Still, he is less vituperative about that chaotic decade than many of his
contemporaries and even admits to a certain tentative sympathy for what the New
Left was trying to achieve. Indeed, the virtue of this book is Mr. Howe's
compassion, both toward others and toward himself. Modest about his
distinguished career as a teacher and critic, he insists that his books were
''just good enough to mark the limits of my talent'' (too humble an appraisal
from the author of ''World of Our Fathers'') and reflects without rancor on the
meagerness of his childhood, the hazards of a literary vocation, the innocent
unworldliness that clung to the New York intellectuals.  ''For all their gloss
of sophistication,'' he concedes, ''they had not yet moved very far into the
world, and the source of their discomfort lay more in their origins than in
their situation. The immigrant milk was still on their lips.'' In the face of
such cleareyed humility, criticism seems unnecessary. Mr. Howe has done the job
himself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A PRESIDENT ON HIS PEERS

BYLINE: By Telford Taylor; Telford Taylor is the author of ''Munich: The Price
of Peace,'' which won the 1979 National Book Critics Circle Award for
nonfiction.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1853 words


LEADERS By Richard Nixon.  Illustrated. 371 pp. New York: Warner Books. $17.50.

WITH the one exception of Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore, all the
principal characters in Richard Nixon's new book were dead before the time of
writing. Paul Freund has shrewdly observed that descriptions of the deceased
often tell more about the author than about his subjects. And this reviewer, at
least, found the book's reflection of Mr. Nixon's character and views no less
interesting than what he tells us about the great and near-great whom he
parades.

He has selected as his main subjects Winston Churchill, Charles de Gaulle,
Douglas MacArthur and Shigeru Yoshida (considered jointly), Konrad Adenauer,
Nikita Khrushchev and Zhou Enlai. Twelve other men, including David Ben-Gurion,
Anwar el-Sadat and the Shah of Iran, and one woman, Golda Meir, are dealt with
in a single chapter entitled ''A New World: New Leaders in a Time of Change.''
In theme and structure, therefore, ''Leaders'' is not unlike Winston Churchill's
''Great Contemporaries'' (1937). But there is no similarity of style or thought.

The book is a very mixed bag. Mr. Nixon has written ''profiles,'' or capsule
biographies, of all the featured individuals that serve as the book's matrix,
enclosing anecdotes about the subjects' sayings and doings and accounts of the
author's own meetings and discussions with them. In addition, serving as both
prelude and postlude to the book and sprinkled liberally through what lies
between are Mr.  Nixon's ruminations on the nature of leadership and the
attributes of leaders, in the course of which he gives vent to strongly held
opinions on a number of matters.

The biographical profiles, which include much common knowledge, have little to
offer. Most of the material is familiar to readers of current history or readily
available in well-regarded biographies, to which the author acknowledges his
indebtedness. There are no footnotes or endnotes, but the nature of the work is
such that they are not greatly missed.

By far the most interesting passages are those in which Mr. Nixon describes his
personal encounters with his subjects. While some of these accounts are routine,
those dealing with de Gaulle, Adenauer and especially Khrushchev, Zhou Enlai and
Leonid Brezhnev (to whom Nixon devotes a portion of the chapter on Khrushchev)
are fascinating. For example: ''In their personal diplomacy Khrushchev and
Brezhnev were similar to Lyndon Johnson. They felt compelled to reinforce their
words with some sort of physical contact.  Khrushchev's tactile diplomacy was
almost always menacing. ... When Brezhnev reached out to touch or grab my arm,
he sought to implore, not to bully. But should these gentler means fail to
persuade me, Brezhnev could also apply sheer muscle. What struck me most about
Brezhnev was his emotional versatility. At one moment he would speak with what
seemed to be perfect sincerity about his deep desire to leave a legacy of peace
for his grandchildren. In the next he would assert with unequivocal
determination his right to control the destinies of other nations all around the
world.''

Furthermore, the style of these parts is fluent and poised - not unduly
self-laudatory and with few wasted words. Indeed, this reviewer came away from
the book with a sense that Mr. Nixon was far more relaxed -and successful - when
dealing with foreign potentates than when confronting domestic problems in
Washington or California and that his own most pleasant memories are for the
days in Paris, Bonn, Moscow and Peking. It is noteworthy that the only American
leader on whom Mr. Nixon focuses is General MacArthur. Without further
explanation, the author tells us, ''I have not included American leaders, except
for Douglas MacArthur, whose most lasting contribution was his role in the
shaping of modern Japan.''

THERE are glancing references to Presidents Franklin Roosevelt and Johnson (both
described as ''masters of intrigue''), Truman, Eisenhower (a good delegator) and
Kennedy (mostly derogatory comments by MacArthur) but no developed evaluation.
Mr. Nixon almost totally ignores Congressional leaders and other prominent
American politicians. Considering Henry Kissinger's role in foreign affairs, it
is remarkable (though perhaps not surprising) that references to him are few and
en passant; he is given one pat (he and Zhou deserve ''major credit'' for the
compromise communique on Taiwan) and one slap (he is ''seldom ... lavish in his
praise of people who are out of earshot'').

Insofar as the work expresses or implies Mr. Nixon's evaluation of himself as a
leader, it involves almost exclusively foreign relations. There is virtually no
discussion of the handling of American national problems by himself or others or
of Presidential-Congressional relations - an area where leadership qualities are
vital. Watergate is unquestionably relevant to the quality of Mr. Nixon's
leadership and perhaps to his qualifications to assess leadership in others. It
is barely mentioned, though there is a curious passage in which he asserts a
special affinity with Golda Meir because, as he puts it, ''We both took office
in 1969. We both resigned in 1974.'' Considering the circumstances of his
resignation, it is odd that Mr. Nixon should choose to commemorate this
particular coincidence.

When viewed as a whole, the book's failing is that for every page of
spontaneous, vivid and often peppery description of meetings with the great,
there are at least two of undistinguished profiles or, what is worse, of
rambling, ill-written and confusing comments on leadership in the abstract -
indefatigably bromidic and excruciatingly repetitive. Qualities that anyone
would associate with leadership - courage, intelligence, ambition, egotism,
foresight, dignity, charisma -are described ad nauseam. But, of course, some who
are not leaders possess many of these qualities, and some leaders lack several
or many of them.

THE author begins his analysis by distinguishing managers (whose goal is ''to do
things right'') from leaders (whose goal is ''to do the right thing''). That is
well enough, as far as it goes, but we are never told how the right thing is to
be identified. Does it mean the thing that will secure the leader's objectives,
or must those objectives themselves be right in a sociomoral sense? This never
becomes clear; we are told that a ''great leader'' must have a ''great vision''
or a ''great cause,'' but also that a great leader might not be a ''good'' man
and that his objective might be despotic and cruel.

Mr. Nixon's efforts to analyze leadership are never thought through. Thus a
leader should ''never look back'' but nevertheless should ''learn from his
mistakes.'' The obvious tension between these two admonitions is weakly relieved
by the author's suggestion that the ''backward look'' should be ''confined to
those periods'' when there is ''time for reflection,'' such as when the leader
is out of power.

Elsewhere Mr. Nixon defines great leaders as those who ''so effectively wielded
power on such a grand scale that they significantly changed the course of
history for their nations and for the world.'' Of course, the question of
whether leaders channel or ride the tide of human events is old and as yet
insoluble. But if this test were taken at face value, Adolf Hitler might well
have been the greatest leader of this century. More fundamentally, however, the
author offers no proof that the mistakes, failures and sins of those in
authority may not affect the course of history just as much as the achievements
of those regarded as great.

Mr. Nixon puts his finger on a factor more in line with general perception when
he remarks on the ''sad fact of life that great leadership seems most evident
only under the terrible conditions of war.'' But his examples are strangely
chosen. He mentions that Sir Robert Peel, ''one of the greatest British Prime
Ministers,'' is nevertheless ''not as widely remembered as Disraeli or the other
Prime Ministers who lived in 10 Downing Street during wartime.'' He then adds
that ''the same could be said of James Polk, who probably ranks among our top
four or five Presidents in ability and accomplishments.'' In fact, although
Disraeli took Britain to the brink of war with Russia, there was no war (other
than colonial ''policing'') during his residence on Downing Street, and he
returned bringing ''peace with honor'' from the 1878 Berlin Conference, which
settled a Russo-Turkish war in which Britain was not a belligerent.  As for
Polk, it was under his Presidency that the highly successful war of conquest
against Mexico was waged.

Throughout the book Mr. Nixon displays a defensive undertone that eventually
flares into anger. According to him, great leaders may, and perhaps must, be
ambitious, egotistical and abrasive. Abraham Lincoln deliberately violated the
Constitution and ''trampled individual liberties'' in the interests of the
Union. The author sarcastically refers to ''the Little Folk in our own bloated
bureaucracy'' who are either ''institutionally lethargic'' or ''politically
active for liberal causes,'' and to ''dewy-eyed advocates'' of cultural
exchanges with foreign countries.

IN the final chapter, professors who ''can go off on flights into the
stratosphere of the absurd'' are contrasted with leaders who ''deal with the
concrete.'' So too the ''average professor sees the world through the prism of
his own values and therefore exalts theory,'' while the leader utilizes
''analysis.'' The ''pundit'' is ''sanctimonious,'' an ''armchair strategist''
who exalts principle over the necessities of compromise.

Mr. Nixon also launches a diatribe against television, which he accuses of
having ''drastically shortened the public's attention span.'' He sees it as full
of ''distorting mirrors'' that portray a ''fantasy world'' and as having a
''pervasive left-wing bias.'' He complains that ''emotionally loaded footage of
such scenes as a bleeding soldier or a hungry child,'' which concentrate on
''painful consequences,'' effectively ''stuffs the ballot box.'' It is an ''open
question'' whether ''democratic nations can survive against a determined
totalitarian foe in a television age.'' In Iran ''the Ayatollah played the
networks for patsies,'' and one-sided television coverage of the war in Vietnam
''was probably the single most significant factor in so limiting our options
there that the war was lengthened and ultimately lost.''

Of course, academics and television have been bugging Mr. Nixon for most of his
career. Nevertheless, and whether or not these serious accusations are
supportable, they should not have been made ex cathedra in a few paragraphs. Nor
should stereotypes be allowed to substitute for thought.

When the subject of the anti-Vietnam War movement was raised in Mr. Nixon's
meeting with Sir Robert Menzies, the Australian Prime Minister ''just waved his
hand in the air and barked, 'Intellectuals!' '' It is doubtful that Sir Robert
would have so expressed himself had he not been quite sure that he was not
addressing one.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NONFICTION IN BRIEF

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1319 words


TRIAL BY FIRE A People's History of the Civil War and Reconstruction.  By Page
Smith.  1,038 pp. New York: McGraw-Hill. $29.95.

In this fifth volume of his ''People's History'' of the United States, Page
Smith again relies heavily on contemporary diaries and letters, this time of
Southerners and Northerners, blacks and whites, Republicans and Democrats,
soldiers and civilians who endured the Civil War. Everybody is here, from Carl
Schurz to Mary Chestnut, and their writings make for lively reading. Whether the
perceptions of these eloquent folk are always representative or accurate or
illuminating is less certain.

Mr. Smith sometimes uses his sources to make favored points rather than to
advance the story. For example, to support his assertion that it is impossible
to overestimate the importance of the black soldier in the Civil War, Mr. Smith
quotes a black historian, William Sinclair, to the effect that ''the glory and
power of the Republic today ... may be traced to the effective use of the Negro
as a soldier and as a voter. ... He was unquestionably the deciding factor.''
And then Mr. Smith tosses in an abolitionist anecdote about a prejudiced white
Union officer who was transformed into an admirer of blacks by their performance
in battle.

The attention to blacks sets this otherwise conventional treatment of the Civil
War apart from most histories of the period. It is in accord with Mr. Smith's
unqualified assumption that slavery was ''the exact and specific cause of the
war,'' an arguable issue that he does not pause to argue. On the endlessly
debated subject of Reconstruction, he comes down strongly on the side of the
radical Republicans, whose tough approach to the South he believes was necessary
to safeguard the newly freed men and women from their former masters. For Mr.
Smith, there was ''only one issue, simple, stark, inescapable,'' in
Reconstruction: ''How far did justice and humanity require that the Republicans
of the North go in attempting to protect the rights of the freedmen and women of
the South?'' His case is forceful, and the long chapter on what ''the profound
and poignant experience'' of freedom meant to black Americans is deeply felt and
moving.

What Mr. Smith's prose lacks in elegance, it makes up for in zip.  It drives
ahead at a snappy pace, undeterred by the occasional cliche. His battle scenes
are spirited; his accounts of Lincoln Cabinet infighting are clear; his
character vignettes show an eye for revealing detail. And if his assertions
sometimes seem to be missing a needed modifier - ''There was never any question
in Lincoln's mind about the ultimate goal of emancipation'' - that's a
storyteller's prerogative.
THE DAY IS SHORT By Morris B. Abram.  Illustrated. 280 pp. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.  $14.95.

In 1973, at the age of 55, Morris Abram learned that he had leukemia. As he
began the months of sometimes experimental and always harrowing treatments, he
began to record an oral history of his career, from lonely, bookish Jewish boy
in a Georgia town, to eminent attorney, to (in the quaint but appropriate
phrase) public servant.  The task was probably therapeutic for Mr. Abram; the
result, put into print, is edifying for his readers.

His career can stand as a case history of the passage of many American liberals
through three difficult decades. He won attention in the 1950's as a young
Southern lawyer fighting Georgia's countyunit voting arrangement, which assured
possession of the State House by the Talmadge machine. As president of Brandeis
University from 1968-70, when campus takeovers were in style, he stood up to
black militants who demanded a black studies program to be run by them. His
opposition to reverse discrimination in all its more discriminatory forms led
him ever farther from his former allies in civil rights causes; in 1980, fed up
with Jimmy Carter, he supported Ronald Reagan.

Mr. Abram thinks of himself as an outsider; the kind of activity that came
naturally to him is reflected in his associations over the years - the New York
law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison; the American Jewish
Committee; the Field Foundation; the United Negro College Fund; the 20th Century
Fund. In politics, he operated as a mainstream liberal, beginning with John F.
Kennedy's 1960 campaign. He was not among the earliest opponents of the war in
Vietnam, but in time he split from Lyndon Johnson. And he is frank about his own
ambitions, which led in 1970 to a stillborn try for the Democratic nomination
for United States Senator from New York.

The man who comes through the pages of this straightforwardly written
autobiography is eminently human, full of self-doubt about his personal life and
his career, somewhat self-righteous about his causes and not above taking shots
at some of the people, such as Brandeis University administrators, who got in
his way. For 20 years, he worked for his principles in a practical manner. I
hope that his determination to see a fight through will continue to serve him in
his battle for life.
STEAMING TO BAMBOOLA The World of a Tramp Freighter.  By Christopher Buckley.
222 pp. New York: Congdon & Lattes. $14.95.

There was a time, an eon or two before the extraterrestrial era, when the notion
of shipping out on a tramp freighter stirred the souls of adolescent fans of
Conrad, London and the weekly pulps. The word ''tramp'' promised the same sort
of raffish romance as ''Foreign Legion,'' and the little steamers offered
companies of philosophers and toughs alone on the boundless sea. So nostalgia
travels along with Christopher Buckley, who actually sailed aboard a freighter
for a couple of weeks in 1979 - only, alas, to return with a tale that never
leaves port.

The steamer was an old one, dating to the record shipbuilding splurge of World
War II, and it had done service in Korea and Vietnam. Its cargo this trip was
mostly weapons and whisky. Mr.  Buckley provides a few interesting items of
information amid much wearying dialogue: Did you know, for example, that most
merchant sailors are, or claim to be, orphans? And he doles out a couple of
drams of laughs: There was the time during a showing for the crew of ''I Escaped
from Devil's Island'' when the soundtrack produced Diane Keaton talking about
Kierkegaard.

But most of the ship's adventures are mundane - a leaky condenser, a loose boom.
Most disheartening for those who still cherish the memories of those determined
captains, tough mates and reflective ship's doctors of long ago, the crew is
pathetic. Mr. Buckley does what he can to present them as colorful, but their
lives seem composed from tabloid headlines -all shootings, stabbings and
batterings. No doubt it's closer to reality than most of what Jack London wrote,
but who wants reality on the high seas?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 31, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS;
FICTION

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1278 words


1 1 5 SPACE, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) The story of the
American space program told through fiction.
2 2 9 MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $15.95.) The hidden truth
behind a woman business tycoon's rise to power.
3 3 9 THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Crown, $15.95.) Continuing the
saga of human survival at the dawn of civilization begun in ''The Clan of the
Cave Bear.''
4 4 10 E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL STORYBOOK, by William Kotzwinkle. (Putnam's,
$6.95.) Abridged, profusely illustrated version of the novelization of the
current film.
5 6 13 DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.
6 5 6 CROSSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) A clandestine
trans-Atlantic romance survives the stresses and strains of World War II.
7 10 3 FOUNDATION'S EDGE, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $14.95.) The struggle to
keep civilization alive in a crumbling empire: fourth volume of s.f. stories in
''The Foundation Trilogy.''
8 7 10 LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Three decades in the
lives of a coterie of members of the international glitter set.
9 13 3 SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) From soldier
in Vietnam to right-wing television superstar: the career of an evangelist.
10 8 4 CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$13.95.) The operator of a c ounterterrorist agency finds himself high on an
assassination list.
11 9 4 MAX, by Howard Fast. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The birth of the
American film industry in New York at the turn of the century.
12 11 22 THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Linden Press, $15.95.) A
sequel to the author's ''Kane & Abel,'' in which two children of those
antagonists marry one another.
13 1 SECOND HEAVEN, by Judith Guest. (Viking, $14.95.) Two emotionally battered
souls, a man and a woman, are healed through the act of healing an emotionally
battered runaway boy.
14 1 LIFE, THE UNIVERSE AND EVERYTHING, by Douglas Adams.  (Harmony, $9.95.) On
a journey through space, two Englishmen find answers to all their questions
about existence: s.f.-fantasy.
15 12 33 THE PARSIFAL MOSAIC, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $15.95.) Michael
Havelock saves the world from nuclear extinction.
.)

NONFICTION
1
2 41 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) An
exercise book for women, seasoned with the film star's philosophy of physical
well-being.
2
4 28 LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia. (Holt/Slack, $13.50.)
Inspirational talks by a University of Southern California professor.
3
1 14 LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $22.50.) Ways to
add years to your life and life to your years: a popularly written
medical-science book.
4
3 38 WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE, by Harold S. Kushner.  (Schocken,
$10.95.) Comforting thoughts from a rabbi.
5
5 5 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson.  (Morrow,
$15.) How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work as well as
your own.
6
7 3 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK FOR PREGNANCY, BIRTH AND RECOVERY, by Femmy
DeLyser. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Advice from a colleague of the film star.
7
6 5 THE G SPOT, by Alice Kahn Ladas, Beverly Whipple and John D.  Perry. (Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, $11.95.) Recent discoveries about human sexuality.
8
14 2 AND MORE BY ANDY ROONEY, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Atheneum, $12.95.) A new
collection of essays by the journalist and television commentator.
9
8 9 INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick. (Morrow, $17.50.) The scandal at
Columbia Pictures and Wall Street's part in it.
10
9 4 ATLANTIC HIGH, by William F. Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Log of a
trans-Atlantic crossing aboard a luxurious ketch.
11
10 31 NO BAD DOGS: The Woodhouse Way, by Barbara Woodhouse. (Summit, $12.50.)
Advice on training dogs by a British expert: tie-in to a television series.
12
13 4 WEIGHT WATCHERS FOOD PLAN DIET COOKBOOK, by Jean Nidetch. (NAL Books,
$13.95.) A new collection of nearly 600 recipes.
13
11 3 LANA: The Lady, the Legend, the Truth, by Lana Turner. (Dutton, $14.95.)
The film actress's autobiography.
14
51 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Humor in
cartoons and verse.
15
46 A FEW MINUTES WITH ANDY ROONEY, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Atheneum, $12.95.)
Reflections on contemporary life.
The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 1,600
bookstores in every region of the

United States.

FOOTNOTES
There are two new hard-cover fiction best sellers this week, in 13th and 14th
place. There are also two new runners-up to the list: Gen.  Sir John Hackett's
''The Third World War: The Untold Story,'' a sequel to his earlier best seller
on the same subject, and Mary Higgins Clark's ''A Cry in the Night,'' in which
the heroine's sweetie-pie husband turns out to be a homicidal maniac. The two
new runners-up to the nonfiction list are ''Growing Up,'' The New York Times
columnist Russell Baker's autobiography, and ''Keeping Faith,'' Jimmy Carter's
memoirs. The new runner-up to the trade paperback list is ''The Official J.A. P.
Handbook.'' Described as ''the complete guide to Jewish American princesses and
princes,'' it discusses such matters as where to be born (not Staten Island) and
identifies some honorary J.A.P.'s, among them Eva and Zsa Zsa Gabor, Cher, Mary
Todd Lincoln and Lady Brett Ashley.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 1, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS EXPECT FIVE OR MORE GAINS IN GOVERNORSHIPS

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1695 words


A list of the candidates on ballots in the New York metropolitan area and a
guide to the key issues in the major races begin on page B10.

WASHINGTON, Oct. 31 - Analysts for both major parties agreed today that
Democrats are poised to take five or more governorships now held by Republicans
in Tuesday's elections, including four in the economically hard-hit industrial
Middle West. Republican leaders, resigned to a net loss of several statehouses,
said they hoped to ease the sting with an uphill victory in California and a
long-shot upset in Alabama.

Charles T. Manatt, the Democratic national chairman, contended that his party
would ultimately stave off the Republican drive in California, hold on to New
York, Connecticut and Alabama and ''net from five to seven governorships'' from
the Republicans nationwide.  Some Democrats think the party will do even better.

Reflecting Republican gloom about the gubernatorial contests, Richard Wirthlin,
President Reagan's poll taker, conceded today in a television interview, ''We'll
probably lose six governor's races primarily because a lot of our stalwarts
aren't running for re-election this year.'' Richard Richards, the Republican
national chairman, has acknowledged a ''worst case'' net loss of five Republican
governorships.

36 Races for Governor

In all, 36 statehouse races are on the ballot, along with elections for the
House and a third of the Senate. Twenty of the governorships are now held by
Democrats and 16 by Republicans. Of the 14 governorships not contested this
year, seven are held by each party.

Both Republican and Democratic political specialists expect that the best
chances for Democratic gains are in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Ohio, Michigan and
Nevada, where voter surveys have shown Democratic candidates holding steady
leads for several weeks.

The Republicans hope to strike back in California and Alabama.  Democratic
strategists contend the party will ultimately stave off the Republican drive in
California and hold on to Alabama, New York and Connecticut.

Democratic Party officials see chances for four more gains in extremely tight
races that were considered too close to call, in Alaska, Arkansas, Iowa and
Nebraska.

Republican Party officials asserted that their best chances to take away seats
now held by Democrats were in California, Idaho, New Hampshire, New Mexico and
Alabama, where former Gov. George C.  Wallace is seeking his fourth term. And
they contended that their incumbents in Illinois, Texas and Oregon were turning
back important Democratic challengers.

Both sides agree that the most important opportunity for the Republicans is in
California, where Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles, a Democrat, is attempting to
become the first black elected governor in American history. His lead has been
steadily whittled by Attorney General George Deukmejian, the Republican nominee.


Lead of 47 to 41 Percent

The California Poll, produced by Mervin Field, showed Mr. Bradley leading Mr.
Deukmejian by 47 to 41 percent, with 12 percent going for other candidates or
undecided five days ago. But Mr. Deukmejian asserted Saturday night, ''Our own
polls are showing we are dead even right now.''

In Texas, Gov. William Clements has spent close to $12 million in what could
become the most expensive gubernatorial campaign in history, for a hard-hitting
advertising drive and a vast organizational effort to get out his vote and turn
back the strong challenge of Mark White, the Democratic State Attorney General.

Mr. White asserted today that their race had become a dead heat.  However,
Republican consultants to Governor Clements contend that after Mr. White had
drawn close about a week ago, the Republican Governor slowly and steadily pulled
several points ahead and that the race was clearly leaning his way.

In the New York race, Lewis E. Lehrman, an outspoken conservative Republican
businessmen, put a brief scare into the Democratic effort of Lieut. Gov. Mario
M. Cuomo in late September with a campaign that will end up costing more than
$10 million.

But as a giant-killer who defeated Mayor Koch in the Democratic primary, Mr.
Cuomo has shown enough ability to cut into the Republican vote, especially among
Italian-Americans, to pull away solidly from the Republican challenger in recent
polls. Worsening economic conditions have compounded the traditional problem
that a conservative candidate has against a liberal in a two-way race in New
York.

It is in the big states of the Middle West where Republicans are most affected
by both the long recession and the fact that popular incumbents in Michigan,
Ohio, Minnesota, Wisconsin and Iowa were either unable to run for re-election or
chose not to do so.

In Michigan, where Republicans have held the governorship for two decades, James
J. Blanchard, the Democrat, has held a steady lead, although some late polling
showed Richard H. Headlee, a Republican business executive, catching up a bit.

In Ohio, former Lieut. Gov. Richard F. Celeste has run a strong campaign against
Clarence J. Brown, a conservative Republican Congressman who gave up a fairly
safe House seat to run for governor.

Ripple Effect in Minnesota

In Minnesota, former Gov. Rudy Perpich, who scored an upset victory in the
Democratic primary, is rated so strong against Wheelock Whitney, a wealthy
businessman, that Democratic strategists think he could help carry Democratic
Senate and Congressional candidates to upset victories.

In Wisconsin, Anthony S. Earl, director of natural resources under former Gov.
Patrick J. Lucey, a Democrat, has established himself as a favorite over Terry
J. Kohler, a Republican businessman and son of a former Governor.

The Iowa race has been a seesaw battle between Lieut. Gov. Terry Branstad, a
Republican, and Roxanne B. Conlin, a former United States Attorney and founder
of the National Women's Political Caucus.

Both candidates have made damaging statements that left them close to a dead
heat in the final Iowa Poll, published by The Des Moines Register today. It
found Mr. Branstad leading by 45 to 43 percent, with 12 percent undecided or for
other candidates.

The brightest spot in the Middle West for Republicans is Illinois.  Gov. James
R. Thompson has weathered some early controversies and built such a strong lead
over former Senator Adlai E. Stevenson 3d that national Democratic strategists
concede the race.

In Nebraska, Democratic strategists contend that a late campaign stop by Mr.
Reagan may actually have helped the prospects for an upset victory against
Republican Gov. Charles Thone by Bob Kerrey, a Vietnam War veteran and a holder
of the Medal of Honor.

Kansas Candidate Weakened

For weeks, Kansas Republicans had harbored hopes of unseating Gov.  John Carlin,
a Democrat. But privately, Republican specialists said their candidate, Sam
Hardage, had hurt himself by opposing a state severance tax and favoring a
gasoline tax.

In the South, Republicans felt the sharpest fight had developed in Alabama
between Mr. Wallace and Emory Folmar, the Republican Mayor of Montgomery. Mr.
Folmar, with an expensive advertising campaign, was seeking to capitalize on the
split in Democratic ranks in the tough primary fight.

In Arkansas, both sides reported a virtual dead heat between former Gov. Bill
Clinton, a Democrat, and Gov. Frank D. White, who took the Statehouse from Mr.
Clinton two years ago.

Although Republicans concede that Nevada's Gov. Robert F. List seems virtually
certain to lose to his Democratic opponent, Richard Bryan, they hope to take
Democratic-held statehouses in New Mexico and Idaho and New Hampshire. In Idaho,
Gov. John V. Evans, the Democrat, faces a tough battle with Lieut. Gov. Phil
Batt. In New Mexico, former State Senator John Irick, a Republican, is making a
strong bid against Toney Anaya, a Democrat with close ties to former Gov. Jerry
Apodaca.

In New Hampshire, John N. Sonunu, a Tufts University professor of engineering,
put on a final press against Gov. Hugh Gallen, a Democrat.

In several states, incumbent governors seemed in strong positions to hold their
seats. Among them are Connecticut, where Gov. William A. O'Neill has steadily
led his Republican opponent, Lewis B. Rome, a ranking state legislator, in the
polls.

Other Incumbents Hold Leads

Other incumbents holding comfortable leads for re-election were Joseph E.
Brennan of Maine, J. Joseph Garrahy of Rhode Island, Harry R. Hughes of
Maryland, George Nigh of Oklahoma, Bruce Babbitt of Arizona and Richard D. Lamm
of Colorado, all Democrats, and Republicans Richard A. Snelling of Vermont, Dick
Thornburgh of Pennsylvania and William J. Janklow of South Dakota.

But four other races were much tighter. In Alaska, William Sheffield, a
Democrat, and Thomas A. Fink, two businessmen and personal hunting friends, were
in a close race. In Wyoming, Gov. Ed Herschler, a Democrat, was reported to be
staving off a strong drive by Warren A. Morton, his Democratic opponent. In
Hawaii, Gov. George Ariyoshi, a Democrat, was said to be benefiting from a
three-way race to hold off D.G. Anderson, a Republican. In Oregon, Gov. Victor
G.  Atiyeh, the Republican, has made a comeback to take an edge in surveys over
Ted Kulongoski, the Democrat.

Finally, two Democrats were regarded as almost sure winners in Massachusetts and
Georgia. In the Bay State, former Gov. Michael S.  Dukakis, who won out over
Gov. Edward J. King in a tough Democratic primary, was well ahead of John W.
Sears, his Republican opponent. In Georgia, Joe Frank Harris, a surprise winner
in the Democratic primary, was ahead of his Republican opponent, State Senator
Robert H. Bell.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EDUCATION;
PREP SCHOOLS FOR THE MILITARY ARE FLOURISHING

BYLINE: By RUTH ROBINSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 975 words


JENNY O'BRIEN and Ben Cotton attend a preparatory school, yet they are hardly
typical preppies. Neither has any intention of applying to Yale, Harvard or
Princeton. Their goal is to enter the United States Military Academy at West
Point. Like their classmates at the Military Academy Preparatory School at Fort
Monmouth, N.J., they wear Army fatiques to class rather than the Brooks Brothers
shirts de rigueur at other exclusive schools.

Applications for admission to the military academies have risen steadily in the
last few years, giving the Fort Monmouth school, along with the Naval Academy
Preparatory School in Newport, R.I., and the Air Force Preparatory School in
Colorado Springs, all quasimilitary institutions operated by the Defense
Department, an increasingly important role in preparing the nation's future
military leaders.

Competition for nomination to the college-level academies is stiff. Applications
to West Point were up about 20 percent this year over last year. Capt. Charles
Pope, a West Point spokesman, said the rise reflected a change in ''the attitude
of the public with regard to the military,'' which suffered during the Vietnam
War. At the Air Force Academy, in Colorado Springs, applications this year were
up by 17 percent. The Naval Academy, in Annapolis, Md., received 12,614
applications for the class of 1986, as against 11,897 for the class of '85. The
size of the entering class at all three institutions, however, has remained
fairly constant at about 1,400 each.

The purpose of the preparatory schools is to help young people meet the high
admission standards of the academies. Army Prep, established in 1946, is open to
both civilians and Army personnel. The civilians it accepts have been referred
by the West Point admissions office as having potential but needing a little
more work to meet cadet standards. Once in the preparatory school, however they
become part of the Army's Enlisted Reserves and receive pay according to their
rank.

Entrance requirements for the 10-month Army preparatory program are quite
specific. An applicant must be a United States citizen or become one by the end
of the program; at least 17 years old but not over 21; a high school graduate;
of ''high moral character,'' and must be single with no children. Each applicant
must also meet the medical requirements for admission to the Military Academy.
The Navy and Air Force prepatory schools have similar entrance requirements.

People already in the Army often make sacrifices to enter the school. Having
survived basic training, and sometimes found comfortable slots in the service,
some find the long and regimented day hard to take.

''It is a radical resocialization process,'' said Col. Melville A.  Drisko Jr.,
the Army school's commandant, himself a graduate of the school.

Each weekday starts at 5:45 A.M. and ends with lights out at 11 P.M. There are
two one-hour sessions in English and two in mathematics daily, as well as a
mandatory study period from 8 P.M. to 11. Time is also set aside for physical
training and sports. ''Every soldier is required to be an athlete,'' Colonel
Drisko said.

Private Cotton, a 20-year-old from Sheridan, Wyo., joined the service shortly
after graduating from high school two years ago.  Although he continues to draw
his salary as a private first class, he misses the extra jump pay he received
while serving with an airborne battalion at Fort Bragg, N.C.

Of the 330 cadet candidates who began the course in August, about 200 will make
it to the Academy. Most of those who drop out do so voluntarily. Some become
reluctant to make the required 10-year commitment: a year at the school, four
years at the Academy and five years' active duty. Regular Army students who drop
out return to their units. Students in the Enlisted Reserve who drop out can be
assigned elsewhere in the Army, most often they become civilians again.

Private O'Brien, 19, who joined the Regular Army right after high school in
Fontana, Wis., said that as a woman she felt more at home at the school than she
had in her Army unit, even though social practices among fellow students were
strictly prescribed.

No Chemistry Classes

Harold G. Beal Jr., dean of academics and one of 25 civilians on the faculty and
staff of 75, said Army Prep, unlike its Navy and Air Force counterparts, did not
include chemistry in the curriculum because the aim was not to teach the
equivalent of first-year West Point courses but to make the students capable of
handling such courses. A reading specialist meets with students who need aid,
and all cadet candidates become familiar with the special calculator that is
used at West Point. The calculator costs about $85 at the Post Exchange, but is
virtually the students' only expense. Tuition, room and board and uniforms are
free.

Dormatories are spartan double-bunk rooms, and students are charged demerits if
their slippers are out of line or if the electric desk clock is not positioned
correctly. For leisure time, there are a library, video games, pinball machines,
television, and a gymnasium with weightlifting equipment and exercise machines.
Students in good academic standing can leave the post on weekends.

Some students see the preparatory school and West Point, where graduates are
commissioned as second lieutenants, as a way to an excellent free education, and
say that when they complete military service at 28 or 29 they will still be
young enough to enter the corporate world. Those already dedicated to a military
career view the school as the best way to become an officer and advance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Court to Rule on State Bank Taxes

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 702 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 1


The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether a state that imposes a tax on
bank shares can include the bank's holdings of Federal notes and bonds in
calculating the value of the shares.

Federal law generally bars state and local taxation of Federal obligations, but
various state courts have disagreed over whether that immunity also applies when
the notes and bonds are not taxed directly but are simply factors in the overall
valuation of taxable assets.

Seven states levy a special tax on the shares of stock issued by banks. The
banks' shareholders are nominally liable for the tax, but banks themselves often
pay it on behalf of their shareholders and then take a special deduction against
their Federal tax liability.

Challenge to Texas Law

The case before the Court is a challenge to the Texas law, brought by the
American Bank and Trust Company and several other banks in Dallas. The banks
sought a state court declaration that the state's refusal to exclude the value
of Federal obligations from the calculation of the cash value of the banks'
stock violated Federal law. The Texas Court of Appeals rejected their argument.

When the banks' appeal reached the Supreme Court last spring, the Justices asked
the Justice Department for the Government's views on the significance of the
issue. The department told the Court in September that, according to the
Treasury Department, ''resolution of this issue will have a significant impact
upon the borrowing power of the United States'' because the Texas tax
effectively reduced the yield of the Federal obligations and made them less
attractive investments for banks and their shareholders.

The Justice Department noted that the Georgia Supreme Court had upheld a similar
law in that state. The other states that tax bank shares are Louisiana, Nevada,
Ohio, Pennsylvania and West Virginia.  The issue can also arise, at least
theoretically, in other states that impose taxes on the value of shares issued
by nonbank corporations, if those corporations own Federal bonds and notes.

The case, American Bank and Trust Co., v. Dallas County, No.  81-1717, is one of
several cases involving state bank taxes on the Supreme Court's docket. The
Court has also agreed to hear a challenge to a Tennessee tax on banks' net
earnings, which the state defines to include interest earned on Federal
obligations but not on bonds issued by Tennessee or its localities.

No Hearing for Chase

The Court today also declined to hear an appeal by the Chase Manhattan Bank from
a Federal appeals court ruling that held the bank liable for deposits held in
its Saigon branch when South Vietnam fell in 1975. Chase closed the branch and
evacuated its employees, leaving all the assets behind, six days before Saigon
fell to the Communists. The next day, all banks in South Vietnam were
nationalized.

At the 1975 rate of exchange, the corporate checking accounts and sole
certificate of deposit involved in the dispute were worth about $450,000.
However, in upholding the claims of the Vietnamese depositors, the United States
Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit said that Chase would have an
opportunity to show that in practical terms the deposits were worth considerably
less.

In its Supreme Court appeal, Chase Manhattan v. Vishipco Line, No.  81-1591, the
bank challenged the appeals court's theory that the bank's obligation to pay the
depositors ''sprang'' from Saigon to New York when the branch was closed. Chase
said it had already lost the branch and all the assets, and should not also have
to pay the assets a second time to Vietnamese nationals.

The New York Clearing House Association and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
both supported Chase's appeal. But the Justice Department, the views of which
were solicited by the Supreme Court last spring, told the Justices that, even
though the appeals court's decision ''may well be erroneous,'' the case was
highly unusual and not important enough for the Court to review.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Agency Plans Test On Cleaning Up Toxin

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 286 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 1


The Environmental Protection Agency announced today that it would test a
''promising'' new technique for cleaning up a deadly chemical at a contaminated
site in Missouri.

The chemical, dioxin, known to cause cancer, has been found in high
concentrations at several sites in southeast Missouri, including three horse
arenas. One arena will be the site for the tests.

A spokesman for the agency said that the testing was being undertaken at the
request of state officials. Dioxin is an ingredient in herbicides, and in Agent
Orange, a defoliant used in the Vietnam War.

The executive director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, Leon
Billings, said of the timing of the announcement, made on the eve of the
Congressional election, ''One can assume it was politically motivated.''

The agency spokesman, Byron Nelson, was asked if the announcement was timed to
help Republican candidates. He replied: ''We are trying to protect people. It's
a tough problem. We've been asked by officials to do everything at our
disposal.''

The procedure involves spraying the contaminated soil with a mixture of sodium
hydroxide and polyethelene glycol to break down the dioxins.

Dr. Riordan said that the dioxins were known to be at 20 or more places in
Missouri, sometimes in concentrations as high as several parts per million.
Concentrations of parts per billion have been regarded by the agency and by
public health groups as a threat.

The contamination in Missouri occurred when waste oils containing the chemical
were hauled around the state in the early 1970's. Some oil was used in the
arenas to keep dust down.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER MEETS THAI OFFICIALS ON SECOND STOP OF 5-NATION TOUR

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 390 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 2


Secretary of Defense Caspar W.  Weinberger met with Thai leaders here today on a
tour designed to show American support for friendly nations in Southeast Asia
and the Pacific.

High on the region's security agenda are Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia, the
buildup of the Soviet Navy in the Pacific, the desire of some nations for a
larger American naval presence and the desire of others for more arms aid.

Mr. Weinberger told reporters this morning in Singapore, where he talked with
Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, that what he sees as a Soviet threat ''is clearly
increasing in the Pacific and it is obviously the thing we discuss with each of
the countries.''

His Air Force jet landed at Don Muang Airport to full military honors, and he
proceeded to Government House for talks with Prime Minister Prem Tinsulanonda,
who is also Defense Minister. Mr.  Weinberger later took a short cruise on the
Chao Phrya River with Gen. Arthit Kamlang-ek, Commander in Chief of the army,
and Gen.  Saiyud Kerdphol, head of the military's supreme command.

General Prem told reporters that the United States would increase its military
aid to Thailand. But an American Embassy spokesman said the Prime Minister was
referring to an additional $12 million in foreign military sales credits for
fiscal 1982, which ended Sept.  30. The increase, already announced, brought the
year's total military aid to Thailand to $82 million.

The Reagan Administration has asked Congress for $91 million for Thai military
aid during the current fiscal year, plus $2.2 million for military training and
$10 million for economic support to Thailand's ''security-sensitive areas.''
There is also a request for $28 million in economic aid.

The other nations on Mr. Weinberger's itinerary - Indonesia, New Zealand and
Australia - have expressed concern about the way the United States has urged
Japan to enlarge its navy and patrol more of the Pacific.

President Suharto of Indonesia
has said that Washington's strategic and economic links with Peking might make
it easier for China to spend its resources subverting the region's non-Communist
countries. Mr. Weinberger is to meet with President Suharto in Jakarta on
Wednesday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NATIONAL COUNCIL OF CHURCHES FACES NEW TYPE OF CRITIC

BYLINE: By CHARLES AUSTIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 902 words


The National Council of Churches has taken extraordinary steps to counter
magazine and broadcast reports that its leaders say have unfairly linked the
group to leftist political and social programs.

The nation's largest ecumenical organization, long a favorite target of the
religious and political right, also faces new criticism from another front: a
small but well-organized coalition of theologians and others who consider
themselves political centrists.  These new critics say they feel that statements
by the council on social issues show a lack of appreciation for American
democracy.

Some of the criticism echoes earlier allegations that national church
organizations have adopted a thoroughgoing leftist political stance and
abandoned the Bible as the authority for Christian life.  But while these
charges came from the religious and political right, the new attacks come from
people who disavow connections with extremist views.

Officials of the National Council of Churches, including its president, James
Armstrong, a United Methodist Bishop, say they are taking the critiques
seriously, but they are angry at how the organization is portrayed. They say the
articles and broadcast interviews characterize the council as more interested in
Marxist political theory than in preaching the Gospel.

Described as Myths

Before this week's meeting of the council's 180-member governing board, the
organization of 32 Protestant and Orthodox church bodies issued a special issue
of its tabloid newspaper in an effort to dispel what it calls myths about the
agency that have resurfaced in recent months.

The council's office of news and information has also distributed a background
memorandum telling supporters how to respond to criticisms that appeared in a
Reader's Digest article on the World Council of Churches and a recent television
program of the Public Broadcasting System. Heads of several denominations who
are members of the world council wrote to their members in July to repudiate the
information in the Reader's Digest article.

Church leaders also expect a forthcoming article in Reader's Digest to be
unfavorable to the National Council of Churches and have written the magazine to
complain about the writer, Rael Jean Isaac, and how research for the article was
handled.

A spokesman for Reader's Digest said this week that the magazine believed the
article on the world council ''had been carefully researched.'' Charles
Pintchman, deputy director of corporate affairs for the magazine, said he was
unaware of the letter about the forthcoming magazine article.

Bishop Armstrong appeared on ''Firing Line,'' a widely syndicated PBS program,
where William F. Buckley Jr., the host, chastised him for the council's
opposition to the Vietnam War and its current views on nuclear disarmament.

The CBS News television program ''60 Minutes'' is preparing a segment on the
national council that church officials expect to be critical of their
activities. In an interview taped for the program, Bishop Armstrong is asked to
explain church involvement in aid to liberation movements in Africa.

In a pastoral letter, Bishop Armstrong said his interview with Morley Safer, a
CBS News reporter, was ''disturbing'' because questions put to him seemed like
''judgmental editorial sentences.'' The Indiana Bishop said, ''It appears to me
that the thrust of the program has been determined before the cameras did their
selective work at the North Indiana conference or before Mr. Safer came to our
home.'' A spokesman for CBS News, Ari Marabel said it was the network's policy
not to comment on programs in preparation.

Focus of New Criticism

Much of the increased criticism of the council comes from the Institute for
Religion and Democracy, headed by the Rev. Ed Robb, a United Methodist
evangelist who has been a frequent critic of his own denomination and its
involvement in the council.

The institute, based in Washington, has only about 800 members, but it has
collected more than $350,000 in grants from foundations and individuals to
pursue its critique of liberal religion. Mr. Robb says CBS News consulted him in
preparing the segment to be broadcast on ''60 Minutes'' later this year.

''We are a threat to the N.C.C. because we are a centrist organization, and they
are not accustomed to having criticism from people of this background,'' Mr.
Robb asserted. He said liberal church leaders showed a ''lack of appreciation
for democratic values.''

Council officials discount the impact of the institute and similar groups, but
at least one public debate was held last year between council supporters and
institute members.

''I don't think the critiques have had much direct effect on us,'' said Dr. Arie
Brouwer, a member of the council's governing board, who is general secretary of
the Reformed Church in America. But Dr.  Brouwer said, ''The sentiments they
represent may be becoming more visible among our people.''

He said he perceived a ''more cautious approach to social concerns, along with a
certain turning away from them in order to focus more on spiritual matters.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Ex-V.A. Head Wins in Georgia

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 31 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 2


The former director of the Veterans Administration, Max Cleland, a triple
amputee who fought in the Vietnam war, won election today as Secretary of State
in Georgia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 3, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'BACK TO BACK,' G.I.'S IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 729 words


THE two men we find side by side in Al Brown's ''Back to Back'' are lowly
American grunts patrolling a demilitarized zone in the South Vietnam of 1966.
They have nothing in common except their fear.  Verville (Eugene Lee) is a black
from the Philadelphia ghetto; Hughes (Keith Gordon) is a middle-class white from
Rhode Island. In ''Back to Back,'' these young soldiers while away a long, hot,
uneventful day by playing card and word games, by reminiscing about the lives
they left back home, by bickering about food and cigarettes. As Mr.  Brown sees
it, an anguished war could also be, for those who waged it, painfully boring. Or
so it was until nightfall, when the ''black pajama devils'' might suddenly
emerge from the jungle to show the Americans what real pain was about.

''Back to Back,'' which is receiving a fine production at the WPA, proves an
unusual treatment of a familiar piece of history. Although Mr. Brown is far too
successful in conveying the tedium that afflicts his soldiers -especially in his
overlong first act -he has written his play with refreshing candor. In ''Back to
Back,'' there are no lectures about the war's moral or political implications;
nor are there the expected sentimental scenes in which the black and white
heroes learn that they are blood brothers under the skin.  Verville and Hughes
keep their distance from each other until the very end, and even at the end they
don't make eye contact. They're neither friends nor enemies - just strangers
thrown together by chance in a difficult job.

Was this the way it sometimes was? I don't know, but Mr. Brown makes a
persuasive case with his dialogue, which captures the inarticulate, often
trivial personalities of both men. If the seeming reality of ''Back to Back''
can also be dull, it's because of the writing's repetitiveness and its lack of
even a buried structure. The author's ability to avoid exposition, confessional
monologues and melodrama is commendable, but he hasn't taken the next step of
using his small talk to deepen the characters indirectly as the play proceeds.
Except for a few facts, we learn nearly all we're ever going to know about
Verville and Hughes and their impersonal relationship in the first half-hour.

The actors keep us interested in the heroes throughout, even if they don't
convince us that they're as funny as Mr. Brown seems to find them. Mr. Gordon,
who has played brainy young men so well in ''Album'' and ''Dressed to Kill,'' is
both a clownish and touching sight as Hughes, a bumbling nerd who is equally
adept at losing his weapons and his lunch. Mr. Lee's Verville is a hostile,
fatalistic sad sack who is certain that no better life awaits him at home should
he return from Vietnam alive. In one of the play's moving moments, he struggles
to describe the war's horrors in a tape-cassette message to his mother, only to
come up with the statement, ''Last week was bad.''

Douglas Johnson's direction is flawless; we feel, as the exposed soldiers do,
that danger is always lurking just beyond the barbed wire of Edward T.
Gianfrancesco's open set. Craig Evans's lighting does an exceptionally good job
of capturing the eerie blue darkness that overcomes the soldiers' post in Act
II. Though that night ultimately explodes with fire, the playwright keeps to
form and presents even the actual outbreak of bloodshed as a routine event, over
which his characters can only achieve a very small victory.  ''Back to Back'' is
also a very small victory, but it does promise bigger things from Al Brown in
plays to come.

Chance Assignment
BACK TO BACK, by Al Brown; directed by Doug- las Johnson; setting by Edward T.
Gianfrancesco; lighting by Craig Evans; costumes by Don Newcomb; sound by
Michael Kartzmer; produc- tion stage manager, Mary Fran Loftus. Pre- sented by
the WPA Theater, Kyle Renick, artistic director. At 138 Fifth Avenue.  Verville
...................................Eugene Lee Hughes
...................................Keith Gordon

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Keith Gordon

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS GAIN 5 GOVERNORS

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 612 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Nov. 3


The Democrats, seizing on the rare opportunity of five retiring Republican
Governors, captured five new governorships in the Middle West in the election
and clung to a slim chance at a sixth.

In Illinois, where pre-election opinion polls had indicated a big lead for the
Republican incumbent, James R. Thompson, only 34,000 votes separated the
Governor from his Democratic challenger, Adlai E. Stevenson 3d, the former
Senator. The race in which three million ballots had been cast was considered
too close to call. There were nearly 400 precincts to be heard from but the
hopes of Mr.  Stevenson's supporters were beginning to fade. About half the
precincts were in the city of Chicago, where the Senator had outpolled Mr.
Thompson by a wide margin.

The Republicans lost six House seats in the region, including the central
Illinois district once held by Abraham Lincoln and long held by Representative
Paul Findley. There was no change in the Middle West's Senate representation.
But aggressive Republican candidates did manage to trim substantially the
winning percentage for Wisconsin's Senator William Proxmire and they recaptured
an Ohio House seat lost to the Democrats in 1980.

''Things sure look good for us in the Midwest,'' said Eugene Eidenberg,
executive director of the Democratic National Committee, ''and no one thought
we'd be so close in Illinois.''

''We would have preferred to do better in the Midwest,'' said Rich Galen, a
spokesman for the National Republican Congressional Committee, ''but there were
times earlier this fall when tide was running so strong the wrong way that we'd
have been happy to come out of the Midwest with just these losses.''

Ohio Elects Democrat

In Ohio, where Gov. James A. Rhodes was retiring, Richard F.  Celeste, a former
Democratic Lieutenant Governor and Peace Corps director from Cleveland, easily
defeated Representative Clarence J.  Brown, winning 59 percent of the vote in
his third statewide campaign.

In Michigan, where the Republican incumbent William G. Milliken retired,
Representative James J. Blanchard seized on the state's unemployment rate of
15.9 percent, the highest in the country, to become Michigan's first Democratic
Governor in 20 years. He easily defeated Richard H. Headlee, a conservative
insurance executive.

Voters in both Wisconsin and Minnesota, where Republican incumbents retired
after one term, also turned to Democrats this year. Anthony S. Earl, a former
Democratic state cabinet member, beat Terry J. Kohler, a Republican businessman,
winning 57 percent of the vote to Mr. Kohler's 42 percent.

Perpich Returns in Minnesota

Rudy Perpich, a maverick Democrat, gained an even larger percentage in
Minnesota, capturing 59 percent of the vote to return to the Governor's chair he
held four years ago. His Republican opponent, Wheelock Whitney, also a
businessman, won only 41 percent.

Nebraska, normally a conservative Republican stronghold, narrowly turned out
Gov. Charles Thone, a Republican, in favor of Bob Kerrey, a Democrat, a
restaurant owner who won the Congressional Medal of Honor in Vietnam.

Iowa's voters, who saw a Republican Governor, Robert Ray, retire, turned down
Roxanne Conlin, a Democrat and former United States Attorney, in favor of Lieut.
Gov. Terry Branstad, who at 35 years of age becomes the nation's youngest
Governor.

There were no surprises in the Middle West's Senate races, with all incumbents
winning.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert and Corinne Michel

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

300 HONOR SIDNEY HOOK AS DEFENDER OF REASON

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 824 words


The very first article, some 69 years ago, contained a bit of the foolishness of
a bright but badly informed 11-year-old. Dear editor, it said to The New York
Tribune in 1913, I'm shocked to learn that the entire 3,000-mile border with
Canada is unfortified.

That not very impressive beginning by Sidney Hook was followed by deeper,
better-informed writings over subsequent decades. Mr. Hook's latest
bibliographical list contains more than 1,000 items, including articles,
reviews, essays and some of the most influential books on philosophy and public
policy of our era, books like ''From Hegel to Marx'' and ''Reason, Social Myths,
and Democracy.''

An account of that first published letter, along with expressions of awe and
respect for the later work, were on the program at the St. Regis-Sheraton Hotel
as some 300 friends paid tribute to Mr. Hook, who will celebrate his 80th
birthday in December. He is now professor emeritus of philosophy at New York
University, a senior research fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford
University and one of America's most influential thinkers.

A Tribute to Reason

The St. Regis event, attended by many of America's leading intellectuals, was a
sentimental affair; but it was also a celebration of nothing less than reason
itself, or of what Mr. Hook proclaimed in a later interview as one of his most
cherished values, ''civilized discourse.''

The guests at the gathering ranged from old leftist comrades of Mr. Hook - like
Samuel H. Friedman, a 16-time delegate to the Socialist International - to labor
leaders like Lane Kirkland of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.; a conservative social critic,
Irving Kristol, and Reagan Administration officials like Jeane Kirkpatrick, the
United States delegate to the United Nations, who read a letter of
congratulations from the President.

Casting his eye over the guests last Friday, Mr. Hook noted that many were not
friends of one another, only of Mr. Hook himself. Their coming together, he
added, exemplified the endurance of civilized discourse at a time when ''the
mores of civility are threatened by angry political tides.''

Then he brought a roar of laughter by declaring: ''It would be possible to fill
a much larger hall with those who are not friends of Sidney Hook.''

Conservative and Liberal

Mr. Hook, considered one of the most controversial intellectuals of his time, is
a fervent democrat and anti-Communist. He is best known for his conservative
views on defense and foreign policy.

At the same time he is traditionally liberal in other areas, like welfare
spending and labor unions. He is, in the words of Paul Kurtz, a former student
of Mr. Hook's who is now professor of philosophy at the State University of New
York at Buffalo, ''the American Socrates, a great gadfly and, in my judgment,
the most consistent defender of freedom.''

Born in 1902 in New York and raised in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, Mr.
Hook graduated from City College in New York and, while teaching school part
time, studied at Columbia University under the renowned pragmatist philosopher
John Dewey.

Since then, as Michael Joyce, one of the guests at the dinner pointed out, ''he
has been at the center of the passions that cut through American intellectual
life.''

Mr. Hook stirred his first major controversy when he broke with the supporters
of Stalinist Russia during the Soviet show trials of the 1930's, a gesture
viewed as treason by many in the left-leaning New York intelligentsia.

Skeptical of Soviet Union

During World War II Mr. Hook argued persistently that the Soviet Union should be
considered a ''co-belligerent'' rather than an ally.  He engaged in public
debates with Bertrand Russell and Albert Einstein on disarmament and criticized
the Supreme Court for, in his view, usurping the power of Congress.

Mr. Hook's fervent anti-Communism led him to support the American involvement in
the Vietnam war, a position that made him a focus of attack by antiwar
activists.

''Sidney is not out to be loved,'' said Irving Kristol after the party for Mr.
Hook had ended. ''He doesn't sway with the wind, because his position is so
firmly rooted in a commitment to the democratic idea.''

Mr. Hook himself points to a ''fanaticism of virtue'' as the gravest danger to
intellectual life.  As his 80th birthday approaches, he says he is embarrassed
by the tributes and accepts them on behalf of old colleagues, including those
who have died. He told the assemblage at his party of ''a recurrent dream in
which there is a table of the dead whose faces I see, friends and comrades of my
generation who fought beside me in common causes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sidney Hook and Irving Kristol

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN PERSPECTIVE AT THE I.M.F.

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


Three times a week, they drift into the well guarded entrance of a 12th-floor
boardroom and take their assigned places around an oversized oak table.

There are about 75 officials, all weighted down with briefcases and sheaves of
technical papers. They have come for a meeting of the board of one of the more
esoteric, occasionally controversial, yet generally important institutions of
the postwar world, the International Monetary Fund.

On any one day the discussion may center on the equilibrium rate for the
Seychelles rupee, the terms of trade for Gambian groundnuts, prospects for
Central American bananas or the outlook for interest rates, inflation and
employment in the United States, Western Europe and Japan.

The I.M.F. makes loans to any of its 146 member countries that have trouble
paying their international bills. It lends, however, only after negotiating the
conditions under which the countries will make appropriate policy adjustments
that put them on a course to pay the money back in a few years. In that sense
the I.M.F. operates like a commercial bank.

It tries to be apolitical, but some of its loans turn out to be very political.

Recent Talk of Collapse

In that green-carpeted room the size of a basketball court are members of the
fund's staff such as Jacques de Larosiere, the managing director, or E. Walter
Robichek, director of the Western Hemisphere Department, and representatives of
governments such as Bruno de Maulde, executive director from France, Yusuf A.
Nimatallah of Saudi Arabia and Richard D. Erb of the United States.

Collectively, they try to keep the world's financial system working. ''We talk
about the nitty-gritty of what is perceived of as the stability of the system,''
said Mr. Erb, an economic official in the Nixon and Ford administrations and a
former investment banker who has represented the Reagan Administration for the
past 18 months.

Recently, there has been a lot of talk about possible collapse of the monetary
system because of the troubles of such big borrowers as Mexico, Poland and
Brazil. There have also been worries about a deepening of the worldwide
recession.

The United States, as the world's biggest economy, is in both the driver's seat
and the hot seat at those frequent meetings on the 12th floor. It has 20 percent
of the weighted vote and, therefore, exercises veto power. It also provides 20
percent of the money for the loans.

'Meetings Can Be Very Dry'

According to Mr. Erb, the United States wields its power with discretion. ''This
is really an analytical body, not a political forum,'' said the lean,
41-year-old. ''There is a very high professional quality. Just about everybody
in the room has a Ph.D in economics. Our meetings can be very dry. Impressions
that it is the U.S. versus the rest of the world are simply incorrect. No one
nation can dominate. What I see is a world that is very diverse.''

Mr. Erb, who has monitored international economic developments for a last decade
and a half, said that despite the policy differences among nations. there was a
''very efficient collective process'' at work in the I.M.F.

''I don't understand at times the extreme fear outside, as if nothing were being
done,'' he said. ''From what I see we are working every day on the bricks and
mortar of the system. We review just about every economy once a year, measuring
what it is doing against the problems it faces and the help it may need.''

Mr. Erb called for historical perspective: ''Remember the crunch of 75-76.
Italy, Portugal and Turkey had problems. I get a sense of deja vu. While some
countries are borrowing, others are paying off their debts. That doesn't mean
there aren't problems today, but they're manageable.''

Role of the Point Man

The United States has opposed loans to Nicaragua, Vietnam and Granada, pressed
the case for a loan to El Salvador despite the opposition of Western Europe and
the I.M.F. staff and supported South Africa's loan application.

Mr. Erb is the point man, carrying out policies made at the Treasury Department
and at the White House that he may or may not have had a hand in. He is in touch
daily with Beryl Sprinkel, Under Secretary of the Treasury for Monetary Affairs
and with Marc E.  Leland, Assistant Secretary for International Affairs.

''All other countries know what's going on in America. Where I can be helpful is
to provide some of the thinking that goes into policymaking,'' Mr. Erb said.

Tall, well spoken, armed with his own Ph.D in economics from Stanford, the
American delegate to the I.M.F. was assistant director of the Council on
International Economic Policy in the Nixon White House. During the Ford
Administration he moved to Treasury as Deputy Assistant Secretry for Developing
Nations Finance.

What's next? Although Mr. Erb says he has no plans to leave his present job, he
said he may eventually return to investment banking ''to earn some money.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Richard Erb

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

I.M.F. LOAN TO PRETORIA IS VOTED

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


The International Monetary Fund today approved a $1.1 billion loan to South
Africa despite opposition from many third-world countries and strong criticism
of its racial policies even by governments supporting the loan.

Monetary fund sources said the extent of the opposition was unprecedented for
this 146-nation institution, which routinely lends to countries that have
trouble paying their international bills.

The Washington-based fund declined to disclose the vote but the Center for
International Policy, which studies foreign assistance and human rights
problems, said that 68 countries, mainly from Africa and the Middle East, voted
against the loan.

The weight of a country's vote is determined by its economic strength. The
United States, Canada and most Western European countries supported the loan. In
the weighted voting, those in favor held 51.6 percent and those opposed, 19.24
percent. Most countries in Latin America abstained.

Richard D. Erb, the executive director representing the United States, condemned
apartheid - as the racial segregation policies of South Africa are known - but
insisted that the fund's lending rules should be applied impartially. Similar
arguments were voiced by European representatives.

The I.M.F. has lent money to a number of countries with poor records in human
rights, including Rumania, Vietnam, Nicaragua, Argentina and El Salvador.

Opposition in Congress

At least 35 American lawmakers wrote to Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan
opposing the loan. Among them was Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, chairman
of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, who warned that the loan
''will be viewed by the nonwhite community within South Africa as support for an
unjust status quo.''

Responding to the criticism, the State Department issued an unusual statement
that said, ''The U.S. position on the South African drawing indicates no change
in our position to apartheid nor in our opposition to the use of force to
resolve political differences in the region.''

South Africa will draw $689 million under the fund's compensatory financing
program, which is intended to provide temporary help for countries suffering a
decline in export earnings, and $394 million under a standby arrangement that
South Africa may use as needed. The money is available for three to five years.

The fund said in a statement that South Africa's export earnings in the 12
months ended June 1982 fell 13 percent below the the average of the preceding
two years.

The shortfall reflected declines in export receipts for gold, its major export,
as well as for diamonds, uranium, platinum, nickel, copper, iron ore, citrus and
wool.

The fund said that South Africa had qualified for the standby arrangement by
agreeing to conditions under which it will restrain growth of its money supply,
pursue a flexible exchange rate policy and limit growth of domestic bank credit.
The program's goal is to reduce the current account deficit in the balance of
payments from nearly 6 percent of the gross national product earlier this year
to 2 percent by 1983.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 4, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Move by Nixon Helped in 1973

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 169 words


President Richard M. Nixon played a central role in propelling the Dow Jones
industrial average to its previous record nearly 10 years ago.

On Jan. 11, 1973, a Thursday, the President ended mandatory wage and price
controls that he had imposed to combat inflation, signaling a welcome relaxation
for the economy. Reacting to the news, investors pushed the key stock market
barometer ahead 5.64 points, to 1,051.70. That closing mark remained unbroken
until yesterday.

In the next two trading sessions, however, investors took a harder look at the
Nixon economic program and concluded that the potential for a new surge of
inflation remained strong. On Friday, the Dow plunged 12.34 points. On Monday,
Jan. 15, despite an early spurt linked to hopes for a Vietnam peace agreement,
the index plunged another 13.77, closing at 1,025.59.

The two-day decline of 26.11 points was described at the time as the fourth
largest since the early 1970's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET NAVY: BUILDUP SEEN IN THE PACIFIC;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


The Soviet Union is continuing to expand its military power in the Pacific,
according to senior officers in the United States Navy.  Adm. Robert Long,
commander of American forces in the Pacific and Indian Oceans, said Backfire
bombers were flying missions from the Kamchatka Peninsula in the Soviet Far East
and from Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam.

He said the arrival in the Pacific theater of the Backfire, a medium-range
supersonic plane, added ''a new dimension to the threat to sea lanes in the
area.'' From their present bases, he said, Backfires could attack Midway, Guam
and the Philippines and return without refueling.

In addition, the admiral said, a third of the Soviet Union's SS-20 missiles have
now been deployed in the Far East. He said that the missiles, some of which are
within range of Japan, were armed with 250 nuclear warheads.

Also pointing to an increase of Soviet power in the Pacific area are
intelligence reports reaching Washington and other Western capitals on Soviet
naval construction plans. These reports suggest that the Soviet Union is
expanding construction of major surface ships and that it intends to build an
aircraft carrier of 60,000 to 70,000 tons that will probably be driven by
nuclear power.

Likely to Be Operational by 1990

Rear Adm. Sumner Shapiro, the Navy's director of intelligence, told a
subcommittee of the Senate Armed Services Committee several months ago that he
expected such a ship to be operational by the end of this decade.

In other reports on Soviet naval construction, Western intelligence sources say
the third ship of the Kiev class, the Novorossiisk, has begun her sea trials and
the fourth, and probably final, one is about to be launched.

A guided-missile cruiser armed with a cruise missile with a range of 300
mautical miles is also reported about to begin sea trials. A cruise missile is a
winged weapon powered by jet engines that flies like a plane and can be guided
to its target.

Two new classes of guided-missile destroyers are said to have completed sea
trials. The Sovremenny, the lead ship of one class, reportedly carries two
130-millimeter guns, the largest put on a Soviet ship in nearly 30 years, as
well as new antiship cruise missiles.

The first of the Udaloi class of guided-missile destroyers is also reported to
have completed her sea trials. Western naval intelligence experts say they
believe the class is to provide the principal antisubmarine warfare element in
Soviet task forces. The new Helix ASW helicopter is expected to be the ships'
principal weapon against submarines.

Expansion in Naval Shipyards

Western intelligence sources report that there has been an increase in the
number of Soviet naval shipyards and and that their equipment has improved
steadily. They say that five major shipyards build submarines and that eight
others build surface ships.

Soviet emphasis on submarines -there are more than 375 of various classes now
operational - appears to have taken on a new significance with the deployment of
the first ship of the Oscar class, which is said to carry 24 SS-N-19 cruise
missiles.

The Typhoon class of nuclear-missile submarines is considered the most important
reinforcement of the naval nuclear armory.  Intelligence sources say that
Typhoons, which are armed with the SS-N-20 missile, would be able to reach
targets in the United States without leaving home waters.

The growth of Soviet sea power, intelligence analysts say, has resulted in
greater projection of that power.  Naval and air centers have been acquired in
Ethiopia and Southern Yemen, and Soviet reconnaissance planes fly missions from
these bases over task forces of the United States and other members of the
Atlantic alliance in the Indian Ocean.

In Africa, Luanda in Angola has replaced Conakry in Guinea as the principal
Soviet naval and air base.  A Soviet Navy squadron is also based on Dahlak
Island off the Ethiopian port of Massawa in the Red Sea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COURT SAYS U.S. SPY AGENCY CAN TAP OVERSEAS MESSAGES

BYLINE: By DAVID BURNHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 6


A Federal appeals court has ruled that the National Security Agency may lawfully
intercept messages between United States citizens and people overseas, even if
there is no cause to believe the Americans are foreign agents, and then provide
summaries of these messages to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Because the National Security Agency is among the largest and most secretive
intelligence agencies and because millions of electronic messages enter and
leave the United States each day, lawyers familiar with the intelligence agency
consider the decision to mark a significant increase in the legal authority of
the Government to keep track of its citizens.

The mission of the N.S.A. is to eavesdrop on the electronic messages of foreign
governments and protect the electronic communications of the United States. To
accomplish these goals, the agency has several thousand listening posts around
the world and a huge bank of computers in its heavily guarded headquarters at
Fort George Meade, Md., near Washington.

A Special Senate Intelligence Committee report in 1975 found that the computer
system functioned like a ''giant vacuum cleaner'' capable of sweeping in all
electronic messages to and from the United States.

Reverses 1979 Ruling

The Oct. 21 decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
involves the Government's surveillance of a Michiganborn lawyer, Abdeen Jabara,
who for many years has represented Arab-American citizens and alien residents in
court. Some of his clients had been investigated by the F.B.I.

Mr. Jabara sued the F.B.I, and the National Security Agency, and in 1979 Federal
District Judge Ralph M. Freeman ruled that the agency's acquisition of several
of Mr. Jabara's overseas messages violated his Fourth Amendment right to be free
of ''unreasonable searches and seizures.'' Last month's decision reverses that
ruling.

The F.B.I.'s investigation of Mr. Jabara, who has not been formally accused or
indicted for any crimes, began in August 1967. In November 1971, the Government
has acknowledged, the bureau asked the security agency ''to supply any available
information'' about the lawyer that ''might come into its possession during the
course of its foreign signals intelligence activities.'' As a result, the agency
provided the F.B.I. summaries of six overseas communications of Mr. Jabara.

F.B.I. Passed Information

In earlier court proceedings, the F.B.I. acknowledged that it then disseminated
the information to 17 other law-enforcement or intelligence agencies and three
foreign governments.

The opinion of the three-judge panel of the Court of Appeals held, ''The simple
fact remains that the N.S.A. lawfully acquired Jabara's messages.''

The court ruled further that the lawyer's Fourth Amendment rights ''were not
violated when summaries of his overseas telegraphic messages'' were furnished to
the investigative bureau ''irrespective of whether there was reasonable cause to
believe that he was a foreign agent.''

Lawyers familiar with the N.S.A. believe the Jabara decision is highly unusual
in that it is the first time the Government has openly acknowledged that the
agency's surveillance equipment was used to acquire the overseas communications
of an individual and that these communications then were passed to a Federal
law-enforcement agency.

In other cases in which individuals have charged such actions, the courts have
ruled that the intelligence agency was protected from acknowledging whether it
had or had not undertaken the alleged surveillance activities, and no rulings
were handed down on the actual legality of its actions.

Mr. Jabara is represented by John Shattuck, Washington director of the American
Civil Liberties Union. In a formal request for a rehearing of the case before
the full 10-judge court of appeals, the A.C.L.U. said, ''It is difficult to
imagine a more sweeping judicial approval of governmental action in violation of
constitutional rights than the decision of the panel in this case.''

Federal Warrants Required

The request for a rehearing contended, ''Taken to its logical conclusion, the
decision authorizes the Federal Government to restructure its surveillance
activities so that any Federal law-enforcement or intelligence investigation
requiring the interception of private communications could be conducted without
a judicial warrant merely by turning to the N.S.A.''

Under current laws, if the F.B.I. wants to eavesdrop legally on the conversation
of a criminal it must obtain a warrant from a Federal judge. In those cases
where the bureau wants to eavesdrop on a specific individual who it believes is
an agent of a foreign government, it can apply for a warrant from a special
secret panel of Federal judges established just for that purpose.

The special missions and advanced technology of the N.S.A., however, make its
operations more difficult to control within the restrictions of the Federal
wiretapping and surveillance laws.  According to the 1975 report of the Special
Senate Intelligence Committee, the agency has equipment that ''sweeps up
enormous numbers of communications, not all of which can be reviewed by
intelligence analysts.''

Key Words and Phrases

''Using 'watch lists' - lists of words and phrases designed to identify
communications of intelligence interest -N.S.A. computers scan the mass of
acquired communications to select those which may be of specific foreign
intelligence interest,'' the report said.

The report added that N.S.A. intelligence analysts review the selected
communications and then ''the foreign intelligence derived from these signals is
reported to the various agencies that have requested it.''

The Senate investigation in 1975 uncovered evidence that the overseas
communications of some individuals engaged in organizing political protests
against the war in Vietnam were subjected to surveillance by the N.S.A.
equipment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DINU LIPATTI'S TALENT HIGHLIGHTS NEW PIANO DISKS

BYLINE: By TIM PAGE

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1296 words


One of the profound artistic calamities of the 20th century was the early death,
from leukemia, of the Rumanian pianist Dinu Lipatti.  Only 33 when he died in
1950, he was recognized as a prodigious talent while still a child, and began
his recording career at the age of 19. In his few remaining years, Mr. Lipatti
made only a scant handful of recordings, yet these have guaranteed his
posthumous reputation, as they are on a uniformly high level.

Now Angel has distilled a four-record set (ZD 3924) from a more comprehensive
seven-disk EMI/ Electrola reissue (IC-197-53780/86M; available from the German
News Company) and has made it available on the American market. It is a fine
package, and contains sterling performances of works by Bach, Mozart, Scarlatti,
Chopin, Liszt, Ravel and Georges Enesco - the pianist's godfather.

Mr. Lipatti's pianism combined a rare delicacy and grace with a rock-hard
structural muscle, passion with a certain Olympian detachment. His repertory was
limited - he was best known as a performer of Bach, Mozart and Chopin - but this
was attributable to his uncompromisingly self-critical nature rather than any
pianistic shortcomings. Until late in his life, Mr. Lipatti had never publicly
performed the music of Beethoven: he claimed that he did not yet feel equal to
the challenge. But what he chose to play, he played splendidly; although he was
not a bravura pianist, and he shunned gratuitous showmanship, his technique was
impeccable.

The new Angel release contains quite a few of the most famous Lipatti
recordings. Here is the celebrated 1948 rendition of Chopin's ''Barcarolle'';
the pianist imparts an irresistible buoyancy to this limpid and evocative
boat-song. And there is the great rendition of Mozart's Piano Concerto in C
(K.467), recorded in performance with Herbert von Karajan. This precious
souvenir was rescued from a live radio broadcast and released on disk some 10
years after Mr. Lipatti's death.

Lipatti archivists will want to search for the imported set. The import contains
studio performances of the Chopin waltzes, which remain, for many, still the
most graceful and attractive renditions of these deceptively simple pieces. In
addition, the EMI sevenrecord set contains distinguished readings of the Grieg
and Schumann concertos, and a selection of Brahms waltzes arranged for four
hands, in a charming rendition recorded in tandem with Mr.  Lipatti's teacher
and mentor, Nadia Boulanger.

It should also be noted that the last Lipatti recital, recorded in France three
months before he died, is still available in some shops as a two-record set on
Angel (3556B), although it has been officially deleted from the catalogue. This
recording captures an almost unbearably poignant moment for posterity, as Mr.
Lipatti, mortally ill and shot full of cortisone, performed for a capacity
audience fully cognizant of his condition. He falters only once, toward the end
of his survey of the waltzes. After performing 13 waltzes, he could no longer
muster the strength necessary to perform the final selection. So he substituted
Myra Hess's piano arrangement of Bach's ''Jesu, Joy of Man's Desiring.'' As the
pianist's wife, Madeleine Lipatti, would later write: ''Broken by fatigue,
scarcely breathing, Mr. Lipatti yet had the courage to play that Bach chorale,
which, for him, was a prayer ....'' An earlier recording of this Bach work is
available on both the European and domestic Lipatti reissues, and, in its rapt
simplicity and awe, it represents the pianist's art at its pinnacle.

An integral survey of the Chopin Nocturnes by Daniel Barenboim has just been
issued by Deutsche Grammophon, and it is one of the finest records he has made
(2741 012; two disks). Although there are some masterpieces among their number,
the Nocturnes often present Chopin at his most formless and perishable. They do
not have the structural and rhythmic vigor of the dance pieces, nor the
complexities of the studies, nor the heroic scale of the Ballades and Scherzos,
and we do not find in the Nocturnes the microcosm of varied emotions that so
dazzles us in the Opus 28 Preludes.

The Nocturnes represent Chopin at his most self-consciously poetic, most
prettified; this is the Chopin of antiquated legend, the sickroom talent propped
up at the piano, rolling his eyes heavenward. As a result, the Nocturnes need a
clear-headed approach if they are to be fully effective; and self-indulgence on
the part of a pianist will render them oversweet. Happily Mr. Barenboim plays
straightforwardly, yet allows the music to breathe. He clearly understands the
Nocturne's moody charms and his use of pedal is effective and spare. This is a
complete set of the Nocturnes, containing several posthumous compositions, and
those in search of a such a set will find Mr. Barenboim's recording most
attractive. Sound and surfaces are first-rate.

Peter Serkin's third recorded Chopin recital, just issued on RCA (ARC1 4356), is
well worth acquiring. Mr. Serkin has put together a nice combination of
well-known works and lesser known but worthy pieces, and this set contains
recordings of three Mazurkas, the First Impromptu, the ''Andante Spinato and
Grand Polonaise,'' the Third Ballade and the Nocturne in E flat,(Op. 55, No. 2).
Mr. Serkin takes a generally classical, even elegant view of this music and it
pays off. This is not to say that there is no passion to his playing, only that
the passion is contained within a limited and literate structural framework.

Mr. Serkin is not a pianist for histrionic excess; those who favor white-hot
Chopin may wish to look elsewhere. But there is a cool intelligence and bright
fire in these recordings. Mr. Serkin has a fresh conception of the Ballade in A
flat, one with a good deal of spring and elasticity, and he takes an obvious joy
in this music. The Mazurkas, while never betraying their humble roots as peasant
dances, do not have the crudity with which they're sometimes imbued, and Mr.
Serkin well understands that there is more than meets the ear in Chopin's
miniatures.

The Vietnamese pianist Dang Thai Son, who won first prize in the 1980 Warsaw
Chopin Competition, has now produced his first recording, a Chopin recital. This
disk, on DG (2531 359), cannot be recommended with much enthusiasm, as it
reveals a talented artist still very much in the process of maturation. Mr. Dang
was born in Hanoi in 1958 and grew up during the worst years of the Vietnam War.
With such a difficult childhood, it is somewhat remarkable that he can play at
all, let alone with such obvious technical finish. Yet there is little soul to
his Chopin, and Chopin without temperament is Chopin slighted.

These are well played but emotionally timid performances. A little restraint is
usually beneficial to Chopin playing, but not in the case of Mr. Dang's recital.
One also questions the wisdom of making a live recording, as it allowed the
pianist no chance to tinker and perfect his ideas, and one can't escape the
feeling that something - perhaps an understandable fear of missing a note - is
holding him back. While there is much to admire here - a close attention to
Chopin's contrapuntal writing and a dignified solemnity to some of the larger
works - Mr. Dang's Chopin is currently rather prosaic. His career merits
watching, but he cannot yet be said to be in a league with the best Chopin
performers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dinu Lipatti

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S WRONG WITH OUR DEFENSE

BYLINE: By David C. Jones

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7865 words


At a late-afternoon meeting at the White House a few months ago, President
Reagan, who had just returned from horseback riding at Quantico, turned to me in
jest, but with a touch of nostalgia, and asked, ''Isn't there some way we can
bring back the horse cavalry?'' My reply was: ''Just wait, Mr. President. We are
starting by resurrecting battleships.''

Below the surface of this lighthearted exchange lie two pervasive problems
within defense: We are too comfortable with the past.  We do not make a
sufficiently rigorous examination of defense requirements and alternatives.  By
their very nature, large organizations have a built-in resistance to change. As
the largest organization in the free world, our defense establishment - the
Department of Defense - has most of the problems of a large corporation but
lacks an easily calculated ''bottom line'' to force needed change. At the core
are the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps: institutions that find it
diffcult to adapt to changing conditions because of understandable attachments
to the past. The very foundation of each service rests on imbuing its members
with pride in its mission, its doctrine and its customs and discipline - all of
which are steeped in traditions. While these deep-seated service distinctions
are important in fostering a fighting spirit, cultivating them engenders
tendencies to look inward and to insulate the institutions against outside
challenges.

The history of our services includes striking examples of ideas and inventions
whose time had come, but which were resisted because they did not fit into
existing service concepts. The Navy kept building sailing ships long after the
advent of steam power. Machine guns and tanks were developed in the United
States, but our Army rejected them until long after they were accepted in
Europe. The horse cavalry survived essentially unchanged right up until World
War II despite evidence that its utility was greatly diminished decades earlier.
Even Army Air Corps officers were required to wear spurs until the late 1930's.

But the armed services are only part of the problem. The Defense Department has
evolved into a grouping of large, rigid bureaucracies -services, agencies,
staffs, boards and committees - which embrace the past and adapt new technology
to fit traditional missions and methods. There is no doubt that the cavalry
leaders would have quickly adopted a horse which went farther and faster - a
hightechnology stallion. The result of this rigidity has been an everwidening
gap between the need to adapt to changing conditions and our ability to do so.
Over the last two to three years the American public has become increasingly
concerned over our deteriorating position in military power and convinced that
we must devote more to our defenses than we did in the 1960's and 1970's. But
after serving on the Joint Chiefs of Staff longer than anyone else in history
and under more Presidents and Secretaries of Defense (four of each), and being a
student of military history and organizations, I am convinced that fundamental
defense deficiencies cannot be solved with dollars alone - no matter how much
they are needed.

We do not think through our defense problems adequately, and we are getting less
capability than we should from our increased defense budgets. There is reason to
believe that, faced with a contingency requiring a major joint operation, our
performance would be below the level we should expect or need.

No one element of our defense establishment is singularly responsible for our
defense problems. The problems I will identify, and for which I will propose
solutions, have existed too long to be the fault of any particular
administration or of particular personalities in or out of uniform.

History books for the most part glorify our military accomplishments, but a
closer examination reveals a disconcerting pattern:

Unpreparedness at the onset of each new crisis or war.  Initial failures.
Reorganizing while fighting.  Building our defenses as we cranked up our
industrial base.  Prevailing by wearing down the enemy - by being bigger, not
smarter.  We could do things poorly at the start of past wars and still recover
because time was on our side.  The North was a striking example of a
bureaucratized military establishment during the Civil War. Initially, the South
had better leadership, was far more flexible and was able to do a great deal
more with its limited resources and forces. The North suffered early defeats and
encountered many leadership problems, but finally won by virtue of overwhelming
industrial output and military manpower.

We also had serious organizational problems during the Cuban campaign of the
Spanish-American War. The interservice wrangling had been so great that the Army
commander refused to let the Navy be represented at the formal surrender.
Unfortunately, this was not the last case of split responsibilities and
interservice conflicts obstructing our conduct of a war.

In the aftermath of the 1898 war, the services, particularly the Army,
instituted some organizational reforms. Despite a great deal of opposition, a
Chief of Staff of the Army was created in 1903 and a Chief of Naval Operations
was established in 1916. But the War Department (the precursor of the Department
of the Army and the Department of the Air Force) and the Navy Department
continued to be riddled with semiautonomous, often intractable fiefdoms,
branches, corps, departments, bureaus, and so forth.

World War I was the most tragic example of trying to win a war through mass and
attrition. Thousands of young men gave their lives to advance a few yards over
the enemy trenches, only to be thrown back the next day at an equal cost to the
enemy.

The emergence of the airplane as a major military asset during World War I
should have alerted us to the need to adjust our doctrines and our organizations
to changing realities. The continued development of air power could not help but
blur the traditional distinction between land and naval warfare, but the nation
reacted to this phenomenon in a traditionally bureaucratic manner: Each service
developed its own air power (today there are four air-power entities), and
protected it with artificial barriers to obscure the costly duplications. One
barrier, established in 1938 (later rescinded), prohibited any Army Air Corps
airplane from flying more than 100 miles out to sea.

The Army and Navy began World War II with authority and responsibility diffused.
Each still had many semiautonomous agencies with little coordination below the
chief-of-service level. Soon after Pearl Harbor, Gen. George C. Marshall, the
Army Chief of Staff, streamlined the Army by reducing the number of officers
with direct access to him from 61 to 6. The Navy also made some adjustments.
(The services have since slipped back into the old patterns. The number of
officers having direct access to most service chiefs - especially when the joint
system is considered - is again very high.)

The Joint Chiefs of Staff were established informally in late 1941 as a
counterpart to the British Chiefs of Staff Committee. Although the wartime
Chiefs addressed certain priority issues, to a great extent World War II was
fought along service lines. Gen. Dwight D.  Eisenhower, in his United States (as
distinct from his Allied) role, reported to General Marshall. In the Pacific,
the difficulties of integrating the operations of the services resulted in the
establishment of two separate theaters: the Southwest Pacific Area, with Gen.
Douglas MacArthur reporting to General Marshall, and the Pacific Ocean Area,
with Adm. Chester W. Nimitz reporting to Adm.  Ernest J. King, the Chief of
Naval Operations. Split authority and responsibility in the Pacific was a
continuing problem, and nearly caused a disaster during the battle of Leyte
Gulf. Today the Pacific has been joined into one command and our combat
commanders now report directly to the Secretary of Defense rather than to their
service chiefs. But the Army, Air Force, Navy and Marine components of our
combat commands report both to their service chiefs and the combat commanders,
and the service chiefs still have the greatest influence over their actions.
Furthermore, many of the fundamental problems of the World War II joint system
still exist below the surface.

We won World War II despite our organizational handicaps, not because we were
smarter, but once again because we and our allies were bigger. We had the time
and geographic isolation to mobilize American industry and a superb
code-breaking effort to aid our intelligence gathering.

As the war drew to a close, an exhaustive debate ensued on how to organize the
postwar military. The Army favored a highly integrated system, but the Navy and
others were strongly opposed, some fearing that the Army would dominate any
integrated system. The Air Force, then still a part of the Army, supported
integration, but was primarily interested in becoming a separate service.

Those opposed to integration were backed by stronger constituencies, including
powerful forces in Congress, than were the advocates of unification. Arguments
that unification threatened civilian control over the military soon dominated
the debate. As it became quite clear to the advocates that major change was
unlikely, a little-known and surprising effort was made to salvage true
integration: Karl Bendetsen, then a colonel on the War Department General Staff,
but later the Under Secretary of the Army, and then chairman of the board of the
Champion International Corporation, was the prime mover. He had been designated
by General Marshall as the War Department liaison officer for the unification
project, dealing with the White House, the Navy and Congress. After several
months of analysis, he concluded that, in the absence of a new and bold
initiative, unification as conceived by President Harry S. Truman, Secretary of
War Henry L. Stimson and General Marshall had no chance of success.

In response to General Marshall's inquiry as to what such an initiative might
be, Colonel Bendetsen responded that the only way to overcome the Navy's
resistance would be to do away with the War Department, transfer all of its
elements to the Navy, and redesignate that organization as the Department of
Defense.

Instead of throwing the officer out of his office, General Marshall, one of the
most consummate soldier-statesmen in our history, marched him straight to
Secretary Stimson to outline the proposal. After an extended discussion among
the three, Stimson called President Truman and asked for a meeting on this
subject.

President Truman was intrigued by the idea and decided that the liaison officer
should try it out on Secretary of the Navy James V.  Forrestal. Though his first
reaction appeared to be positive, Secretary Forrestal rejected the proposal, on
the supposition that a single armed forces chief of staff could become too
powerful and threaten civilian control. So after nearly two years of studies,
debate and political maneuverings, the National Security Act of 1947 emerged
with a compromise military establishment: a loose confederation of large, rigid
service bureaucracies - now four rather than three - with a Secretary of Defense
powerless against them.

Ironically, Mr. Forrestal became the first Secretary of Defense, and, after
learning at first hand his impotence in dealing with service autonomy told Karl
Bendetsen, by then a civilian, that he, the Secretary, had been wrong in
rejecting Mr. Bendetsen's advice.

One of Mr. Forrestal's last acts as Secretary of Defense was to recommend a much
more integrated Department of Defense, but changes came slowly. Amendments to
the National Security Act in 1949, 1953 and 1958 strengthened the Secretary's
authority and expanded the size and purview of his staff, but did little to
alter the relative influence of the joint military system and the services.

President Eisenhower had recommended a much stronger joint system in 1953 and
1958, and his wisdom was borne out by our conduct of the Vietnam War - perhaps
our worst example of confused objectives and unclear responsibilities, both in
Washington and in the field. Each service, instead of integrating efforts with
the others, considered Vietnam its own war and sought to carve out a large
mission for itself. For example, each fought its own air war, agreeing only to
limited measures for a coordinated effort. ''Body count'' and ''tons dropped''
became the measures of merit. Lack of integration persisted right through the
1975 evacuation of Saigon - when responsibility was split between two separate
commands, one on land and one at sea; each of these set a different ''H-hour,''
which caused confusion and delays.

Our soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines have acted bravely throughout our
history. With few exceptions, our forces have performed well at the unit level.
And there have been bright moments at the higher levels also. The landing at
Normandy, Patton's charge across France, the battle of Midway and the landing at
Inchon were brilliant strategic conceptions, valiantly executed. But these peaks
in martial performance followed valleys in which the nation found itself poorly
prepared, poorly organized and imperiled by inadequacies in Washington.

In the past, we had time to overcome our mistakes. Our allies often bore the
initial brunt, and we had the industrial capacity for a quick buildup in the
military capacity needed to turn the tide. Today we can expect no such respite.
Our allies could not delay the Soviet Union while we prepared, and our
industrial base has fallen into a state of disrepair. Nuclear weapons have added
new dimensions which make constant readiness even more critical. If we are to
deter another conflict, or to succeed if one be thrust upon us, we must be
prepared to do things right on the battlefield the first time.

A sound defense posture should begin with sound long-term planning, a means to
measure progress, and authoritative direction and control to insure that all
elements contribute to a well-defined objective.  On the surface, our system
appears to provide such an orderly approach. The process starts with a defense
guidance document prepared by the office of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Policy, based on Administration policy and fiscal guidance and on inputs from
field commanders, the services, the Joint Chiefs, the Secretary of Defense's
staff and other relevant sources. The services build their annual programs on
the basis of the defense guidance's objectives and budget targets and then
submit them to the Secretary of Defense. The Secretary convenes a committee to
review the documents and recommend changes to bring the service programs into
conformance with the nation's priorities. After being submitted to the President
and Congress for approval, the budgets are administered by the services and
agencies assigned to the Department of Defense.

But this process begins to break down at the very beginning because the military
strategy contained in the defense guidance always demands greater force
capabilities than the budget constraints will allow. Some administrations have
attempted to limit the requirements by calling for the capability to fight ''one
and a half'' or ''two and a half'' wars, while others have proposed preparing
for global war almost without limits. In any case, the guidance almost
invariably leads to what the Joint Chiefs have long called the ''strategyforce
mismatch'' as requirements outpace capabilities.

Current guidance is so demanding that developing truly coherent programs to
carry it out is impossible even under the most optimistic budget assumptions.
The guidance places high priority on the longterm survivability of our strategic
forces if a nuclear war should occur. Spending programs now include improvements
in strategic command and control, a new bomber force with the B-1 and cruise
missiles (and eventually the Stealth bomber), new nuclear submarines with
improved missiles, and the MX intercontinental ballistic missile. The guidance
also requires a revitalized air defense, an expanded civil-defense program and
possibly an antiballistic-missile system to protect the MX. Military
developments in space will receive additional priority. At the other end of the
nuclear spectrum, ground-launched cruise missiles and Pershing
intermediate-range ballistic missiles are planned for Europe to reinforce our
position in arms-control negotiations, or to restore theater nuclear balance if
those negotiations break down.

These nuclear requirements are large indeed, but they pale in comparison with
conventional force requirements - expenditures for conventional forces are about
three times those for nuclear forces.  Substantial improvements in European and
Pacific operations are planned and the ability to project power, especially in
Southwest Asia, is to be expanded. The defense guidance tells the services to
improve the readiness of conventional forces, greatly increase
strategic-mobility capabilities and build up the Navy to provide maritime
superiority. At the same time, they are to replace many weapon systems which are
nearing obsolescence. And they are to provide greater sustainability so as to be
able to fight a longer war. Improved industrial preparedness is also a goal.

There is simply not enough money in the projected defense budgets to do all
this, but the defense guidance does little to set meaningful priorities or
mandate a search for new directions to maintain our security. This is not a
problem unique to this Administration.

Since requirements exceed resources, the military services invariably allocate
resources among their traditional missions, and seek ways to justify a greater
share of the budget. But additional funds are likely to come only from another
service's share, so each attempts to outgame the others without sufficient
regard for crossservice programs.

The vast array of service programs is then submitted to the defense committee.
The name and composition of the committee may vary from administration to
administration, but its function remains the same.  Currently it is called the
Defense Resources Board, and its chairman is the Secretary or the Deputy
Secretary of Defense, and includes the service Secretaries, Assistant
Secretaries of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The
service chiefs attend as observers.

Week after week, the board meets in an attempt to examine major issues, but the
focus is primarily on the service programs, which include many hundreds of items
deemed essential by their advocates.  The board fusses over marginal changes in
the service programs, but it is literally impossible for it to address them in
sufficient depth or to focus on the most critical cross-service issues.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff are assigned a role in this
process, but each service usually wants the Joint Staff merely to echo its
views. Since four of the five members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff are also
service chiefs, a negotiated amalgam of service views almost invariably prevails
when inputs are finally proposed by the Joint Staff. The Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff is the only military member of the Defense Resources Board and
can offer independent opinions, but the chairman has only five people working
directly for him to sift through the various issues. (The Joint Staff belongs to
the Joint Chiefs' corporate body, not to the chairman.) Consequently, chairmen
traditionally focus on a few critical items. In my case, they were readiness,
command and control, and mobility.

The result of this tedious process is a defense budget that is derived primarily
from the disparate desires of the individual services rather than from a
well-integrated plan based on a serious examination of alternatives by the
civilian and military leadership working together. Inevitably, a Secretary of
Defense either supports a total program that is roughly the sum of the service
inputs (limited by fiscal guidance) or resorts to forcing changes, knowing that
advocates of disapproved programs will continue the opposition into the
Congressional hearings.

But resource allocation by the board is only the beginning of the problem. The
optimism expressed in program proposals seldom comes true. The chairman of the
Defense Science Board, Norman Augustine, has written that over the last 30 years
our major weapons systems have met performance goals 70 percent of the time (not
bad), but have met schedules only 15 percent of the time, and cost estimates
only 10 percent of the time, even after accounting for inflation.

As costs increase, programs are stretched out. Weapons are usually ordered in
numbers well below efficient production rates, to the detriment of the
''industrial base.'' This only leads to further cost increases, the cycle
repeats itself, and we find ourselves trapped in a Catch-22 situation. Tough
decisions are not made, so the financial ''bow wave'' that always spills ahead
is magnified.  Attempts to improve efficiency, such as the current
Administration's multiyear procurement contracts, are very helpful, but do not
get to the fundamental problems of planning and resources.

The lack of discipline in the budget system prevents making the very tough
choices of deciding what to do and what not to do.  Instead, strong
constituencies in the Pentagon, Congress and industry support individual
programs, while the need for overall defense effectiveness and efficiency is not
adequately addressed.

Pentagon leadership finds it virtually impossible to spend the time necessary to
impose discipline on the budget process. Cycles overlap and, as this year, we
usually find Congress considering a lastminute multibillion-dollar supplemental
appropriation at the end of one fiscal year and unable to agree on the budget
before the start of the next fiscal year. At the same time, the Pentagon is
struggling with the next five-year defense plan and the subsequent budget
submission. This immerses the leadership constantly in confusing external
struggles for public and Congressional support and bewildering internal disputes
over resources and turf.

The same pressures burden the service leaders as they attempt to cope with
managing procurement programs, recruiting and training the forces, and
maintaining discipline and esprit. Chiefs are judged by their peers and services
on their success in obtaining funding for their own major systems and on
protecting service interests in the three afternoons a week they spend in
meetings of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Furthermore, a service chief, who is a
service advocate in one hat and supposedly an impartial judge of competing
requirements in his other hat as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has a
fundamental conflict of interest.

To sum up, our defense establishment suffers serious deficiencies, including the
following: Strategy is so all-encompassing as to mean all things to all men.
Long-range planning is relegated to a back seat. Leaders are inevitably captives
of the urgent, and long-range planning is too often neglected.

Authority and responsibility are badly diffused.  Rigorous examination of
requirements and alternatives is not made.  Discipline is lacking in the budget
process.  Tough decisions are avoided.  Accountability for decisions or
performance is woefully inadequate.  Leadership, often inexperienced, is forced
to spend too much time on refereeing an intramural scramble for resources.  A
serious conflict of interest faces our senior military leaders.  The combat
effectiveness of the fighting force - the end product - does not receive enough
attention.  Before too much criticism is heaped on the current Administration,
let me point out that these problems have been with us for decades and there are
no easy solutions.

What all this adds up to is that it is an uphill struggle for anyone - including
a Secretary of Defense - to gain real control of our defense establishment. An
earlier study on defense organization stated that everyone was responsible for
everything and no one was specifically responsible for anything. The top
leadership is too often at the mercy of long-entrenched bureaucracies. It is
ironic that the services have, with considerable help from outside
constituencies, been able to defeat attempts to bring order out of chaos by
arguing that a source of alternative military advice for the President and
Secretary of Defense runs the risk of undermining civilian control.

There has for some time been an imbalance in the degree of control that our
civilian leadership exercises over operational and other defense matters. In
operational matters, it is pervasive. An order cannot go out of Washington to
move a ship or other combat unit or to take any other specific operational
action without the specific approval and initialing of the directive by the
Secretary of Defense. At times, Defense Secretaries and their staffs have been
involved in the most minute details of operations.

In other areas, civilian influence is more often apparent than real. Defense
Secretaries are given very little comprehensive advice on alternative strategies
or systems. In an attempt to fill the void, Defense Secretaries have often
turned to civilian analysts for such advice. Such consultants can provide a
useful service, but they cannot make up for the absence of alternative advice
from experienced, serving military officers. That the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a
committee beholden to the interests of the services, has not been able to
provide such advice during its existence is amply documented in scores of
studies over many years.

Civilian accountability within the Defense Department is undermined further by
the rapid turnover or by inexperience in the senior leadership. In the 35 years
since the department was founded, there have been 15 Secretaries of Defense, and
there have been 19 Deputy Secretaries of Defense in the 33 years since the
establishment of that position. A recent study revealed that the civilian policy
makers in the Defense Department stay on the job an average of only 28 months.

Little of what I have said is new. Reams of paper have been used since World War
II to describe these same deficiencies. President Eisenhower, who knew well both
sides of the civilian-military equation, tried to resolve the basic problem, but
the effects of his efforts were limited. Others have also tried, but with even
less success. The bureaucratic resistance to change is enormous and is
reinforced by many allies of the services - in Congress and elsewhere - who are
bent on keeping the past enthroned. Civilian defense leaders have been reluctant
to push hard for changes, either because they thought they could not succeed or
because they did not want to expend the necessary political capital which they
believed was better spent on gaining support for the defense budget. Many have
feared that raising basic organizational issues might distract attention from
the budget and give ammunition to opponents, who would use admissions of
organizational inefficiency to argue for further budget cuts. Yet, since the
public already believes that all is not right with the Department of Defense,
bold reforms would not only increase our defense effectiveness, but would
strengthen public support as well.

That the balance of influence within the defense establishment is oriented too
much toward the individual services has been a constant theme of many past
studies of defense organization. A special study group of retired senior
officers just this April found it necessary to report that ''a certain amount of
service independence is healthy and desirable, but the balance now favors the
parochial interests of the services too much and the larger needs of the
nation's defenses too little.''

It is commonly accepted that one result of this imbalance is a constant
bickering among the services. This is not the case. On the contrary,
interactions among the services usually result in ''negotiated treaties'' which
minimize controversy by avoiding challenges to service interests. Such a
''truce'' has its good points, for it is counterproductive for the services to
attack each other. But the lack of adequate questioning by military
professionals results in gaps and unwarranted duplications in our defense
capabilities. What is lacking is a counterbalancing system, involving officers
not so beholden to their services, who can objectively examine strategy, roles,
missions, weapons systems, war planning and other contentious issues to offset
the influence of the individual services.

President Eisenhower tried to resolve this problem in 1958 by removing the
services from the operational chain of command. In essence, two separate lines
of authority were created under the Secretary of Defense: an operational line
and an administrative line. The operational line runs from the President,
through the Secretary of Defense, to the combat commands - those theater or
functional commands headed by the Eisenhowers, the Nimitzes, the MacArthurs of
the future. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are not directly in this line of command
but do, through the Joint Staff, provide the Secretary oversight of the combat
commands, and pass his orders to them. The administrative line runs to the
service departments responsible for recruiting, training, procurement and a
myriad of other tasks necessary to develop the forces assigned to the combat
commands.

President Eisenhower intended that the operational side would assist the
Secretary of Defense in developing strategy, operational plans and weapons and
force-level requirements based on the needs of ''truly unified commands.'' The
Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff were to be the Secretary's military
staff in this effort. The services would remain the providers of the forces
needed by the combatant commands but would not determine what to provide or how
those forces would be employed. But President Eisenhower did not achieve what he
wanted. The scales of influence are still tipped too far in favor of the
services and against the combat commanders.

Although the combat commanders now brief the Defense Resources Board and have
every opportunity to communicate with the Secretary of Defense and the Chiefs,
virtually their only power is that of persuasion. The services control most of
the money and the personnel assignments and promotions of their people wherever
assigned, including in the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Staff
and the Unified Command Staffs. Officers who perform duty outside their own
services generally do less well than those assigned to duty in their service,
especially when it comes to promotion to general or admiral. The Chiefs of Staff
of the services almost always have had duty on service staffs in Washington but
almost never on the Joint Staff. Few incentives exist for an officer assigned to
joint duty to do more than punch his or her ticket, and then get back into a
service assignment. I cannot stress this point too strongly: He who controls
dollars, promotions and assignments controls the organization - and the services
so control, especially with regard to personnel actions.

The most recent critique of defense problems was contained in a book published
in September called ''U.S. Defense Planning,'' written by John M. Collins of the
Library of Congress. This study reveals some new deficiences as well as pointing
out the old ones.  ''Interests, objectives, policies, commitments, strategic
concepts and force postures often fail to complement each other'' and
''Preoccupation with present problems leaves little time to contemplate those
coming down the pike'' are but two of many such conclusions.

Yet it is very difficult to break out of the Department of Defense's
organizational maze. Many have struggled vainly within the system to make
improvements in the balance between the operational and administrative lines.
Solutions to some of the basic interservice problems are heralded every few
years but to this date have not addressed the fundamental causes. To provide a
balance, the services must share some of their authority, but they have proved
to be consistently unwilling to do so. A service chief has a constituency which,
if convinced that he is not fighting hard enough for what the service sees as
its fair share of defense missions and resources, can destroy the chief's
effectiveness.

Only the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is unconstrained by a service
constituency, but he is in a particularly difficult position. His influence
stems from his ability to persuade all his colleagues on the Joint Chiefs of
Staff to agree on a course of action and any disagreement requires by law a
report to the Decretary of Defense. A Chairman jeopardizes his effectiveness if,
early in his tour, he creates dissension within the corporate body by trying to
force the services to share some of their authority.

By the summer of 1980, after serving as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
for two years, I had become convinced that we could not begin to overcome our
defense problems without a basic restructuring of military responsibility. In
the early fall, I discussed the problem with Secretary of Defense Harold Brown
and found that he shared my concerns. Although he was soon to leave office, he
has remained a staunch supporter of organizational change. My first conversation
with Caspar Weinberger, just before he assumed the office, was also promising.
He indicated a receptiveness to any ideas that would improve defense
decision-making and management. Soon thereafter I commissioned the group of
retired senior officers mentioned earlier to examine the issues thoroughly and
to interview and incorporate the views of the Chiefs, the combat commanders,
joint staff personnel and many others.

At the same time, I studied the organizational arrangements in other countries
-East and West. The Soviet Union has a highly centralized system with a general
staff numbering in the thousands, but it also has many bureaucratic problems
common to an authoritarian system. There are quite a few Western democracies
with a centralized system that works well. For example, the Norwegians have a
chief of defense who has great authority and control over the services and is
considered a positive link in maintaining democratic control. At the other end
of the spectrum, there are countries that keep their services well apart and in
competition with each other.  Iran under the Shah and Argentina with its junta
made up of the three service heads are examples of such competitive systems. Our
system falls more toward the competitive than the centralized end of the
spectrum.

In trying to determine where our system should be on this scale, I had long
discussions with my British counterpart, Admiral of the Fleet Sir Terence Lewin,
Chief of the Defense Staff of the United Kingdom. Our system is an outgrowth of
the British World War II system, and Sir Terence and I concluded that our
respective organizational arrangements were now outmoded. We saw almost
identical problems in our two military systems and came to very similar
conclusions as to what was needed. Despite strong opposition from two of the
British services, Sir Terence was able to secure quick approval to act on his
conclusions from Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. The major changes - providing
a military counterbalance to the separate services - were implemented this
spring and contributed to British success in the Falklands dispute.

Early this year, I aired certain proposals publicly in the winter issue of
Directors and Boards magazine. Gen. Edward C. Meyer, Chief of Staff of the Army,
soon published an article containing similar criticisms and recommended even
greater changes in military organization.

This past summer, the House Armed Services Subcommittee on Investigations, under
the chairmanship of Representative Richard C.  White of Texas, held extensive
hearings on the issue. The witnesses in support of major changes outnumbered the
opponents by almost three to one. I was particularly impressed that all of the
former Secretaries and Deputy Secretaries of Defense who testified supported at
least as much change as I recommended, and most advocated even more.

It is no secret that the greatest opposition to any change came from the
Department of the Navy, just as it did in 1947 and has ever since. I believe I
understand, even though I cannot agree with the reasons. The Department of the
Navy is the most strategically independent of the services - it has its own
army, navy and air force. It is least dependent on others. It would prefer to be
given a mission, retain complete control over all the assets, and be left alone.

The Army is and always has been the most supportive of the services in
cross-service activities and the strongest advocate of organizational changes
which would improve unity of effort. Its reasons, too, are understandable -and I
agree with them. The Army is the least strategically independent service. It
depends on the Air Force for much firepower and on the Air Force and Navy for
mobility; the Army can, in fact, do very little in isolation and hence is
particularly short-changed by a lack of integration and cooperation among the
services.

The Air Force has some missions requiring the cooperation of the other services,
and some which it can pursue independently. Not surprisingly, Air Force officers
generally have been more ambivalent about change.

Given these circumstances, we cannot expect the services to agree on profound
changes no matter how badly needed, for the changes inevitably would result in
the services' giving up some of their sovereignty.

The bill drafted and then passed in the House avoided the issues on which the
services are most sensitive; the bill contains some good provisions but they are
insufficient to correct the basic ills of the system. It is to be hoped that the
Senate will hold in-depth hearings, for public airing of the issues is essential
in obtaining widespread understanding and support. There is always great
reluctance in Washington to take on entrenched bureaucracies in the absence of
some consensus for change.

Since I dealt only with military organization in my initial proposals, some
misinterpreted them as calling for an all-powerful Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff. That is definitely not my intent. On the contrary, my proposals are
designed to provide the Secretary of Defense more balanced military advice and
staff support in order to strengthen civilian control. I believe we must provide
a proper balance between the services and the joint system - the administrative
and operational lines of authority and responsibility. So long as the leadership
of the operational side remains within the control of the four services,
individual service interests - which are oriented to independent capabilities -
will continue to dominate the military advice offered to the Secretary of
Defense.

In broad outline, this is what I believe must be done: To eliminate service
domination of the channels of military advice to the Secretary and the
President, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff - rather than the five-man
committee of the Chiefs - should represent the operational side, while the
service chiefs should continue to represent the administrative side of our
military organization. The Chairman would receive advice from both the service
chiefs and the combat commanders in preparing his recommendation to the
Secretary of Defense. Furthermore, there should be a provision for a direct
appeal to the Secretary of Defense or the President, as appropriate, if a
service chief disagreed with the Chairman on a joint matter and felt strongly
about the differences. The influence of the combat commanders on operational
matters should be increased to equal that of the service chiefs.

To insure that he can meet his responsibility to the Secretary and the
President, the Chairman should be authorized a deputy chairman and the Joint
Staff should be assigned to the Chairman rather than the corporate body of the
Joint Chiefs. The service chiefs and their staffs (most of which dwarf the Joint
Staff) would still have access to the Joint Staff but would not have a de facto
veto of all proposals which subordinated service interests to greater
crossservice effectiveness.

Systems analysts should be transferred from the office of the Secretary of
Defense to the Chairman's office to insure a good balance of civilian and
military perspectives on alternatives offered to the Secretary. As a related
action, many of the more than 500 military officers assigned to the Office of
the Secretary of Defense should be reassigned back to their services as the
Joint Staff becomes defensewide oriented rather than service dominated.

Discipline should be imposed on the guidance-program-budget cycle.  Not only
should there by a requirement for an independent cost analysis on every major
program, but greater reliance should be placed on the results. Until the system
proves it can plan and execute in a disciplined way, a substantial percentage of
dollars in the five-year program should be reserved for unexpected cost growth
or contingency operations. This would force some tough decisions at the
beginning of the cycle which would avoid wasting money and provide greater
effectiveness in the long run by not allowing programs to start that cannot be
supported even under the most optimistic budget projections.

Administrative matters should be decentralized to the services, with their
leadership, military and civilian, being held more accountable for performance.
Fixing responsibility for defensewide advice more clearly on a joint system not
dominated by the services would allow the service chiefs and their staffs to
spend much more time on running their services.

Substantial changes should be made in military personnel policies so that
officers could develop a broader vision than that of their own service and could
be prepared better for both service and interservice assignments. We should
begin by encouraging and allowing a substantial number of graduates from one
service academy to volunteer for transfer to another service immediately upon
graduation. The Air Force benefitted a great deal in its early days by receiving
officers from both West Point and Annapolis -officers with basic understanding
of the other services. And two- or threeyear assignments of officers to another
service should become more common. The professional education system should be
changed to stress the joint needs in defense by providing the National Defense
University limited oversight of part of the curriculum of the Service War
Colleges. We should re-examine the retirement system which provides great
incentives for officers to serve for 20 years, but very few incentives for the
best to stay longer. We still lose too many of our best officers at the peak of
their capabilities. The joint system should be given some limited influence in
the promotion and assignment of officers so that joint duty could become more
attractive and rewarding for the best. Finally, the Congressional restrictions
on tenure of assignment on the Joint Staff should be removed so that we do not
continue to experience a 100 percent turnover in a little over two years.
Collectively, the above should provide opportunities for greater stability and
experience in officer assignments and, thus, the opportunity for better
accountability of performance.

I do not claim that my proposals will solve all of our defense problems, but
these or similar major changes can set us on the right course. Congressional
action is needed on these organizational issues - the most important defense
problem facing our nation.  Additional money is badly needed for defense, but
without major realignment, we will neither achieve the necessary capability nor
spend the money as wisely as we should. The critical question is whether we will
show the wisdom to do as the British did, or whether we will muddle along as we
have in the past until some crisis or disaster awakens us to the need for
change.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a military ceremony photos of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TIME IS NEW YEAR'S EVE, 1999

BYLINE: By Mark Rose; Mark Rose is the author of several books on Renaissance
literature as well as ''Alien Encounters: Anatomy of Science Fiction.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 815 words


THE TWOFOLD VIBRATION By Raymond Federman.  175 pp. Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana
University Press. $10.95.

Raymond Federman has long been associated with the literary avantgarde both as
an editor and expounder of Samuel Beckett and as a coterie novelist.
Idiosyncratic typography has been one of the trademarks of his fiction. Each
page of his first novel, ''Double or Nothing'' (1971), for instance, was
designed as an independent visual image, and his later ''Take It or Leave It''
(1976) not only employed various emblematic devices such as swooping or sagging
lines but also omitted page numbers in order to emphasize that the sequence is
arbitrary. As a result of Mr. Federman's studied refusal to succumb to the lures
of sustained narrative, these earlier novels soon became tedious going. ''The
Twofold Vibration'' is more conventional and more successful. Here Mr.
Federman's wit and intelligence, his humor and sense of verbal play combine with
his acute awareness of the problems of fiction to produce a mildly avant-garde
cream puff with a science-fiction flavor.

It is New Year's Eve, 1999, the night of the turn of the millennium. A nameless
old man sits alone in a sterile ''antechamber of departure'' awaiting
deportation to the space colonies where undesirables of all sorts, the aged and
infirm as well as criminals and perverts, are sent. Exactly why is he being
deported? Has he somehow offended the ''authorities''? Can anything be done to
save him? These Kafka-like questions provide some continuity for the narrative's
investigation of the old man's life. Gradually pieces of his picaresque history
emerge. We witness his accidental involvement in an antiwar protest in Buffalo
during the Vietnam era. We follow him to Monte Carlo as he pursues a whirlwind
romance with a radical movie star reminiscent of Jane Fonda. We participate in
his wild gambling sprees throughout Europe.

We learn that he is a Jew born in Paris, like Mr. Federman himself, and also
like the author a survivor of the Holocaust, a writer and an admirer of Beckett.
In fragments we learn about the concentrationcamp deaths of his parents and
sisters and his own experiences in Nazi Europe. The anonymous old man in some
ways conspicuously resembles the author, and yet as a larger-than-life figure of
vitality, protest and suffering, he is also meant to represent essential
humanity. We are all in a sense displaced persons awaiting deportation for
reasons that are not apparent. But the book's narrative appeal derives less from
its insistence on the old man's representative status than from the
effectiveness of some episodes. In particular I was impressed by the fine and
complex story - by turns farcical and pathetic, sardonic and affectionate - of
the old man's visit to Dachau in the company of a Hollywood show-biz couple and
a sentimental widow from Teaneck, N.J.  Here and elsewhere Mr. Federman reveals
considerable ability as a storyteller.

Nevertheless, he does not wholly yield to the illusionism of conventional
narration. ''What do you think this is, a pseudorealistic story that pretends to
record facts,'' his narrator exclaims in one of his frequent asides to the
reader. Indeed, so pervasive is the book's self-reflexiveness that it might be
said to have a two-tier plot. On one level is the ostensible subject, the story
of the old man. On another are the comic squabbles and debates between the
narrator and his two doubles, Namredef and Moinous, about how the old man's
story should be told. At this level of metafictional farce the book's interest
depends less on storytelling than on Mr. Federman's ability to generate a
continuous stream of rhetorical energy in the manner of Beckett.

Some years ago Mr. Federman coined the term ''surfiction'' to refer to
narratives concerned with the ambiguous relation between fiction and reality.
Provocatively poised on the exact boundary between reality and fiction, ''The
Twofold Vibration'' seems to have been conceived almost as an illustration of
the term.  At an early point in the story the radical moving picture actress -
her name is June Fanon in the novel - confesses to the old man that she is never
entirely sure who she is: ''How do I know when I am real or simply a fictitious
character in a story, after a while in my kind of life one loses one's
perspective on reality.''

THE ambiguous relation between fiction and reality is, I take it, the central
concern of Mr. Federman's novel, as it was also of the very first novel, ''Don
Quixote.'' What is surprising, then, about ''The Twofold Vibration'' is less the
old theme than the way this still potentially radical idea comes trippingly off
the tongue. Mr.  Federman does not so much renew the theme as rehearse it,
running through it once more with skill. Although his novel is not profoundly
innovative, it is a slick piece of work and good fun to read.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS;
FICTION

SECTION: Section 7; Page 48, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1336 words


1 1 6 SPACE, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) The story of the
American space program told through fiction.
2 2 10 MASTER OF THE GAME, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $15.95.) The hidden truth
behind a woman business tycoon's rise to power.
3 3 10 THE VALLEY OF HORSES, by Jean M. Auel. (Crown, $15.95.) Continuing the
saga of human survival at the dawn of civilization begun in ''The Clan of the
Cave Bear.''
4 4 11 E.T. THE EXTRA-TERRESTRIAL STORYBOOK, by William Kotzwinkle. (Putnam's,
$6.95.) Abridged, profusely illustrated version of the novelization of the
current film.
5 6 7 CROSSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) A clandestine
trans-Atlantic romance survives the stresses and strains of World War II.
6 5 14 DIFFERENT SEASONS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $16.95.) Four novellas with
mainly nonhorror themes by a modern master of horror.
7 7 4 FOUNDATION'S EDGE, by Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $14.95.) The struggle to
keep civilization alive in a crumbling empire: fourth volume of s.f. stories in
''The Foundation Trilogy.''
8 11 5 MAX, by Howard Fast. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) The birth of the
American film industry in New York at the turn of the century.
9 10 5 CLOAK OF DARKNESS, by Helen MacInnes. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$13.95.) The operator of a counterterrorist agency finds himself high on an
assassination list.
10 13 2 SECOND HEAVEN, by Judith Guest. (Viking, $14.95.) Two emotionally
battered souls, a man and a woman, are healed through the act of healing an
emotionally battered runaway boy.
11 8 11 LACE, by Shirley Conran. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Three decades in
the lives of a coterie of members of the international glitter set.

12 1 LIFE SENTENCES, by Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey.  (Delacorte, $14.95.) Two of
her old college classmates come to a woman's aid in her time of crisis.
13 9 4 SPELLBINDER, by Harold Robbins. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) From soldier
in Vietnam to right-wing television superstar: the career of an evangelist.
14 12 23 THE PRODIGAL DAUGHTER, by Jeffrey Archer. (Linden Press, $15.95.) A
sequel to the author's ''Kane & Abel,'' in which two children of those
antagonists marry one another.
15 15 34 THE PARSIFAL MOSAIC, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $15.95.) Michael
Havelock saves the world from nuclear extinction.
.)

NONFICTION
1
1 42 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) An
exercise book for women, seasoned with the film star's philosophy of physical
well-being.
2
2 29 LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo Buscaglia. (Holt/Slack, $13.50.)
Inspirational talks by a University of Southern California professor.
3
4 39 WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE, by Harold S. Kushner.  (Schocken,
$10.95.) Comforting thoughts from a rabbi.
4
8 3 AND MORE BY ANDY ROONEY, by Andrew A. Rooney. (Atheneum, $12.95.) A new
collection of essays by the journalist and television commentator.
5
5 6 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson.  (Morrow,
$15.) How to increase the productivity of those with whom you work as well as
your own.
6
3 15 LIFE EXTENSION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $22.50.) Ways to
add years to your life and life to your years: a popularly written
medical-science book.
7
7 6 THE G SPOT, by Alice Kahn Ladas, Beverly Whipple and John D.  Perry. (Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, $11.95.) Recent discoveries about human sexuality.
8
6 4 JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK FOR PREGNANCY, BIRTH AND RECOVERY, by Femmy
DeLyser. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Advice from a colleagueof the film star.
9
10 5 ATLANTIC HIGH, by William F. Buckley Jr. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Log of a
trans-Atlantic crossing aboard a luxurious ketch.
10
11 32 NO BAD DOGS: The Woodhouse Way, by Barbara Woodhouse. (Summit, $12.50.)
Advice on training dogs by a British expert: tie-in to a television series.
11
1 PUZZLE PALACE, by James Banford. (Houghton Mifflin, $16.95.) A report on
America's most secret governmental organization, the National Security Agency.
12
9 10 INDECENT EXPOSURE, by David McClintick. (Morrow, $17.50.) The scandal at
Columbia Pictures and Wall Street's part in it.
13
1 KEEPING FAITH, by Jimmy Carter. (Bantam, $22.50.) The 39th President recalls
his four years in office.
14
14 52 A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Humor
in cartoons and verse.
15
12 5 WEIGHT WATCHERS FOOD PLAN DIET COOKBOOK, by Jean Nidetch. (NAL Books,
$13.95.) A new collection of nearly 600 recipes.
The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 1,600
bookstores in every region of the

United States.

FOOTNOTES
The one new hard-cover fiction best seller, ''Life Sentences,'' is the second
novel by Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey, whose first, ''A Woman of Independent
Means,'' was a best seller in its Avon paperback edition. The one new runner-up
to the fiction list is Kurt Vonnegut Jr.'s ''Deadeye Dick.'' The two new
nonfiction best sellers concern government: ''The Puzzle Palace'' and Jimmy
Carter's ''Keeping Faith,'' which is reviewed this week on page one of The Book
Review.  The new nonfiction runner-up is John Naisbitt's ''Megatrends,'' a kind
of ''Future Shock'' for the 80's but with a slant toward selfhelp. For instance,
because of ''America's shift from industrial production to providing services
and information,'' according to the book's jacket copy, ''you can project your
career and business moves.'' The new runner-up to the trade paperback list is
also a book of prophecy, Marilyn Ferguson's ''The Aquarian Conspiracy: Personal
and Social Transformation in the 1980s,'' which was first published in
hard-cover in 1980 and which, despite the ominous tone of its title, describes
an ''immensely powerful and wide-ranging charter of human possibility'' that
''is working to create a different kind of society based on a vastly enlarged
concept of human potential.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JERSEY GUIDE;
A MASTER GUITARIST

BYLINE: By Frank Emblen

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 25, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 921 words


Narciso Yepes, who plays the 10-string guitar as though he invented it (and he
did), once said: ''If I have a 10-string guitar, I have within it a six-string
guitar; but if I have only six strings, I do not have 10. I have all the
advantages, and none of the disadvantages.''

Mr. Yepes will perform Friday at 8 P.M. at the County College of Morris in
Randolph.  John Rockwell, in a New York Times review of Mr. Yepes's ''annual
Carnegie Hall recital'' last year, said Mr. Yepes's instrument allowed him ''to
encompass lute music without transposition or alteration.''

Although Mr. Yepes is a classical guitarist, sometimes reaching back to the
Renaissance and baroque periods to retrieve almost forgotten pieces, he also has
gained international renown in the larger musical world through his film scores.

He composed and performed the music for Rene Clement's 1952 film ''Forbidden
Games'' and for another French film, ''The Girl with the Golden Eyes,'' in 1962.

The concert at the County College will feature works by Bach, Giuliani,
Castelnuovo-Tedesco and DeFalla.  Tickets are $9, and are available through the
college's Office of Cultural Affairs. The campus is at Route 10 and Center Grove
Road.  Information: (201) 361-5000, Ext. 515.

REMEMBERING VIETNAM

As the country moves closer to acknowledging the patriotism of those who served
in Vietnam, the Newark Museum is, in the words of its director, Samuel C.
Miller, ''providing a public forum for Vietnam veterans to share their
experiences.''

''I Remember Vietnam,'' an exhibition of works by artists who served there, will
open on Veterans Day, Thursday, as a salute to the dedication of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial in Washington the same day.

Joining the museum in sponsoring the exhibtion is the Vietnam Era Veterans of
New Jersey.  The show comprises wire sculptures by Raymond Barkley of
Ridgefield, oil wax sculptures with original poetry by Joseph P.  Collins of
Norristown, Pa., paintings by George Skypeck of Arlington, Va., and photographs
by Peter Van Ellis and John D.  Warwick, both of Trenton.

The exhibition will continue through Dec. 12. The museum, at 49 Washington
Street, is open daily from noon to 5 P.M. Admission is free.

Information: (201) 733-6600.

BENEFIT PIANO RECITAL

Bernice Silk, pianist with the New Jersey Chamber Music Society, will give a
recital next Sunday at 3:30 P.M. at Union Congregational Church, 67 Church
Street, Montclair.

The program will open with Mozart's Sonata in A minor, Schubert's posthumus
Sonata in C minor will form the centerpiece and the recital will end with
Schumann's Carnaval.

The recital benefits the society and tickets are $10, which is tax deductible.
Information: (201) 744-6770 or 783-6430.

'DR. RUTH' TO SPEAK

Dr. Ruth Westheimer, a sex therapist known for leavening serious advice with
humor, will speak Tuesday at Fairleigh Dickinson University's Teaneck-Hackensack
campus.

Dr. Westheimer dispenses advice on her half-hour television show, ''Dr. Ruth,''
each weekday at 9:30 A.M. on Channel 5 and from 10 to 11 P.M. Sundays on the
WYNY radio show, ''Sexually Speaking,'' on which she takes calls from listeners.

Her accent (flavored since she left her native Frankfurt by years in
Switzerland, Israel, France and the United States), combined with her
occupation, have earned the 4-foot-7 ''Dr. Ruth'' the nickname ''Grandma Freud''
(she is in her mid-50's).

After studying psychology at the Sorbonne, earning a master's degree in
sociology at the New School and an Ed.D. at Columbia University, Dr. Westheimer
trained as a sex therapist at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.

''I don't do therapy on the air,'' she said. ''I do educating.'' She will speak
at 8 P.M. in Wilson Auditorium at Fairleigh Dickinson's School of Dentistry.
Admission is $2 ($1 with a university identification).

Information: (201) 692-2434.

ON THE COMEBACK TRAIL

Connie Francis, who started on her comeback trail last year, will appear at the
Ritz Theater in Elizabeth Saturday at 8 P.M.  Miss Francis, a native of New
Jersey, had made it about as big as a singer could when tragedy struck: She was
raped in a motel room in Westbury, L.I., on Nov. 8, 1974.

The rapist was never caught, and Miss Francis suffered long periods of
depression. Her marriage broke up, and she became a recluse. It wasn't until
last year that she was able to pick up the pieces of her career. And when she
did, she returned to Westbury to perform at the Music Fair there.

Born Concetta Franconero in Newark in 1938, Miss Francis later lived with her
parents in Bloomfield before moving to Essex Fells.  The girl who made her debut
by singing ''O Sole Mio'' at a school recital sold 42 million records by the
time she was 26, and eventually commanded club fees of $12,000 a week.

Tickets for Saturday's concert are $12, $13.50 and $15, and are available at the
Ritz box office, 1148 East Jersey Street, Elizabeth, and through Ticketron.

Information: (201) 352-7469 Frank Emblen

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HELP FOR EX-WAR PRISONERS IS PUSHED

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 28, Column 3; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1224 words


SOME still awaken in the middle of the night and smell cordite; some,
remembering the barbed wire and prowling searchlights of the sentry towers, claw
at bedsheets.

These are experiences common to many former prisoners of war, haunting visions
that some are able to share with family but others cannot.

In the last year, a veterans' organization formed in 1978 has branched out and
has been instrumental in helping ex-G.I.'s cope with their memories and
disabilities, mental or physical. The organization also emphasizes that veterans
are not alone and, most of all, not forgotten.

Like many veterans' groups throughout the state, the American Ex-Prisoners of
War was formed out of a need for camaraderie and mutual assistance, according to
its organizers. However, it goes beyond a group of aging men swapping stories of
boot camp or combat.

In less than 12 months, its officials have actively called public, state and
Federal attention to the special needs of former war prisoners in terms of
health care, psychological counseling and financial assistance.

The group's aim, according to 60-year-old Christopher Morgan of Old Bridge, is
to ''help the man who cannot help himself.'' Mr. Morgan, a former Army Air Corps
fighter pilot who was a prisoner of the Japanese in World War II, heads a
240-member chapter of American Ex-Prisoners of War that meets monthly at Fort
Monmouth.  The nonprofit organization has chapters in all 50 states and is
nationally based in Grand Prairie, Tex.

''There is one thing common about all former prisoners of war,'' said Mr.
Morgan, an insurance broker with a Manhattan-based concern, ''and that is that
all of us are survivors. Instinctively, we had to be, considering the terrible
conditions we were all forced to live under.''

Those conditions, he said, included mental and physical torture at the hands of
the enemy, malnutrition and starvation, inadequate housing and health care, and
long-term imprisonment.

Mr. Morgan, who flew a P-51 fighter that went down in Burma, said that his stay
in a Japanese prison camp was not measured in terms of years, but in
misery-filled days that seemed without end.

''I didn't spend years in a prison camp,'' recalled Mr. Morgan, ''I spent 560
days. Each day was spent not knowing if I would live to see the next. I was a
19-year-old kid when I went down, and I grew up awfully fast.''

State and national officials concerned with former war prisoners note that a
majority of them are World War II-era veterans advancing in age. This group
currently accounts for millions of dollars in Federally subsidized health care,
a figure that is expected to grow rapidly in the next few years.

According to a 1980 Veterans Administration report on former prisoners of war,
130,000 Americans were captured in World War II, compared to 4,100 in World War
I, 7,100 during the Korean War and 766 during the Vietnam conflict. About
100,000 thousand of those servicemen are living today, the same report said.

Membership in the organization of former war prisoners is 17,000 nationwide, Mr.
Morgan said, including 500 who live in New Jersey.  ''There's a little more than
1,000 former P.O.W.'s in the state,'' he said, ''and right now we have a
concerted effort going to reach those people and inform them about benefits they
may or may not be receiving.''

The benefits, according to Thomas M. LaLumia, assistant director of the Bergen
County Veterans Bureau in Hackensack, include free dental care (for those held
prisoner more than 181 days), prescription eyeglasses and physician-prescribed
medication available through the V.A. Hospital in East Orange.

Mr. Morgan and Mr. LaLumia contend that, because of incomplete records and a
lack of publicity, many former war prisoners are unaware of qualification
requirements and have been deprived of assistance for years, some for as many as
four decades.

Many former prisoners, officials say, do not have papers or files acknowledging
that they were prisoners of war, particularly during World War II.

''It could have been because of slip-ups in paperwork in the rush to process
everybody coming back home at the end of the war,'' Mr.  LaLumia said. In some
instances, he added, faulty records put an unfair burden of proof on the former
prisoner who was applying for benefits.

''Many veterans, including ex-P.O.W.'s, had the chance of filling out injury
claim forms before they were shipped home, but didn't,'' Mr. LaLumia said.

He explained that many such men and women were in a hurry to return home, and
that the idea of spending a week in a military hospital for a physical
examination was often rejected.

''At the time, you couldn't blame them,'' Mr. LaLumia said. ''They were just fed
up and tired. But they weren't thinking of the future.  What might have been a
small injury causing a little inconvenience turns into something completely
different 40 years down the road.''

Prior to 1981, former prisoners incarcerated for less than six months were not
eligible for benefits arising from disabilities such as avitaminosis, beriberi,
malnutrition (due to poor diets), chronic dysentery, pellagra or mental
ailments.

''The turning point was after the Iranian hostages were returned and the
Government gave them back pay and a whole slew of benefits that we were never
considered for,'' Mr. Morgan said. ''P.O.W.'s made a lot of noise, and that's
what initiated the Former Prisoners of War Benefits Act of 1981.''

The act essentially rolls back the eligibility date to include veterans held
captive for more than 30 days.  Counseling is an important part of the
war-prisoner chapters in the state, Mr. Morgan said. As he put it: ''After the
war, many of us, because of what we had been through, had the attitude that 'we
don't need any help from anyone, we can stand on our own two feet.'

''However, many people withdrew within themselves and became alienated from
their families and friends. There are many, too, who turned to alcohol as an
answer.''

Being able to talk about traumatic experiences with other former war prisoners
is one of the best forms of therapy, chapter officials say.

''You can only hold back so much,'' said Theodore Tucci, head of Chapter 3 in
Fair Lawn.  A waist-gunner aboard a B-24 bomber shot down over Germany, Mr.
Tucci spent more than a year in a German prison camp.  ''We have to support each
other today,'' he said. ''That's what we did as prisoners when we thought we'd
never see freedom again. Why stop now?''

''They are a tough bunch who've seen it all,'' Mr. LaLumia said recently while
collecting donations for another group, the Disabled American Veterans.
''P.O.W.'s have given more for this country than you can imagine, and they
deserve our respect in return.''

A young woman with a child in her arms asked what type of imitation flower Mr.
LaLumia was handing out in exchange for a contribution.  ''They're
forget-me-nots,'' he replied.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of William Dorney during WW II photo of William
Dorney

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 7, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE OVAL OFFICE AESOP

BYLINE: By James David Barber

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: DURHAM, N.C.


The election is over, the Republic stands, but how long can democracy stand the
type of talk we are drifting into as the nation deliberates the choice of
leaders?

Democracy is not only a structure of power, it is also a special kind of
conversation: a deliberation meant to result in the consent of the governed -an
informed consent, a persuaded consent, not just a sigh of thanks that all that
jabber is over. If President Reagan's performance so far is any index, we are in
for a long slide away from democratic deliberation as we mosey toward 1984.

Ronald Reagan is the first modern President whose contempt for the facts is
treated as a charming idiosyncracy. Way back in 1976, those of us who watch
Presidential politics could deplore the news media's fascination with gaffes,
such as Jimmy Carter's odd blurts about ''ethnic purity'' and ''lust in the
heart,'' and Gerald Ford's accidental liberation of Poland from the Soviet grip.
These lapses were blown way out of proportion. The media seemed (unconsciously)
to be aping Freud, treating any slip of the tongue as an important clue to the
mind. The gaffe story graduated from a diverting episode of the day to a running
drama of at least a week, featuring the candidate's denial, admission, defense
and ultimate apology, in a tragic sequence signaling the victory of form over
content. Those stories were trivial, but the exaggerated coverage made the
candidates think twice about their words.

Comes Ronald Reagan. In the campaign of 1980, his counterfactual statements
rolled forth so fast the news magazines had to bundle them together as a weekly
feature. In a factual sense, be the subject air pollution or nuclear power, farm
policy or foreign policy, he literally did not know what he was talking about.
By now, he has shown that he does not care. As for the past, he has yet to
retract his mythical version of Vietnam history, which, if he believes it, could
easily misguide him when the next Vietnam pops up. In the present, despite the
efforts of his fact-checker (Misty Church, age 24), he continues to toss off
spurious specifics with a cavalier abandon, as if to say he could have gotten
them right, but why bother? As for the future and the policies he hopes to make
work, we already have the testimony of his chief dream-broker, David A.
Stockman, that Mr. Reagan and his friends saw through their own flashy program
from the start, knowing it to be as hollow as a Trojan horse. Now, his left hand
offers record-smashing deficits as his right offers a constitutional bar to any
deficit at all. Having come full circle on taxes, Mr. Reagan urged us to ''stay
the course'' he himself had abandoned.

But it is not the hypocrisy or dishonesty of any particular politician that
ought to disturb us. Rather, the chill descends when it becomes apparent that
the President's fictional flights are being defended as a positive good and that
the media are beginning to buy the idea that at least they are not a significant
harm. David Gergen, Mr. Reagan's communications man, recently illustrated the
new line. He applied a novel version of majority rule to the Reagan record:
''Over the years, he's come out with many facts and figures and far more often
than not, he was right.'' Anyway, ''these stories have a parable-like quality to
them,'' Mr. Gergen says. ''He's trying to tell us how society works'' - which,
presumably, cannot be done with the straight story. The Gergen solution to
remaining doubts?  Since the press was making so much of the factual errors when
expressed in afternoon press conferences, Mr. Reagan should shift to evening
conferences and ''let the public judge for themselves'' when their President was
telling them truth or falsehood.

It is not too far a leap from these new roles for Presidential rhetoric to that
of the President as the Aesop of the Oval Office, tossing off parables instead
of arguments. That is dangerous. The grist of the democratic conversation is
argument. Parables challenge us at church or amuse us in the theater: They reach
beyond the test of evidence. But in the White House, we need a President who
lives in the real world - and knows it. Even more, we rely on public discourse
in which proposals meet facts in a test clear enough for reason to grasp. What
we are getting instead is a mockery of the consent of the governed.

Charles Peters of the Washington Monthly has noticed that, although the big
newspapers still cover Mr. Reagan's fables, the story is slipping away from the
front page as its news value fades. But it is just that retreat from national
attention that may do more to corrupt political talk than the most vituperative
of television ads. Mr.  Gergen calls Mr. Reagan's story telling a ''folk art.''
Thomas Jefferson would have viewed it differently: ''The whole of government is
the art of being honest.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------
James David Barber, professor of political science at Duke University, is author
of ''The Pulse of Politics: Electing Presidents in the Media Age.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SNAPSHOTS OF EL SALVADOR: G.I.'S, JOGGERS AND GRIEF;
The Talk of San Salvador

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 975 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, Nov. 6


It is dusk outside an apartment house near the center of El Salvador's capital,
and an American military adviser walks into the courtyard with a visitor, who
starts to climb into a waiting taxi.

The adviser was an infantryman in Vietnam and trained troops in Cambodia, Laos
and Thailand in the late 1960's.  He breaks into a grin. ''All I want to do is
win one war, that's all, just one,'' he says. ''It'll be like winning the World
Series for me.''

An American recounts a recent visit to the region of Usulutan, southeast of San
Salvador. There is a crowd in the road, and the American learns quickly that the
director of a local school has just been shot dead by two men while shopping in
a small grocery store. A youth whispers to the foreigner that two students in
the school had been shot and killed the day before and the school administrator
murdered in his office the day before that.

The frightened, sullen crowd opens suddenly as a gray-haired woman, walking
stiffly, her face impassive, appears and moves into the store. In silence the
women stares at the body of her son and lifts up his shattered head. She
swallows hard and speaks firmly.

''You've gone to a better place now, much better. Better than this place.''

The center of San Salvador rests in a basin, from which the city slopes upward,
with the wealthy living on peaks in the leafy Escalon and San Benito districts.
At daybreak, these streets are cluttered with upper-class, pudgy joggers,
running on sidewalks beneath the walled villas. Some of the high walls have gun
towers and closed-circuit television, and the sounds of dogs growling and
whining inside the houses shatter the silence and stir an uneasy sense of dread.

In Escalon, near the discotheques and restaurants that are filled with the
wealthy on weekends, is an amusement park favored by teenagers. The chief
attraction is a shack painted with skull and bones and disembodied hands, with
the sign, ''House of Horror.''

At 8:45 P.M., the informal dinner party in an apartment here stops and someone
quickly turns on the radio. It is time for Venceremos radio, a nightly F.M.
broadcast, probably from the Ahuachapan region, near the Guatemalan border, of
the guerrilla forces. The broadcast, heralding this or that new leftist triumph,
opens and closes not with martial music or patriotic songs. The sound effects
are typically Salvadoran: bursts of gunfire.

The morning and afternoon newspapers are now filled with full-page
advertisements by women's groups and businessmen linked to the ultrarightist
National Republican Alliance. The target of the advertisements is the United
States Ambassador, Deane R. Hinton, for his recent speech threatening to cut
United States military aid unless the rightist ''mafia'' stops killing and
kidnapping.

The advertisements demand Mr. Hinton's resignation, saying it is ''abominable
that a North American ambassador intervenes in our affairs.'' The advertisements
struggle to compare Salvadoran justice to the United States legal system. Would
Salvadoran courts find John Hinckley not guilty of attempted murder? Are there
Tylenol killers in El Salvador? What about Chappaquiddick? ''Clean your own
house,'' said one full-page advertisement the other day signed by Ana de Avila,
the aged mother of Capt. Eduardo Avila, one of the wellconnected national guard
officers implicated in the murders of two American land experts and the head of
the Salvadoran land redistribution program. Captain Avila has fled to Guatemala.

A North American recalls coming upon a group of murder victims near the capital.
People in a crowd that gathered said that local security forces had apparently
demanded a bribe and the victims had refused.  All the people were dragged
screaming to a cemetery, shot and killed, then dumped in a ravine near the city.
The dead included a mother and three small children.

Silently a crowd began picking up twigs and branches to cover the bodies, but a
woman plunged through the group and saw her dead husband. She began pounding him
on the shoulders and shrieking, ''Talk to me, talk to me.''

The American military adviser says that the Salvadorans are ''quick learners''
but illiteracy is a problem.  ''I've had 50 people on a line, asked them to
write their names on a target, and only one out of 50 could do that,'' he says.
Compared to two years ago, he says, the army has improved.

''They were raggedy, ill-equipped, no confidence,'' he says. ''I'm looking down
the road at two years. Two years of money and equipment, that's what these guys
need. Just give us two years.''

In recent months the Camino Real Hotel, the haven for most journalists here, has
fallen on hard times. Blame the Falkland crisis, the Lebanese war, the United
States elections. By and large most journalists have fled. Only three of the
eight floors have been kept open, and the bartender grumbled about the decline
in business and reminisced about the good old days earlier in the year when
reporters packed every room.

But Mr. Hinton's speech - coupled with the lack of major crises elsewhere in the
world - has buoyed the bartender. Suddenly television crews have streamed in,
with what appear to be endless supplies of equipment, and the temperature - and
temperament - has soared. The other morning a television correspondent, a blond
woman in designer jeans, barged through the lobby yelling at her entourage. ''I
have got to see Hinton, I've got to see him.'' The bartender smiled. ''Just like
old times,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Salvadoran children

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AT STATE, DISSENT GIVES RISE TO PRAISE

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 7


Dissent is not a popular commodity in the Federal Government. The bureaucracy
has developed numerous and sometimes Draconian ways of stifling differences of
opinion and unconventional thinking.

When J. Edgar Hoover ran the Federal Bureau of Investigation, agents who
challenged his policies were transferred to Missoula, Mont. At other agencies
today, timidity and insularity are defended by banishing dissenters to shuffling
paper, indefinitely postponing promotions or inserting negative information in
personnel files.

The State Department is an exception. It actively encourages and rewards
dissent. The result, since Ronald Reagan became President, has been a fairly
steady stream of internal critiques of policy and speaking appearances by
outside experts who have lambasted the Administration.

Such ferment is a department tradition. Fifteen years ago, when there was
widespread dissent over American policy in Vietnam, Secretary of State Dean Rusk
established several mechanisms designed to bring opposing views to the attention
of senior officials.

Rusk's Intent Questioned

Some officials questioned Mr. Rusk's intent, suggesting that he was actually
interested in diverting the dissent into channels he could control. Similar
concerns are expressed today by some who argue that by organizing dissent, the
department has found a painless way of coopting those who disagree with policy.

Tony Lake, director of policy planning at the department during the Carter
Administration, praised the dissent system in general, but cautioned: ''There is
a danger that it can be used simply as a way to domesticate dissent and relieve
internal pressures in the department.''

Mr. Lake and other former and current officials, however, said that dissenting
views had led to policy reassessments. ''I found it very useful,'' said former
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance. ''On several occasions substantive questions
were raised that made me go out and get additional information.''

A few weeks ago, Secretary of State George P. Shultz delivered the keynote
address at an awards ceremony where one senior official was honored as a manager
who ''will vigorously defend alternative courses of action, without regard to
possible repercussions on his career.'' The recipient, Herman J. Cohen, deputy
director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, was cited for preventing
policy interests from distorting intelligence estimates.

Secretary's Open Forum

The award was one of four given annually by the American Foreign Service
Association to Foreign Service officers who buck the bureaucracy or display
exceptional initiative. Although the association is not part of the department,
secretaries of state have traditionally spoken at the awards ceremonies.

The department plays a more direct role through the Secretary's Open Forum,
which is open to employees of the State Department, the Agency for International
Development, the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and the United States
Information Agency. Current membership totals about 1,000, according to Eric E.
Svendsen, the chairman of the forum.

According to Mr. Svendsen, the forum encourages differences of opinion by
organizing groups to discuss policies, by publishing a quarterly journal and by
inviting critics of Administration policy to speak to department employees.

''The idea is to prevent bureaucratic arteriosclerosis,'' Mr.  Svendsen said.
The chairman, who is elected to a one-year term by forum members, ostensibly
operates independently of any department office or official.

SALT Alternatives Proposed

The journal, which Mr. Svendsen said is classified to keep dissenting opinions
from becoming a cause celebre, is circulated to about 3,000 officials. The most
recent issue, published in September, included one article that proposed
alternatives to the Administration's negotiating position in the talks with the
Soviet Union on limitation of strategic arms, department officials said.

Mr. Svendsen said that recent outside speakers invited by the forum included
Wayne S. Smith, the former head of the American interest section in Havana, who
sharply criticized Administration policy toward Cuba.

The most controversial mechanism for fostering unorthodox thinking in the
department is the ''dissent channel.'' Established by Secretary of State William
P. Rogers in 1971, the channel is the avenue of last resort. ''When you can't
get your opinion through any other way,'' said Mr. Svendsen, ''you use the
dissent channel.''

Messages sent this way are automatically distributed to the Secretary of State
and three of his senior deputies, and are usually circulated to senior officials
responsible for the policy in question.

The director of policy planning, with assistance from the chairman of the open
forum, is expected to insure that a substantive response is made and that the
dissenter is not penalized for going over the head of his immediate superiors.
Anonymous dissents are not accepted.

'Good Paper' on Cambodia

Mr. Lake said that several dissent papers during his tenure had led to
reconsideration of policy positions, but never to reversals. ''We got a very
good paper criticizing our position on the seating of the new Cambodian
Government at the U.N.,'' he said. ''We ultimately opposed the seating of the
Vietnamese client, but the paper prompted a major reassessment of the policy.''

Since Mr. Reagan took office, Mr. Svendsen said, dissent papers have covered a
range of issues, including policy in the Middle East and Central America. He
said that the papers come in at an average of about one a month, similar to the
rate in previous administrations.

Apparently, the channel is used even by those who question the usefulness of the
dissent process itself. One paper received a number of years ago was entitled,
''The Open Forum Program: A Mockery.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE CALENDAR

BYLINE: By Marjorie Hunter

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 667 words


Monday

With the elections over, President Reagan and his advisers will concentrate this
week on his Administration's proposed budget for the fiscal year 1984, scheduled
to be sent to the new Congress in January. The week will also bring more
post-mortems on election returns, a round of Washington appearances by former
President Carter, a meeting of the national commission seeking ways to finance
Social Security and a series of salutes to war veterans, primarly those who
fought in Vietnam.

Off to Africa: Vice President Bush leaves on a two-week trip to Africa, with
stops in seven countries.  High Fliers: The Smithsonian officially begins the
1983 Air and Space Bicentennial, celebrating 200 years of manned flight that
began with the Montgolfier brothers' first balloon flights. 11 A.M., Senate
Caucus Room, Russell Building.

Salute to Veterans: Labor Secretary Raymond J. Donovan and Senator Strom
Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, will take part in Labor Department
salute to American veterans. 11 A.M., Labor Department.

Election Analysis: The political analyst Richard Scammon will discuss the
meaning of last Tuesday's election results at luncheon of Womens National
Democratic Club. 12:15 P.M., Marvin Center, George Washington University.

Drunk Driving: James Burnett, chairman of the National Transportation Safety
Board, will speak on ways to curb drunken driving by teen-agers at two-day
traffic safety workshop sponsored by the American Automobile Association. 9
A.M., Key Bridge Marriott.

Acid Rain: Officials of the Izaak Walton League of America will discuss
nationwide data on acid rain pollution. 10:30 A.M., Dupont Plaza.
Tuesday

Former Foreign Minister Oscar Camilion of Argentina will hold a news conference
to discuss Argentina in the aftermath of the Falklands crisis. 9 A.M., 1740
Massachusetts Avenue, N.W.

Election Aftermath: The National Press Forum will sponsor a discussion on the
election results. 6 P.M., National Press Club.
Wednesday

Former President Jimmy Carter returns to Washington for a round of appearances,
including a 2 P.M. news conference at the Mayflower Hotel.

Retail Sales: Figures on October retail sales to be released by the Commerce
Department may provide some further clue as to whether consumers are buying
sufficiently to lead the economy out of the recession. Sales grew at a modest
one percent rate in September.

Working Women: Women at Work broadcast awards will be presented at a meeting of
the National Commission on Working Women. Linda Lavin, star of the television
show ''Alice,'' will make the presentations. 6 P.M., Shoreham.

Vietnam: A four-day National Salute to Vietnam Veterans begins with a
round-the-clock reading of names of the 57,700 Americans killed or missing in
action. 10 A.M., War Memorial Chapel, National Cathedral.
Thursday

This is Veterans Day, and the National Salute to Vietnam Veterans continues with
an 11 A.M. ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery and unit reunions at the
Sheraton Washington. Dedication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial on the Mall
Saturday will conclude the tributes.

Social Security: The National Commission on Social Security Reforms, headed by
Alan Greenspan, a former chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, opens a
three-day meeting to discuss and possibly vote on alternatives to Social
Security financing. 10 A.M., Ramada Inn, Alexandria, Va.

Family Needs: The Family Resources Coalition holds a conference on private and
public responses to family needs. 10 A.M., Shoreham.
Friday

The Agriculture Department will report on supply-demand estimates, including
estimates of how much grain the Soviet Union will buy this year.  Marjorie
Hunter

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

10 YEARS LATER, MISSOURIANS FIND SOIL TAINTED BY DIOXIN

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1334 words

DATELINE: FENTON, Mo., Nov. 9


The area is known variously as Shady Valley, Tara Hill and Country Club Manor,
but in recent weeks the ambiance has been less suburban ease and more
apprehension and anger. Ranged around the ranch-style houses and two mobile
homes is soil contaminated with the deadly poison dioxin at thousands of times
the level at which the Federal Government would ordinarily order a cleanup.

There is no way to be sure that the ill effects that the families report are
directly traceable to the dioxin and no health study has been made by any
agency, public or private. But residents who discussed the case rule out
coincidence.

The poisoned earth was dumped in the area in Jefferson County, 20 miles
southwest of St. Louis, in 1973. Although officials of the Environmental
Protection Agency were listed as recipients of a Government memorandum about the
contamination in 1975, residents were not told until August.

Asked why the environmental agency was only now studying the situation, Rowena
Michaels of the agency's Kansas City office said: ''There isn't any good
explanation.''

He Says Agency Is 'Very Slow'

Lieut. Gov. Kenneth Rothman of Missouri characterized the Federal agency as
''very slow and not very thorough.'' He said: ''Everything the E.P.A. does is
kind of mystifying. The last couple of years has been unusual.''

In the nine years since the contaminated dirt was spread about the site, the
residents report they have experienced premature births, urinary and bladder
problems, rashes and loss of hair.

At one subdivision of six houses, the Environmental Protection Agency has
detected concentrations of dioxin in soil as high as 900 parts per billion. Less
than half a mile away, the two mobile homes rest atop a landfill where the
agency has found dioxin at 21 parts per billion.

Although the Government has yet to issue a regulatory standard for dioxin, the
agency has obtained legal decrees for cleanups when dioxin in the soil
registered above the lowest detectable limit, or 10 to 50 parts per trillion.

Samples Were Taken in May

Soil samples were taken by the agency in May. But homeowners said they were
unaware of any investigation until Aug. 18, when a representative visited
families. A meeting with representatives from the environmental agency, the
Missouri Department of Health and the Federal Centers for Disease Control was
held on Oct. 14, and many residents did not learn of the extent of the problem
until then.

''If it weren't for the local newspaper, I wouldn't know anything about it,''
said George McArthy, whose home is surrounded by contaminated ground.

A public meeting to seek information, called by Representative Richard A.
Gephardt, is scheduled for Wednesday afternoon at Hillsboro, the county seat.

In interviews, families living closest to the suspect sites report health
problems commonly associated with exposure to dioxin. John Vickers, 35, and his
wife Carol, 32, have lived for eight years below an embankment where 20
truckloads of contaminated soil were dumped in 1973. It was his front yard where
the soil showed 900 parts of dioxin per billion.

In the last five years, Tony Vickers, 12 years old, has had nosebleeds for which
he must sometimes be hospitalized, his father said. Mrs. Vickers has been told
she is a borderline diabetic.

Son Has a Bladder Infection

Mr. McArthy, who is 67, lives next door. He said he has had a skin rash for two
years and his son, Kevin, 20, has a chronic bladder infection and recently
suddenly lost his hair.

Across the street from the mobile home site where another 20 truckloads of
poisoned soil were dumped, Elaine Baczynski, 50, says she is being treated for a
bladder disorder. She and her husband, Ed, 53, have reared eight children:
Myles, 12, has recurring stomach cramps; Marty, 14, has severe headaches; Mark,
26, has urethritis, an enlarged spleen and a damaged liver; Maralee, 22, who
once babysat for trailer occupants, bore a baby two months prematurely, and it
died.

Katherine Skaggs, 42, who lived in one of the mobile homes in her pregnancy in
1979, bore the baby one month prematurely, and he is under treatment for a
neurological disorder. She said she had kidney and bladder problems that began
after she moved there. Another baby is due in May, but the family now lives a
quarter of a mile downhill.

It Was Used to Keep Dust Down

The history of how this acutely toxic substance came to rest in a 600-family
subdivision is a tortuous one.  In 1971, a hauler of salvaged oil, Russell Bliss
of Ellisville, Mo., sold his oil to be sprayed on three horse arenas in eastern
Missouri to keep down the dust. The waste oil also contained sludge he had
removed, for a fee, from the Northeastern Pharmaceutical and Chemical Company
near Verona, Mo. Northeastern was then producing the antiseptic hexachlorophene,
in a process that can create dioxin. A previous owner used the plant to make
Agent Orange, the herbicide used in Vietnam.

In the months after the spraying, scores of animals at the arenas died and
several children became seriously ill. An investigation was begun by the Centers
for Disease Control, but the problem was not traced to dioxin until 1974.

By 1973, at least a dozen horses had died or become sick at the Bubbling Springs
horse ranch. It hired an excavator to remove 850 yards of soil from the arena.
The company, operated by Michael Heaps and Vernon Stout, dumped part of this, 40
truckloads, near the houses.

In May, Federal investigators found dioxin at 77 parts per billion around the
Bubbling Springs arena, which is no longer used, although trails around it are.

Savings Are in the Houses

Residents who now find themselves living atop a toxic site want to rear their
families in a place free of dangers but say they are unable to move because
their savings, in most cases, are tied up in houses no one else wants now.

Soil samples from the residential fill sites were analyzed by the Centers for
Disease Control in 1974. On March 31, 1975, members of this center's Bureaus of
Epidemiology and Laboratories sent a letter to their director recommending that
the areas be re-excavated and the soil dumped at a ''remote, deep landfill.''
Copies of this memorandum were distributed to Dr. Lawrence Plumlee of the
Federal environmental agency and Drs. H. Denny Donnell Jr. and Patrick E.
Phillips of the Missouri Department of Health.

''We have one of the strongest state hazardous waste laws in the nation,'' said
Lieutenant Governor Rothman. ''The question all boils down to cash. It takes
money to find these places and clean them up.''

Move for U.S. Money Sought

State Representative Bob Feigenbaum has called for an emergency state
appropriation of $3 million to qualify for Federal waste cleanup money. Dioxin
contamination from the 1971 spraying has been verified at 14 Missouri sites.

''The total amount of dioxin in Missouri is greater than any area in the United
States that I am aware of,'' said Dr. Renate D.  Kimbrough of the Centers for
Disease Control in a telephone interview. However, Gov. Christopher S. Bond said
on Nov. 3 that he had not decided whether to support the Feigenbaum proposal.

In the last month, Federal experts have advised families to stay away from
contaminated spots, but no warnings are posted.  Neighborhood children play
freely in areas where technicians in protective suits and respirators returned
to take samples on Oct. 18.

''That sure killed my soul when I saw what those guys were wearing out there,''
said Mr. McArthy. ''And we've been living here for 10 years.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of Missouri photo of Fenton, Mo.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SALUTE OPENING FOR VIETNAM VETERANS

BYLINE: By LYNN ROSELLINI, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 9


Two couples stood in front of the new Vietnam war memorial this morning.  ''And
where was your son?'' one man asked.  ''He was killed just south of Saigon,''
another replied.  ''Mine was killed three weeks before he was to get out,'' said
the first man.  ''Sad,'' said one of the women, shaking her head.  ''Sad,'' said
another.  Then Ward and Maxine Holzheimer snapped a picture of Jack and Tawanah
Farley in front of the stark black granite monument that listed the names of
their dead sons.

They have been trickling past the memorial for days now: the first of hundreds
of thousands of Vietnam veterans and parents who have come here to observe a
five-day salute to the men who fought in the divisive war.

Fence to Be Removed

From 10 A.M. Wednesday, when the fence around the memorial on the Mall is
removed, to a Sunday morning service at the National Cathedral, the ''National
Salute to Vietnam Veterans'' will be aimed at giving a hero's welcome to men who
never got one.

There will be a big parade, fancy floats, a fly-over of Air Force and Navy F-4's
and numerous open houses to reunite military units.  There will be a 56-hour
candlelight vigil, a reading of the names of all 57,939 Americans killed or
missing in Vietnam, and workshops on topics such as the herbicide Agent Orange,
used as a defoliant in Vietnam, and the war's psychological aftereffects.

But mostly, there will be veterans, an estimated 250,000 of them, coming in
wheelchairs and on crutches, by bus and plane and on foot, from Seattle and
Boston and Sioux Falls, S.D.

''This is the Vietnam Veteran's day in the sun,'' said Jan Scruggs, an
infantryman in the war and the founder of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund.
''It's a little like the hostage situation.  When they returned, they got all
the hoopla and celebration. That's what we're trying to equal here. This is the
big time for the Vietnam veterans to get the big parade and the whole thing.''

Unlike heroes of other wars, the men who fought in Vietnam returned to what was
often a reproachful silence. ''They came home quietly,'' said Al Keller Jr.,
national commander of the American Legion, ''sometimes hurt and broken, while
the nation looked away in shame.''

Homecoming Staged Themselves

Now, nearly a decade after United States troops stopped fighting in Southeast
Asia, and long after it became apparent that no one else was going to give them
homecoming, the veterans are doing it for themselves. Led by Mr. Scruggs,
veterans' groups raised $7 million to build the just-completed memorial on the
mall. Veterans also planned this week's activities.

The salute, said Mr. Scruggs, is also a chance to heal the rifts left by
America's longest and most unpopular war. ''This is just one way in which the
country at large can begin to recover from the whole episode of Vietnam,'' he
said.

Like the Vietnam War itself, the granite memorial that lists the names of
American casualties has also had its share of controversy.  ''It's been a
nightmare, this whole project,'' said Mr. Scruggs, referring to the monument.
The dedication of the monument on Saturday is the cornerstone of the week's
events.

The memorial, two polished, 200-foot walls that meet at an angle on a two-acre
site between the Washington Monument and Lincoln Memorial, created a dispute as
soon as its design was made public.  Some veterans and Congressmen called it a
''tombstone'' that failed to express proper patriotism and spirit.

Mr. Scruggs and others agreed to place a flagpole atop the apex of the two walls
and to erect a statue representing the fighting men, a move that quieted the
critics.

But there is still bitterness among veterans.  ''The memorial's nice,'' said
William Large, a recipient of the Bronze Star from Massachusetts, ''but it ain't
going to take care of the Vietnam veterans.''

''We need jobs,'' said another veteran, who identified himself only as Duane.  A
third man, whose legs were missing, sat in a wheelchair and said: ''We had our
doubts about coming here. I didn't know if there would be demonstrations like
there were when we left.''

The man, Michael Lafleur, of Stoughton, Mass., looked down the row of names
chiseled into the black granite, and added: ''It's like a mass grave, isn't
it?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Viet Nam veterans

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE AND DEBATE;
SHOULD LIBEL RULE FOR PUBLIC FIGURES BE CHANGED

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1238 words


For nearly two decades, the press has operated under a legal rule that shields
it from libel suits by people in the public eye.  Essentially, the rule says
these public figures cannot win unless they can prove not only that the
offending article was false but also that the publication acted with ''actual
malice'' because it either knew that the story was false or recklessly
disregarded the truth.

The rule has been a powerful protection for the press and for free speech in
general. Several recent incidents, however, have focused attention on the rule
and opened a debate on whether it should be modified.

On one side are officials and public figures who say the press has used this
shield arrogantly and carelessly, willfully repeating any scurrilous gossip, no
matter how unsubstantiated or harmful. The rule, they say, should be modified to
make it easier to persuade a court to punish such conduct.

On the other side are the press, some judges and a few civil libertarians who
deny there has been substantial abuse. In fact, some say, the rule is too weak
and, if it is changed, it should provide further barriers against libel suits
and set strict limits on how much a jury can order a news organization to pay.

The Background

The seminal case pitted The New York Times against L.B. Sullivan, the Police
Commissioner of Montgomery, Ala. A local jury awarded him $500,000, agreeing
that he had been defamed by some factual errors in an advertisement placed in
The Times by a civil rights group.

The Supreme Court overturned the verdict. In a landmark decision in 1964, it
hailed the ''profound national commitment to the principle that debate on public
issues should be uninhibited, robust and wide open.''

Better to tolerate the inevitable mistakes than to allow ruinous libel judgments
that would intimidate the press, the Court said.  Press experts say there is no
precise measure of the effect of that decision or of subsequent rulings that
extended the ''actual malice'' standard to include virtually anybody involved in
a public issue. But they say the late 1960's and early 1970's were a time of
enormous press vitality, culminating in The Washington Post's reporting on the
Watergate affair.

Since then, however, officials have been fighting back against a generation of
investigative reporters, arguing that healthy skepticism of public institutions
has been replaced by malevolent cynicism and arrogance. They say some reporting
is motivated by a desire for ratings or readership and is actually hurting
society by undermining the ability to govern and by intruding on individuals'
privacy.

Some recent incidents build public support for that view. The Post, for example,
found few takers last year for its argument that it had a right to report the
rumor that President Carter had had Blair House bugged simply because the rumor
was being repeated elsewhere.

Last month Mayor William J. Green of Philadelphia won a substantial settlement
from CBS because its station there had broadcast a report that a Federal grand
jury was investigating him, even though both he and the Federal prosecutor had
denied it.

For Changing Rule

Central to the Sullivan decision was the premise that public figures can deal
with critical stories because they can demand and get news coverage of their
rebuttals.

Plaintiffs say that might have been true in Montgomery, where The Times sold 35
copies of its newspaper with the offending ad and where Mr. Sullivan had access
to the local press. But they say they have no such guarantee of reply when they
are attacked by the only newspaper in town or the major television station.

For example, Robert C. Hawk, the lawyer for two Gary, Ind., police officials,
said they had no effective forum except the court in which to challenge charges
of corruption made by WBBM-TV in Chicago. CBS, which owns WBBM, settled that
suit in September for an undisclosed amount.

Since laws compelling the press to print rebuttals would run afoul of the First
Amendment, plaintiffs say that their only recourse is litigation. But they say
that deterrent is not credible now because defendants win three-quarters of the
suits in the opening round, through a summary decision by the judge that the
plaintiff cannot show ''actual malice.'' Plaintiffs were heartened by a
suggestion from Chief Justice Warren E. Burger in a a 1979 decision that he
thought too many cases were being cut off prematurely.

The president of the Mobil Oil Company, William P. Tavoulareas, who won a $2.05
million verdict against The Washington Post for its article asserting that he
had set up his son in the shipping business, suggests that the ''actual malice''
defense should be voided if a news organization is told about mistakes and still
refuses to correct them.

Against Changing Rule

The Tavoulareas case is cited by critics as an example - why the press needs to
have the ''actual malice'' test scored by judges rather than jurors. An article
in the November issue of The American Lawyer quotes the jurors as saying they
concentrated on whether The Post had proved its article true, not whether Mr.
Tavoulareas had shown that the newspaper knew it to be false.

The Sullivan rule is ''perfectly appropriate,'' said James C.  Goodale, a New
York lawyer who has specialized in First Amendment issues and who represents The
Times in many of its libel cases. He said the problem was that too many cases
were going to juries, who ''invariably come back with verdicts'' against the
press.

He and others would limit such awards to pay for the actual damage done by a
defamatory article but would abolish the concept of punitive damages that has
allowed the million-dollar verdicts. The American Civil Liberties Union would go
even further and effectively prohibit libel cases.

The Outlook

Lawyers on both sides say they expect that the Supreme Court will consider the
issue within the next year or two. They say the likelihood is that a test will
come in a prominent case, such as the suit by Mr. Tavoulareas.

Press lawyers are worried that such a case could be decided in a context very
different from Sullivan, which involved a politically liberal court and the
actions of a civil rights group and a publication of limited circulation in a
racially repressive atmosphere.

Plaintiffs have yet to collect on most of the very large verdicts, generally
because higher courts overturn what juries do.  But both sides expect the amount
of libel litigation to grow, just as medical malpractice suits increased after
juries began awarding large verdicts against doctors and hospitals.

Gen. William C. Westmoreland, for example, is pressing a $120 million suit
against CBS for a documentary about estimates of enemy strength in Vietnam. And
John J. Walsh, the lawyer who represented Mr. Tavoulareas, has been hired by the
chairman of the Bendix Corporation, William Agee, and his wife, Mary Cunningham,
to demand that several publications retract and apologize for articles about
their private lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 10, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PANEL SEES PROBLEM IN STUDY OF EFFECTS OF AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 546 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 9


A panel of experts appointed by the National Academy of Sciences warned in a
report released today that a proposed study of the effects of the herbicide
Agent Orange on ground troops in Vietnam rested on an ''insecure scientific
base.''

The panel did not define what it meant by an ''insecure scientific base'' for
the study. But Brian MacMahon, a Harvard epidemiologist who was chairman of the
panel, said in an interview that it would be very difficult to estimate the
extent to which ground troops had been exposed to the herbicide. He also
predicted that it would be difficult to measure some of the purported health
effects, such as psychological impairment, that some veterans attribute to Agent
Orange.

The proposed study of ground troops would seek to compare the health of troops
who received relatively high exposure to Agent Orange with those who received
relatively little exposure.

But the academy panel said it had not yet heard described ''a fully satisfactory
method of selection of participants'' and it questioned ''the wisdom of
proceeding with the pilot study until this issue is settled.'' The proposed
study is currently being managed by the Veterans Administration but is expected
to be transferred to the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.

Methods Termed Unsatisfactory

The panel's report called the ability to document whether troops had been
exposed to Agent Orange the ''sine qua non for this study.'' The panel said it
was not satisfied with any of the methods under serious consideration by the
Government for selecting veterans who were exposed to the herbicide and those
who were not.

The academy panel also recommended that the study not be made even more complex
by trying to assess the health effects of other aspects of service in Vietnam,
as some veterans groups and senators have urged. If such a broader study is to
be carried out, the panel said, it should be independent of the Agent Orange
study because it would require a different sample of veterans and different
medical questionnaires.

The panel also threw its weight against recent demands by veterans and members
of Congress that the Agent Orange study be speeded up. It urged that a pilot
study of the ground troops exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam be delayed until
initial results were available from a similar Air Force study of servicemen
involved in the spray operations. That could be many months from now, according
to one panel member.

The panel said the Air Force findings ''should have a significant impact'' on
the design of the ground troop study.  Agent Orange, a mixture of chemicals that
often include dioxin, a highly potent contaminant, was the most widely used
herbicide in the Vietnam War. It was typically sprayed from airplanes to
defoliate trees and deprive the enemy of cover. Veterans have charged that it
caused a variety of adverse health effects, ranging from cancer and birth
defects to liver damage and skin disease. As a result, the Federal Government
has initiated several studies to measure what health effects, if any, can be
attributed to Agent Orange.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TRIBUTE TO VIETNAM DEAD: WORDS, A WALL

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 946 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


President Reagan stopped by the National Cathedral to listen for a while to the
reading of the names of the Vietnam war dead this evening.

His motorcade sounded fast and far-off heading northwest to the cathedral in the
dusk as Tom Toohey, unheeding in another part of town, stepped up to the glossy
dark wall of the war's freshly completed memorial with its long listing of its
dead, touching it for the name, he emphasized, of ''one good lieutenant.''

''There,'' said Mr. Toohey, his fingers brushing the name of Richard H. Housh.
''A real good lieutenant. I saw him jump up with his pump shotgun one time and
blow away four guys coming at us. He was somebody else, one good lieutenant.''

Ceremony by Candlelight

While the President journeyed to one part of the capital's weeklong
commemoration of the Vietnam dead, the continuous reading of their names in a
candlelighted chapel at National Cathedral, Mr. Toohey and hundreds of other
Americans continued to arrive at the wall even after darkness fell tonight, the
eve of Veterans Day. They bore the slow grief of the Vietnam time and indulged
the simplest sort of human memorial, the act of touching stone, feeling the
cold, stony texture of the engraved names of the dead that showed up by
flashlight and in the wavering glow of matches struck in the dark.

Official Washington has built a week of ceremony around the opening of the
simple memorial that hugs a part of the Washington earth. The first senators
have already come to pose for photographs, according to attendants.

But it is already clear that the wall has touched a much more basic and human
strain of response, the simple act of touching the wall as much as reading the
names. Bearded veterans wearing old fatigue jackets and battle medals can be
seen reaching toward the names of remembered dead warriors, running the fingers
across the letters.  Gray-haired women lean forward and reach and touch.

''I don't know what it is,'' said Kenneth Young, a Vietnam veteran who stood for
two hours, staring at the wall, stepping away to think, stepping back to touch
again the names he knew. ''You have to touch it. There's something about
touching it.''

At the National Cathedral, the President and his wife, Nancy, listened silently
for five minutes while the roster of war dead was read out.

''I think the names that are being read are of men who died for freedom just as
surely as any man who ever fought for this country,'' Mr. Reagan said as he left
the cathedral with the reading of nearly 58,000 names still moving forward.

Down along the Washington Mall, the darkness took hold and lights went on at the
nearby Lincoln Memorial, which towered white and glowing to the west of the
humbler Vietnam memorial. The black stone walls all but disappeared except for
the sudden flare of matches of new arrivals searching for names.

John Bender, a volunteer for the National Park Service, stayed late to hold a
flashlight and help in the individual searches.

A Simple Search

''Panel 43, line 13,'' a man said, reciting the instructions of the memorial's
locator book, the size of a big-city phone book. The flashlight raked across the
panels to number 43, then down to line 13. It showed the name of Jerry A.
Beatty. The man, at the end of this simple search, touched it very quickly, then
turned away and said not a word as he faced out to the night.

''I have a son, John Jr., who tried hard to get on this wall,'' Mr. Bender said.
''Wounded twice in Vietnam. Thank God he didn't make it up there.''

The memorial is a gradual V-shaped depression in the earth, with the names
extended in chronological order of death. The names of the first dead move off
from 1959 and the right flank of the wall, and the last of the dead come in from
the left flank. The arrangement is such that the listing of the earliest and the
latest of the deaths are closest together at the apex of the V, almost as if a
circle was being closed.

In his visit to the cathedral, Mr. Reagan sought to express the historical
meaning of the war. ''The tragedy was that they were asked to fight and die for
a cause that their country was unwilling to win,'' he said.

At the memorial, five veterans who had driven 20 hours straight from Green Bay,
Wis., arrived and stepped up to search and touch the wall for what one of the
group, Niles Delfosse, called ''these gentlemen.'' These veterans of the 25th
Infantry Division stared and touched and began greeting others who, like
themselves, wore old fatigue jackets.

Names Without Gilding

The names of the dead are without gilding, showing flat gray in the black stone
in letters less than an inch high. The lists tally above the reach of visitors
on the walls that reach a maximum height of 10 feet 1 1/2 inches, and extend in
a gradually shrinking slope in two 246-foot stretches until they seem to
disappear into the ground.

In his remarks, Mr. Reagan talked of the factor of time in the memories of the
Vietnam War. ''We're beginning to understand how much we were led astray at that
time,'' he said. ''We are beginning to appreciate that they were fighting for a
just cause.''

At the memorial, veterans straggling in offered no such thoughts.  ''Tonight,
I'm sure we'll all get drunk,'' Ken Young said as word spread of numerous
barroom reunions around town.  ''Well, not drunk,'' said Niles Delfosse. ''We'll
have a toast to these gentlemen. We'll definitely drink to these gentlemen.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President and Mrs. Reagan (page B15) photo of
veterans at Vietnam War Memorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

The Editorial Notebook;
Angell's 'Great Illusion' (Cont'd)

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 552 words


When Britain memorialized its dead in the Falklands, this interesting passage
occurred in the Archbishop of Canterbury's sermon at St. Paul's:

''At the beginning of this century in a noble book, 'The Great Illusion,' by
Norman Angell, the irrational character of modern war was precisely described.
The thesis is that in a world of economic interdependence you cannot injure
another state without damaging your own interests. We flourish and become
prosperous not by raiding and pauperizing our neighbors, but by building them
up. ...''

The sermon was not well received; Prime Minister Thatcher ''hated'' it. In a
backhanded way, this was a compliment to Sir Norman Angell, whose long life
(1872-1967) was dedicated to preaching a doctrine that governments found absurd
even as experience proved him right.

The ambiguous Vietnam War makes his point, as does the sadly misnamed ''war to
end wars'' whose close caused rejoicing 64 years ago today.

He was a young journalist when he created a stir with ''The Great Illusion,''
published in 1909 as Europe was

Winning Wars May Hurt as Much As Losing Them
scrambling for arms and empire. It was the era of the naval race, when each
major power justified its armada on grounds of deterrence and protection of
far-flung colonies.

He questioned the value of both, arguing that colonialism was economic folly and
that the wealth and well-being of a nation did not depend on its battleships or
territorial conquests.

Angell was no pacifist. He tried instead to show rationally that wars weakened
the victor and strengthened the victim.  In his day, an obvious example was the
Boer War, fought by the greatest of empires against a band of farmers. It took
three years, 500,000 men and the equivalent of a billion dollars for Britain to
whip the Boers, only to wrest a peace that proved to the losers' advantage.

Angell did not object to patriotism so much as complacent patriotism. He
declined to blame wars on criminal nations or mendacious profiteers. Their
roots, he said, were imbedded in passions common to all, not least ''The
Virtuous People.''

Arguments like these were dismissed as a ''mistake'' by Admiral Mahan, the
American apostle of big navies; others considered it reckless sophism. Still,
Angell was knighted in 1931 and two years later was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize. Believing that not all wars were wrong, he campaigned against appeasing
Nazi Germany, and for collective security among the Atlantic democracies.

No doubt Norman Angell would likewise have opposed British appeasement of
Argentina after the Falklands were invaded. But he also would have noted that
Britain is paying a billion dollars to keep those islands British. Once again,
victory stuck the victor with an appalling bill.

Governments may hate its message, but the Archbishop was right about ''The Great
Illusion.'' Winning a war can be as costly - or even costlier - to a civilized
nation's interests as losing.  KARL E. MEYER

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

The Vietnam Names

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 363 words


During the Vietnam War, the names belonged to the peace movement.  Demonstrators
marched past the White House shouting the names of those who had fallen. In a
single extraordinary stroke of journalism, Life magazine may have turned
millions against the war simply by printing the names and pictures of those who
had died in the course of a single week.

Today the names are the focus of another gathering in Washington: the dedication
of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. Activities include a parade, an Army band
concert, an Air Force fly-by, a variety show, church services, panel discussions
of post-traumatic stress disorder and Agent Orange - and a reading of the names.

The names are also the main feature of the memorial itself; those of all 57,692
American servicemen and -women who died in Vietnam are inscribed on its gleaming
walls of black granite. Controversy over the somberness and modernist simplicity
of the walls recalls domestic conflict over the war.

In that sense, the names also memorialize the historic crisis of authority that
Vietnam brought on American society. Conflicts between generations, classes and
races took shape around the war. The mounting death toll added tragic force to
the debate, and brought it directly home to 58,000 American families.

Their questions would not be ignored: Could the policies and the officials
sending young Americans to their deaths be trusted? Did the best and the
brightest in Washington understand Vietnam? Or were they clinging too stubbornly
to anti-Communist ideology and to military tactics that didn't work? Did the
investment of lives, the list of names that grew each week, only drive them,
ever more isolated, to seek vindication?

Promoters of the memorial, which was built with private contributions, hope this
week's ceremonies will heal some of the lingering divisions and finally give all
the Vietnam veterans a rightful sign of national gratitude. Let it stand for
that gratitude; let it also stand for the promise that America will not again so
unquestioningly send its young to war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 893 words


International
Leonid I. Brezhnev is dead, the Tass news agency reported. The agency said the
75-year-old Soviet leader died ''a sudden death'' at 8:30 A.M. (12:30 A.M. EST)
Wednesday. Tass said the announcement was made by the Central Committee of the
Communist Party. There was no immediate announcement of a successor. (Page A1,
Column 6.)
Mexico announced an austerity plan as part of an agreement with the
International Monetary Fund designed to revive its troubled economy and avert
defaulting on its foreign debt of $78 billion. Under the accord, Mexico could
draw up to $3.84 billion from the fund over three years in exchange for curbing
spending and imports and raising taxes. (A1:1-2.)
A Briton pleaded guilty to spying and passing secrets to the Soviet Union for 14
years on the activities of a classified electronics listening post. The
defendant, Geoffrey Arthur Prime, a linguistics expert, was sentenced to 35
years in prison by Lord Lane, the Lord Chief Justice, who said that Mr. Prime's
treason had caused ''incalculable harm'' to the security of Britain and its
allies.  (A1:5.)
A strike called by Solidarity appeared to be generally unsuccessful in the face
of strong warnings by the Polish military authorities and a massive show of
police power. (A1:4-5.)
Improved Washington-Bonn ties are sought by Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who is
flying to the United States this weekend confident he has political control at
home and can establish a more trusting relationship with the Reagan
Administration. In an interview in Bonn, the new Chancellor sounded much like
President Reagan on economic policy, nuclear arms control and moral philosophy.
(A11:1.)
National
Prospects for a public works program to provide jobs for the unemployed
brightened in Congress. There was a rising bipartisan consensus in favor of
passing a bill to create such a program during the postelection session amid
signs President Reagan might support a limited program. (A1:1.)
Governmental costs of joblessness continued to increase as 650,000 more people
requested unemployment benefit payments. As of Nov. 1, nearly 4.7 million people
were receiving jobless insurance payments averaging $102 a week. (A28:1.)
President Reagan stopped by Washington's National Cathedral to listen for a
while to the reading of the names of Americans killed or missing in the Vietnam
War. The candlelight ceremony, along with the unveiling of the stark war
memorial in the Washington Mall, is part of a weeklong tribute to those lost in
Vietnam. (A1:2-4.)
A faulty aircraft was cited by test pilots in a confidential report.  One month
after the Navy awarded a $1.14 billion contract to McDonnell Douglas for 63 F-18
planes, the pilots reported that a five-month evaluation confirmed that the
aircraft was ''not operationally suitable.'' (A28:1-4.)
The space shuttle program is making a critical transition from flight testing to
the hauling of orbital freight with the fifth mission of the Columbia. Today's
launching will set the stage for the first deployment of satellites from the
shuttle, a method of placing spacecraft in earth orbit that will eventually make
expendable rockets obsolete. (B16:1-5.)
Opposition to Three Mile Island operations continues three and a half years
after the nation's worst nuclear accident at the Pennsylvnia power plant. More
than 1,000 residents of communities near the crippled plant urged the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission not to permit operations to resume at the undamaged
reactor. (A20:3-5.)
The voice of the teamster union chief, Roy L. Williams, in a secretly-wiretapped
telephone talk with an associate, was heard in Federal Court in Chicago and
supported the Government's briberyconspiracy charges. It was the 11th day of
testimony in the trial of Mr. Williams and four other men charged with trying to
bribe Senator Howard W. Cannon, Democrat of Nevada. (A20:1-2.)
Jimmy Carter was in the limelight on one of his infrequent visits to Washington
since he left the White House. He is on a six-city tour promoting ''Keeping
Faith,'' the newly published memoir of his Presidency. (A21:1.)
Metropolitan
Frederick Richmond was sentenced to a year and a day in prison and fined $20,000
for income-tax evasion, marijuana possession and making an illegal payment to a
Government employee. The former Representative from Brooklyn had pleaded guilty
to the charges and resigned from Congress in a plea bargaining with Federal
authorities who agreed not to prosecute him over other matters under
investigation. (B9:1.)
New York State's credit rating was lowered one half-step by Standard and Poor's,
which cited the state's difficulty in maintaining a balanced budget. The change,
reducing the rating for state bonds from AA to A+, is the lowest level ever.
(B1:5-6.)
A drought warning was issued by the Delaware River Basin Commission.  Citing a
four-month dry spell in upstate New York, the four-state agency cut 120 million
gallons a day from New York City's allowance of Delaware River water. (B1:1-2.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 31, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 795 words


ANNIVERSARY

Today, Veterans Day, is a day established to mark the Armistice that ended the
War to End All Wars in 1918. There have been generations of Americans who served
in wars since, and a dozen who went to Vietnam will read poetry and sing songs
about it and about hopes for the future at the Public Theater, 425 Lafayette
Street (598-7150) at 8 o'clock tonight.

The program is part of the ''Language-Theater'' series, once known as ''Poets at
the Public,'' Tonight's presentation is not expected to make political
statements but to offer expressions, in poetry, of personal and human
experiences as well as to project a vision of what these veterans envisage as a
world of tomorrow.

Among the poets are Jan Barry, who edited ''Winning Hearts and Minds, War Poems
by Vietnam Veterans,'' and Bill Ehrhart a Pennsylvania history teacher and
Marine veteran, who has had four volumes of poetry published. The poets Jim
Clark and B.H. Williamson, who are also musicians, will perform songs they
composed for the occasion.

Some of the participants have been active in the Veterans Ensemble Theater
Company of Manhattan.  Admission is $4.
SCALED DOWN

William T. Richards, who lived from 1833 to 1905, was a Philadelphia artist
known for his landscape and marine paintings.  This is usually relatively
large-scale work, but Richards also painted 185 miniature watercolors, of which
110 are on exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

The assortment fills the gallery in the northwest corner of the American Wing
through Jan. 16. The watercolors depict fields and forests, headlands and
harbors in England and New England. Each work is 3 inches by 5 inches, small
enough to be enclosed in a letter.  This is indeed where they were placed by
Richards, who sent them to his friend and patron, George Whitney, a Philadelphia
industrialist and art collector.

The Met's is a small exhibition, a peaceful and serene one that will rest the
eyes and give the visitor surcease from the dramatic immensity of Rodin's
''Gates of Hell,'' which dominates the wing's garden just outside this little
show.

The Met is open today, a holiday, and Sundays from 11 A.M. to 4:45, Tuesdays 10
to 8:45 and Wednesdays through Saturdays 10 to 4:45.  Suggested admission is $4,
$2 for over-65's and students. Under-12's with an adult visit for free.
Information: 535-7710.
HAIL CAESAR

There has not been a week without an opening lately at the Museum of
Broadcasting, 1 East 53d Street (752-4690). The openings consist of shows that
have closed in radio or television, usually long ago.  Memory gives you the
reviews without waiting for the critics.

Sid Caesar, one of the great names of early television, the one whose show
caused set-owners to set up chairs and invite the neighbors over, takes over
memory lane from today through Dec. 31.  ''Sid Caesar: Master of Comedy'' offers
highlights from the Caesar series, ''The Admiral Broadway Revue,'' ''Your Show
of Shows'' and ''Caesar's Hour,'' as well as specials and guest shots.

A 90-minute program, a different one daily, will be shown in the auditorium at
12:05, 1:45 and 3:30. Today's bill draws from the ''Admiral'' series of 1949,
including the premiere of the first Caesar series. Tomorrow's bill will offer
the first sketch from ''Caesar's Hour,'' ''The Commuters,'' -with a guest
appearance by Peggy Lee - as well as other skits from ''Caesar's Hour,'' which
ran from 1955 to 1957.

The museum is open Tuesdays through Saturdays noon to 5. Suggested admission is
$2, $1 for over-65's and under-13's.
MOVIES

Les Blank, a film maker whose ''Burden of Dreams,'' about the making of Werner
Herzog's ''Fitzcarraldo,'' recently finished a long run in Greenwich Village,
has several other movies on view in the neighborhood, in the Agee Room of the
Bleecker Street Cinema at 142 Bleecker Street, near La Guardia Place (473-8306).

These are movies about music - regional music, jazz, blues and rhythm-and-blues.
There are two programs, through Sunday, one, at 7 P.M. daily, consisting of four
films (105 minutes in all), three about blues players of Texas and a short about
Dizzie Gillespie. The other program, at 9 P.M., plus 4:45 showings Saturday and
Sunday, consists of two films (112 minutes in all) that tell about the music of
the New Orleans area.

Admission is $4.

Entertainment Events is on page C23. Thursday Sports is on page B22.  Richard F.
Shepard

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 11, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BREZHNEV ATTEMPTED TO ADVANCE SOVIET GOALS THROUGH DETENTE;
SOVIET LEADER USED CONSENSUS IN POLITBURO ON DOMESTIC ISSUES

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 5850 words


As the leader of the Soviet Union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev was a canny and
careful Communist Party functionary who sought to make his country the military
equal of the United States and promote its political influence around the world
through the policy of detente.

In domestic affairs, as General Secretary of the Communist Party, Mr. Brezhnev
(pronounced BRYEHZH-nyev) ruled as first among his equals on the Politburo, not
as an autocrat, and professed to want economic development of his country of 265
million people spread over a sixth of the globe's land area.

Both his policy and his health faltered in these tasks in the last years of his
life. Detente, which had seemed a necessity to many Western leaders after Soviet
tanks moved into Czechoslovakia in 1968 to crush the liberalization of the
''Prague Spring,'' lost much of its appeal in the United States after the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, and President Carter imposed an embargo on
grain sales and other trade curbs.

After the Polish military authorities ceded to pressure from Moscow and declared
martial law in December 1981, President Reagan imposed further economic and
political sanctions on the Soviet Union, though not an embargo on grain sales.
The Western European allies remained more reluctant to cut back their important
industrial trade with the Russians, and insisted on going ahead with the deal,
creating a political rift within the NATO alliance that Mr. Brezhnev obviously
sought to exploit.

But domestic economic stagnation had become an acute domestic problem by the end
of the Brezhnev years. In this area, despite their recognition of the crisis,
the aging Soviet leaders made no effective attempt to reform the rigidities of
centralized economic planning. And as the standard of living declined, political
repression increased. Dissidents, who had emerged openly in the mid-1970's to
criticize violations of human rights, were later harassed until most had either
left the country or were in prison camps by the early 1980's. Soviet Jews, who
had been permitted to emigrate by the thousands a month in 1977 and 1978, found
that by 1982 permission to emigrate was virtually impossible to get.

In his last years, Mr. Brezhnev's speech became labored and his features pale
and bloated, apparently as a result of medical treatments for a disability that
was never publicly revealed. At the height of his powers in the early 1970's, in
contacts with Presidents Nixon, Ford and Carter and Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger, he was a burly, gray-haired, black-browed figure of 5 feet 10 inches,
gregarious and talkative, but powerful and very much aware of his power over
associates and adversaries alike.

Then he had a reputation as a lover of good food and drink, fast cars - which he
collected - and hunting.  Mr. Brezhnev talked extensively about his weight,
which he sought vainly to keep under control, and often joked about his
excessive cigarette smoking, which was thought to have aggravated his health
problems.

His smoking (Philip Morris Multifilters) was such a vexation that he used a box
with a time lock to slow his pace. But he conceded to one visitor, ''I keep a
reserve pack in the other pocket.'' Ultimately he had to give up smoking
altogether.
Long Part of Coalition

Mr. Brezhnev was long part of a coalition in the ruling Politburo of his party's
Central Committee. Two other members of the coalition who for years were most
visible to the West were Prime Minister Aleksei N. Kosygin, who died in December
1980, and President Nikolai V. Podgorny, who was ousted from the leadership
group in 1977.

In the early years, after this coalition had ousted Nikita S.  Khrushchev in a
bloodless coup in 1964, it operated as a troika, with none of its members
seemingly more authoritative than the others.

Prominent, first in support of Mr. Khrushchev and then as a member of the
coalition that ousted him, was Mikhail A. Suslov, the party's ideologist. As Mr.
Brezhnev encountered growing problems with his health, Mr. Suslov's authority,
already enormous, seemed to grow to the point where many considered him the
second-ranking figure in the hierarchy. But death removed the ascetic ideologist
from the leadership on Jan. 25, 1982, at the age of 79.

In the fall of 1970 Mr. Brezhnev emerged from his post as the party chief to
become the personal ambassador for detente. This occurred in his first meeting
with Chancellor Willy Brandt of West Germany and in a subsequent conference with
President Charles de Gaulle of France.

In these and in other meetings in 1971, the Soviet leader appeared stiff and
uncomfortable, but he loosened up remarkably as his selfconfidence grew.

On June 11, 1979, Mr. Brezhnev and President Carter, meeting in the ornate
Hofburg Palace in Vienna, signed an arms control treaty that for the first time
limited both sides to the same maximum number of long-range bombers and
missiles.

For millions of television viewers around the globe, Soviet-Western
rapprochement was symbolized when the two leaders embraced just after the
signing and, to a crescendo of applause from onlookers, Mr. Brezhnev gave Mr.
Carter hearty kisses, Russian-style, on both cheeks.

Despite the optimism expressed by the two men at the signing ceremony, the
treaty came under criticism from a number of United States senators who believed
it conferred a unilateral advantage on the Soviet Union in heavy land-based
missiles. Mr. Carter withdrew the treaty from Senate consideration after the
invasion of Afghanistan, and it was never approved by the Senate.
Detente Policy Set Back

Mr. Brezhnev's detente policy was further set back by the establishment of
martial law in Poland in December 1981. With the intervention in Afghanistan
began a hardening of attitudes in the West, including an American boycott of the
Moscow Olympics in 1980 and the imposition of trade restrictions by the United
States and other Western countries; Mr. Brezhnev criticized these steps as a
return to the cold war, but never acknowledged the Soviet Union's responsibility
for provoking them.

Instead, in his statements and speeches, Mr. Brezhnev sought to portray his
country as still open to arms reductions talks and detente, not only with the
West but also, with increasing emphasis as relations with the West deteriorated,
with China.

In February 1982, the Soviet leader proposed a two-thirds cut by 1990 in both
sides' medium-range nuclear arsenals in Europe. He said the Soviet Union was
ready to reach agreement not only on the complete termination of all tests of
nuclear weapons but also on ending their further production and on the reduction
and subsequent elimination of their stockpiles.

Early in March he announced that Moscow was suspending its deployment of new
medium-range missiles in the European part of the Soviet Union. He said this was
intended to set ''a good example.''

But United States officials saw his moves as attempts ''to convey the impression
of restraint while diverting attention from the enormous growth of Soviet
capability.''

In a public appearance in Tashkent on March 24, Brezhnev issued a new appeal to
Peking to revive the search for ways to end the Chinese-Soviet feud. ''We
remember well the time when the Soviet Union and People's China were united by
bonds of friendship and comradely cooperation,'' he said. Negotiations with the
Chinese did resume in the fall of 1982, and Mr. Brezhnev, in a speech to an
audience of Soviet generals shortly afterward, said that while the prospects of
a real improvement in relations were slim, the Soviet Union had an interest in
pressing for them.

Regarding detente with the West, the still unratified arms control treaty with
the United States entailed some Soviet concessions, but on several other issues,
Mr. Brezhnev's approach to the policy - called ''peaceful coexistence'' under
Mr. Khrushchev - accomplished much for the Soviet Union.

These accomplishments included strategic nuclear parity with the United States;
an increase in conventional military strength on land and at sea; acknowledgment
by West Germany and the rest of Western Europe of the division of Germany and of
Europe; recognition of East Germany and its admission to the United Nations;
increasing imports of Western technology to modernize the Soviet economy, and a
growing role in the Middle East and Africa.
Concession on Emigration

These were attained with few concessions to the West. A major concession -or
certainly the most publicized - was the Soviet willingness to permit some
emigration, mostly for Jews, starting in the late 1960's.

The policy of allowing emigration for Soviet citizens was, however, a
controversial one within the leadership, and there were periodic indications,
especially from the police apparatus, of disquiet with this relaxation of
traditional curbs. The most recent tightening came in 1981 in response to
stiffening Western positions over the intervention in Afghanistan.

In addition, there was some evidence that Mr. Brezhnev's critics in Moscow felt
that he had not gained sufficient trade and credit advantages in bargaining with
the United States.

Efforts in Washington to make improved commercial ties dependent on further
relaxation of emigration restrictions illustrated one of the practical problems
of detente. Mr. Brezhnev could not explicitly lift emigration barriers because
this might be construed as bowing to external pressures, and the United States
could not do less than insist, owing to its domestic pressures.

Although Mr. Brezhnev and American Presidents were in accord on avoiding
situations that might lead to armed conflict, there were world areas where the
interests of the two superpowers clashed. In the Middle East, the Soviet Union
supported Arab nationalism with arms and technical experts and carried on a
campaign to discredit Israel. Syria and Iraq were among the main beneficiaries
of Soviet backing.

When strikes and rioting in Iran in late 1978 began to build up into a
revolution, Mr. Brezhnev issued a warning against ''outside interference,
especially military interference'' by the United States. At about the same time,
he cemented Moscow's ties with the new pro-Soviet regime in Afghanistan by
signing a 20-year treaty of friendship and cooperation, binding the two
countries to close economic and military links.

In the Horn of Africa, the power balance was reversed as Ethiopia, once a client
of the United States, shifted to the Soviet camp, while Somalia, once close to
Moscow, effected a rapprochement with Washington.
Invasion of Czechoslovakia

There was also an adversary conflict over India. In Southeast Asia, Soviet
military aid helped North Vietnam to victory over Americansupported South
Vietnam. In Central America, the Reagan Administration charged that the Soviet
Union, through its Cuban allies, was trying to expand Communist influence in
Nicaragua under the Sandinist regime that came to power in 1979, and by
supporting the leftist guerrilla movement in El Salvador.

In Europe, on the other hand, the superpowers were less at daggersdrawn. One
evidence of this was the change in Western attitudes toward Czechoslovakia after
1968. In that year, Soviet-led forces went into Czechoslovakia to depose
Alexander Dubcek, the Communist leader who had become an apostate from Kremlin
orthodoxy.  Mr. Brezhnev, defending the incursion, found his name associated
with ''the Brezhnev Doctrine'' - that the Soviet Union had a right to enforce by
arms its control in Eastern Europe.

The bluntness of Mr. Brezhnev's interventions in Czechoslovak internal affairs
was as much condemned then as the baldness of his doctrine. Ranged against him
were not only a large segment of public opinion in the West, but also dissenters
within two major Communist parties in Western Europe.

Both the French and the Italian parties rebuked Mr. Brezhnev, and their
assertion of independence from Moscow developed into the separate line of
Communist development known as Eurocommunism, though it also faded towards the
end of his rule.

Despite the Czechoslovak episode, Mr. Brezhnev managed to maintain the
cohesiveness of Eastern Europe, and only independent-minded Rumania was the odd
man out in retaining cordial relations with China.

But the cohesion among Moscow's allies in Eastern Europe came under strain -
more even perhaps than occurred over Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968
- as the rise of the Solidarity trade union movement in Poland in 1980 fostered
a wide-ranging liberalization of Polish life that ended in December 1981 with
the imposition of martial law.
Chinese-Soviet Dispute

With China, Mr. Brezhnev maintained strictly correct relations at the
governmental level while hurling anathemas against the Peking leadership, both
in the last decade of Mao Zedong's life and under Mao's successors. For a long
time, the Chinese-Soviet dispute was both doctrinal and territorial, and it
involved a struggle for hegemony over nationalist and revolutionary forces in
the third world. Soviet policy toward the Chinese fluctuated in response to
changes in the situation.

At first, Mr. Brezhnev made a number of efforts to convoke a congress of
adherents to Moscow's version of Communism that would read China out of the
world Communist movement, but he was unable to gather a sufficiently impressive
alignment.

This failure was ascribed partly to an underlying distaste among Communists,
even in the Soviet Union, to a formal splitting of the Communist movement;
partly to Peking's stature in strategic areas of the third world, and partly to
hope among substantial segments of pro-Moscow Communists that the Soviet Union
and China could ultimately be reconciled.

The confrontation never escalated to the point of war. When China invaded
Vietnam early in 1979, Mr. Brezhnev duly warned Peking to halt its ''brazen
bandit attack,'' but the statement was relatively subdued in tone. Tentative
moves to improve relations betweeen the two countries followed; at the same
time, Vietnam fell clearly into the Soviet sphere of influence.

Mr. Brezhnev's power within the Soviet Union derived from his position as the
head of the ruling party rather than from his assumption of the nation's
presidency - for the second time - in 1977. In the gradual loosening of the
Soviet system of one-man rule, Mr. Brezhnev was not, however, the single
dominant leader, as Lenin, Stalin and Khrushchev had been, and he sought, not
always successfully, to reduce many of the trappings of ''the cult of
personality'' that Stalin and then Khrushchev had nurtured.

Because Mr. Brezhnev's power was more circumscribed than that of his
predecessors, he was obliged to come to terms with often competing interests.
Careful Arms Negotiator

One of the groups that Mr. Brezhnev had to take into account was the military
establishment. Like their counterparts in Western countries, Soviet military
leaders tended to favor large budgets, impressive displays of weaponry and
conservative mentalities. But the Soviet leader was never so much at odds with
his ''militaryindustrial complex'' as some Western politicians and analysts
thought and hoped.

In the slow-moving negotiations on the limitation of strategic arms, Mr.
Brezhnev bargained carefully with American Presidents, constantly checking
during the negotiations with other Politburo members, including the
representatives of the military. He always seemed careful to move in tandem with
the military on all significant policy issues.

On the other hand, Mr. Brezhnev, by wheeling and dealing (how was never made
public), altered the complexion of the Politburo over the years so that he was
able to accumulate a large measure of personal power without arousing his
colleagues' fears of a return to one-man rule. Shortly after the collective
leadership was installed in 1964, he neutralized Aleksandr N. Shelepin, an
ambitious Politburo member, by shifting him from control of the security police
to the trade union leadership.

And in December 1965, he persuaded Mr. Podgorny to yield a key party secretary's
post to become chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, a ceremonial
post equivalent to that of President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Mr. Podgorny was to hold the presidency for 12 years until Mr. Brezhnev himself
assumed that post in addition to the party leadership.

In 1971 four new men, all Brezhnev supporters, were elected to the Politburo.
And two years later he eased out Pyotr Y. Shelest and Gennadi I. Voronov, both
considered opponents of detente. Despite this seeming majority in the Politburo,
which was further consolidated in subsequent years, Mr. Brezhnev was subject to
scrutiny on such matters as the performance of the economy, the size of the
grain harvest, corruption in the party machinery and the development of Siberia.
In addition, of course, the detente policy was examined from time to time in
terms of specific Soviet advantages, political and commercial.

One of Mr. Brezhnev's dreams was to oversee the rapid development of Siberia
with the aid of outside credits and technology. Blocked by United States
reluctance to commit substantial capital to the venture, he turned increasingly
to Western Europe and Japan for partners in Siberian development projects.
Projected Air of Realism

The ebullience Mr. Brezhnev displayed abroad or to foreign visitors was in
contrast to his staid and conservative deportment in Soviet public life. There
he was very much the Communist in the gray flannel suit, proper and formal and
serious. The air he projected was one of realism, calmness and stability.

He was not much in the public view, except on ceremonial occasions. Nonetheless,
there seemed to be a conscious effort to humanize him in official photographs
that showed him, for example, in shirtsleeve talks with Chancellor Brandt of
West Germany, greeting women factory workers in Yugoslavia with a kiss on the
lips, hoisting up young children in Poland, or wearing dark glasses and an
opennecked windbreaker and leaning against the gunwales of a yacht.

Although Mr. Brezhnev appeared to enjoy the limelight, he was careful to let a
share fall on his principal colleagues. Both Mr.  Kosygin and - while he was
President - Mr. Podgorny journeyed abroad from time to time, and Foreign
Minister Andrei A. Gromyko, who was elevated to Politburo membership under Mr.
Brezhnev, remained the principal Soviet spokesman abroad.

Mr. Brezhnev's attitude toward expressions of dissent in the Soviet Union was
firm. A number of intellectuals, artists and scientists opposed the Kremlin's
ideological policies in whole or in part, and there was restiveness among Soviet
youth.

Outspoken dissidents in the Brezhnev years often found themselves committed to
prison, mental institutions or deprived of their jobs.  Some were deported to
the West, notably Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, the novelist. Those who remained,
including Andrei D. Sakharov, were denounced as lacking in socialist
consciousness, which meant a refusal to place their talents at the disposal of
the ruling ideology.
Describes His Ideology

As Mr. Brezhnev described his views a couple of years ago: ''People who fall for
self-publicity, ready to make a name for themselves not through work for the
homeland but by any politically dubious means - and not disdaining to praise our
ideological opponents - sometimes fall into their net. The Soviet public harshly
denounces the abominable deeds of these double-dealers.

''Renegades should not expect to get away unpunished. The country's enemies
clutch with great tenacity at any manifestations of ieological immaturity or
hesitation among the intellectuals.''

Mr. Brezhnev left the formulation of ideology to others, chiefly Mr. Suslov, the
party ideologist and Politburo member whose close association with the party
leader grew in the years after the ouster of Mr. Khrushchev in 1964. Mr.
Brezhnev's speeches were often more pragmatic than ideological, although earlier
he had studded his remarks with Marxist references to the decline and corruption
of capitalism. But he avoided the flourishes that were associated with Mr.
Khrushchev, who once promised ''to bury capitalism.'' Nor did Mr. Brezhnev
contend, as his predecessor did, that the Soviet Union would become a wonderland
of material satisfactions while the United States and other capitalist societies
were developing into wastelands for their citizens.

Mr. Brezhnev and his colleagues displayed some uncertainties in handling Soviet
public opinion, especially regarding Stalinism.  Whereas Mr. Khrushchev had
pursued a clear-cut policy of de-Stalinization after denouncing Stalin's
excesses in l956, the Brezhnev group tempered the policy on the ground that it
was undermining the authority and unity of the Communist system.

The Stalin issue, with which the Soviet Union has not come fully to terms, was
hushed up, but a nostalgia for some aspects of Stalin's rule was permitted to
revive. His leadership in World War II was occasionally mentioned; his face
reappeared on movie screens; and his bust was mounted on his grave behind the
Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square.

The memory of Mr. Khrushchev was, on the contrary, long drowned in official
silence. The anniversaries of his death were not noted, nor was his regime
recalled in panegyrics.

But Mr. Brezhnev, in reminiscences published in November 1978 in the Soviet
magazine Novy Mir, gave Mr. Khrushchev some credit as an administrator of
agricultural policy - although he also described him as having been petulant,
stubborn and apt to use strong language.

When Mr. Brezhnev came to power after Mr. Khrushchev's ouster, his hold on the
Communist party seemed a little uncertain at first. In recent years, however, he
appeared to accept greater deference as due his position as both the nation's
President and the party's chief.

For Red Square parades, for instance, he usually mounted to the reviewing stand
on the top of the Lenin Mausoleum ahead of other members of the Politburo. When
the crowd applauded, he sometimes doffed his hat, waved and smiled in response.
Mr. Kosygin and others looked at the throng but refrained from responding to its
acclaim.

In contrast to the endless anecdotes illuminating Mr. Khrushchev's jaunty and
unpredictable personality, little humor surrounded Mr.  Brezhnev or his
colleagues. But Soviet citizens quietly exchanged jokes about the Soviet leader,
most of them unflattering.

He rode around Moscow in a ZIL limousine, modeled after the 1965 Lincoln
Continental, and he was often observed riding out of the Kremlin on a Sunday
afternoon through crowds of visitors. He was in the front seat beside the driver
with only one security guard in the back and no escort vehicles. The crowd
looked at him blankly, and he looked back in the same fashion.
Some Earthy Amusements

Because of his position, he had a choice of good housing, but he continued to
live in his old apartment on Kutuzov Prospekt. In moments away from his office
in the Kremlin, he seemed to enjoy earthy amusements and glad-handing.

Once at a circus performance, women performers in scanty costumes presented him
with bouquets of flowers. He thanked the first few with kisses. Then a few more.
And then he made certain that those at the rear were not omitted, for they, too,
received hearty, full-faced busses. Finally, he donned his glasses and settled
back to watch the performance, with the pleasure of one who finds a circus more
entertaining than the ballet or an opera.
makeup: pick up second add BREZHNEV ADV OBIT

Mr. Brezhnev's broad face with its dominating eyebrows often lost some of its
impassivity at cocktail parties, once he could down an impressive number of
cognacs or straight vodkas. In the last few years, though, he was under
physicians' orders to cut down on drinking.

Before he assumed the party leadership in 1964 and when he traveled abroad on
good-will missions during a previous stint as President, he liked to unbend in
toasts. On a visit to Iran in 1963, after toasting a seemingly endless list of
worthy objectives, he lifted his vodka glass to exclaim: ''Down with protocol!
Long live freedom!''

In some private conversations he displayed a certain candor. In 1963, while
talking with Glenn T. Seaborg, then chairman of the United States Atomic Energy
Commission, he conceded that most Soviet buildings were hideous and suggested
that the Soviet Union might profit by sending some of its young architects
abroad to study.

Although Mr. Brezhnev did not have much time for hobbies, he was known to enjoy
hunting, swimming and watching soccer. He also collected antique watches and was
an ardent ornithologist, reputed to have one of the finest collections of live
birds in Moscow. He had an interest in agriculture and land reclamation.
Born in the Ukraine

Before his rise to eminence as Mr. Khrushchev's protege, Mr.  Brezhnev was not
conspicuous in Soviet life. Of Great Russian parentage, he was born Dec. 19,
1906, in Kamenskoye, now Dneprodzerzhinsk, in the Ukraine. His father was a
steelworker.

The boy began his working life at 15 in the local steel mill.  Starting in 1923,
he went to school nights and was graduated four years later from a land survey
and reclamation school in Kursk.

In this period he joined the Komsomol, the Young Communist League, and at the
age of 25 he was accepted as a member of the Communist Party. At the same time
he entered the steel engineering school in his hometown. He was graduated in
1935 and worked as an engineer for two years.

In May 1937 he was elected deputy mayor of Dneprodzerzhinsk, his first post in
government.  Having impressed party leaders with his abilities, he was promoted
the following year to a party secretaryship of Dnepropetrovsk Province at a time
when Mr. Khrushchev headed the party in the Ukraine. Their friendship is
believed to have begun at that time.

In World War II Mr. Brezhnev served with the Red Army as a political commissar
with the 18th Army in a beachhead on the Black Sea coast of the Caucasus, in the
Crimea and in the Ukraine. On his 60th birthday Soviet authorities reviewed his
war record and said:

''In the period of severe trials during the Great Patriotic War against Hitler's
aggressors, while directing the army's political department and the southern and
fourth Ukrainian front's political boards, you played a direct part in devising
and conducting combat operations; you experienced such historic engagements as
the battle of the Caucasus, and the liberation of Crimea and the Ukraine. The
fighting men and commanders of the Soviet Army know you as an outstanding
political worker and a man of great spirit and courage.''

Mr. Brezhnev's wartime exploits were also romanticized and effusively praised in
biographical articles that began appearing in the late 1970's. By then, he also
carried to honorific title of Marshal of the Soviet Union.

Mr. Brezhnev's war experience was the foundation for his many friendships among
Soviet military men, who were one of the chief sources of his later influence in
party and government affairs.

Mr. Brezhnev, returning to civilian life in 1946, was named to a series of
responsible party posts in the Ukraine, supervising postwar reconstruction, and
was then brought to Moscow in 1950 for further seasoning in the Central
Committee's secretariat.

In the middle of 1950 he was sent to the Moldavian Republic as party leader, a
post he held for two years. Simultaneously, he was elected a member of the
national Central Committee and a candidate member of its Presidium, as the
Politburo was then called. He was also named a national secretary, a position he
occupied until the death of Stalin in 1953.

When the party leadership was reorganized after the dictator's death, Mr.
Brezhnev was dropped from the secretaryship and from the Presidium, apparently
because he was not in the confidence of Vyacheslav M. Molotov, Georgi M.
Malenkov and others who took over from Stalin.

After a brief return to political work in the Ministry of Defense as the chief
political commissar of the armed forces, Mr. Brezhnev resumed his rise in the
party hierarchy in July 1957, when Mr.  Khrushchev ousted some of his rivals
from the leadership.
Supervised Virgin Lands

For his loyalty to Mr. Khrushchev, Mr. Brezhnev was rewarded with the leadership
of the republic of Kazakhstan. His job was to supervise Mr. Khrushchev's virgin
lands project, which brought vast acreage into productive use. In two years 87
million acres were placed under cultivation.

Mr. Brezhnev had proved the program a success, confounding experts who had
forecast its failure. The project later ran into difficulties, but not until Mr.
Brezhnev had earned a splendid reputation as an administrator, a man who could
accomplish the impossible.

After being called back to Moscow, Mr. Brezhnev was made President of the Soviet
Union in 1960, replacing Marshal Kliment Y. Voroshilov.  As President, Mr.
Brezhnev became a traveling saleman for the Soviet system, visiting Italy, North
Korea, Finland, Morocco, Guinea, Ghana, Yugoslavia and Iran. His travels and his
friendship with Mr. Khrushchev convinced many observers that he was being
groomed as the party leader's successor.

That speculation increased in 1963, when Mr. Brezhnev combined his job as
President with that of second national secretary of the party, in charge of
personnel selection. Then, in the summer of 1964, he stepped down as President
to devote full time to his party tasks.

Suddenly that fall, criticism of Mr. Khrushchev within the party councils came
to an abrupt climax, and he was obliged to retire, ostensibly because of his age
(he was in his 70's) and his health.

Although there was no official bill of particulars, it became known that he had
been ousted on accusations of bungling the Cuban missile crisis with the United
States in 1962, mishandling the Soviet rift with China, mismanaging the Soviet
economy and supporting a cult of personality.

Although he defended his policies, his removal from office by the Central
Committee's Presidium was confirmed by the committee itself.  In his stead the
collective leadership of Mr. Brezhnev, Mr. Kosygin and Mr. Podgorny took over.

Four days later Mr. Brezhnev and his associates appeared atop the Lenin
Mausoleum at a celebration for three astronauts, the first to circle the earth
in a multiseat spacecraft.

Speaking in a deep baritone and reading his address through darkrimmed glasses,
Mr. Brezhnev promised to spur the economy, lift living standards and insure
social democracy. In foreign matters, he said, the Soviet Union would continue
efforts toward peaceful coexistence with capitalist states.

Seeking to assure the Soviet public, to which he was virtually unknown, he also
promised that the party's new leaders would ''constantly feel the pulse of the
people's life.''
Health Seemed to Decline

Mr. Brezhnev subsequently became, of course, well known to the Soviet public,
and in recent years the state of his health became a continual subject of
speculation in the Soviet Union as elsewhere.

A United States intelligence report, early in 1978, that he was suffering from
gout, leukemia and emphysema was not officially confirmed, but by February 1979
it was evident that he was ailing.

He seemed to lack stamina, to have become unable to put in the long work days
that his position required, to be leaning more heavily than in the past on such
aides as Konstantin U. Chernenko, who became a full member of the Politburo in
November 1978.

At the same time several other allies of Mr. Brezhnev were promoted to the inner
circle of the Soviet leadership, but the shifts gave no hint of who his eventual
successor might be.

Mr. Brezhnev's apparent ill health was in evidence during his meeting with
President Carter in June 1979, which was the first Soviet-American summit
meeting since late 1974.

While in Vienna, Mr. Brezhnev was seen to stumble on a couple of occasions, and
he shut his eyes from apparent fatique while President Carter made a short
public statement on the day the treaty was signed.

And in his trip to East Berlin in October 1979, Mr. Brezhnev's condition seemed
to have deteriorated even further as he frequently slurred his words during his
35-minute address to the East German Parliament.

Mr. Brezhnev held a number of decorations. In 1961 he was made a Hero of
Socialist Labor ''for outstanding services in the development of rocket
technology and in guaranteeing the successful flight of man into outer space in
the Sputnik spacecraft 'Vostok.' '' The citation did not elaborate on his
contributions to that flight, nor did his official biography specify his role.

He also held five Orders of Lenin and was twice given the title of Hero of the
Soviet Union, on his 60th and 70th birthdays.  In keeping with Soviet practice,
little of Mr. Brezhnev's family life was in the public domain. It was known that
he and his wife, Viktoriya, had three children; two sons, one of whom, Yuri, is
a First Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade, the other a student at Moscow
University; and a daughter, Galina, who works as a journalist at Novosti, the
Soviet news feature agency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Leonid Brezhnev during has career as a
Communist Party leader (Page D23) photos of Leonid Brezhnev while a leader of
Communist Party in Russia

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BREZHNEV TRIED TO ADVANCE MOSCOW'S GOALS THROUGH DETENTE SOVIET LEADER

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 5714 words


USED CONSENSUS IN POLITBURO ON DOMESTIC ISSUES As the leader of the Soviet
Union, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev was a canny and careful Communist Party
functionary who sought to make his country the military equal of the United
States and promote its political influence around the world through the policy
of detente.

In domestic affairs, as General Secretary of the Communist Party, Mr. Brezhnev
ruled as first among his equals on the Politburo, not as an autocrat, and
professed to want economic development of his country of 265 million people
spread over a sixth of the globe's land area.

Both his policy and his health faltered in these tasks in the last years of his
life. Detente, which had seemed a necessity to many Western leaders after Soviet
tanks moved into Czechoslovakia in 1968 to crush the liberalization of the
''Prague Spring,'' lost much of its appeal in the United States after the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, and President Carter imposed an embargo on
grain sales and other trade curbs.

After the Polish military authorities ceded to pressure from Moscow and declared
martial law in December 1981, President Reagan imposed further economic and
political sanctions on the Soviet Union, though not an embargo on grain sales.
The Western European allies remained more reluctant to cut back their important
industrial trade with the Russians, and insisted on going ahead with the deal,
creating a political rift within the NATO alliance that Mr. Brezhnev obviously
sought to exploit.

But domestic economic stagnation had become an acute domestic problem by the end
of the Brezhnev years. In this area, despite their recognition of the crisis,
the aging Soviet leaders made no effective attempt to reform the rigidities of
centralized economic planning. And as the standard of living declined, political
repression increased. Dissidents, who had emerged openly in the mid-1970's to
criticize violations of human rights, were later harassed until most had either
left the country or were in prison camps by the early 1980's. Soviet Jews, who
had been permitted to emigrate by the thousands a month in 1977 and 1978, found
that by 1982 permission to emigrate was virtually impossible to get.

In his last years, Mr. Brezhnev's speech became labored and his features pale
and bloated, apparently as a result of medical treatments for a disability that
was never publicly revealed. At the height of his powers in the early 1970's, in
contacts with Presidents Nixon, Ford and Carter and Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger, he was a burly, gray-haired, black-browed figure of 5 feet 10 inches,
gregarious and talkative, but powerful and very much aware of his power over
associates and adversaries alike.

Then he had a reputation as a lover of good food and drink, fast cars - which he
collected - and hunting.  Mr. Brezhnev talked extensively about his weight,
which he sought vainly to keep under control, and often joked about his
excessive cigarette smoking, which was thought to have aggravated his health
problems.

His smoking (Philip Morris Multifilters) was such a vexation that he used a box
with a time lock to slow his pace. But he conceded to one visitor, ''I keep a
reserve pack in the other pocket.'' Ultimately he had to give up smoking
altogether.

Long Part of Coalition

Mr. Brezhnev was long part of a coalition in the ruling Politburo of his party's
Central Committee. Two other members of the coalition who for years were most
visible to the West were Prime Minister Aleksei N. Kosygin, who died in December
1980, and President Nikolai V. Podgorny, who was ousted from the leadership
group in 1977.

In the early years, after this coalition had ousted Nikita S.  Khrushchev in a
bloodless coup in 1964, it operated as a troika, with none of its members
seemingly more authoritative than the others.

Prominent, first in support of Mr. Khrushchev and then as a member of the
coalition that ousted him, was Mikhail A. Suslov, the party's ideologist. As Mr.
Brezhnev encountered growing problems with his health, Mr. Suslov's authority,
already enormous, seemed to grow to the point where many considered him the
second-ranking figure in the hierarchy. But death removed the ascetic ideologist
from the leadership on Jan. 25, 1982, at the age of 79.

In the fall of 1970 Mr. Brezhnev emerged from his post as the party chief to
become the personal ambassador for detente. This occurred in his first meeting
with Chancellor Willy Brandt of West Germany and in a subsequent conference with
President Charles de Gaulle of France.

In these and in other meetings in 1971, the Soviet leader appeared stiff and
uncomfortable, but he loosened up remarkably as his selfconfidence grew.

On June 11, 1979, Mr. Brezhnev and President Carter, meeting in the ornate
Hofburg Palace in Vienna, signed an arms control treaty that for the first time
limited both sides to the same maximum number of long-range bombers and
missiles.

For millions of television viewers around the globe, Soviet-Western
rapprochement was symbolized when the two leaders embraced just after the
signing and, to a crescendo of applause from onlookers, Mr. Brezhnev gave Mr.
Carter hearty kisses, Russian-style, on both cheeks.

Despite the optimism expressed by the two men at the signing ceremony, the
treaty came under criticism from a number of United States senators who believed
it conferred a unilateral advantage on the Soviet Union in heavy land-based
missiles. Mr. Carter withdrew the treaty from Senate consideration after the
invasion of Afghanistan, and it was never approved by the Senate.

Detente Policy Set Back

Mr. Brezhnev's detente policy was further set back by the establishment of
martial law in Poland in December 1981. With the intervention in Afghanistan
began a hardening of attitudes in the West, including an American boycott of the
Moscow Olympics in 1980 and the imposition of trade restrictions by the United
States and other Western countries; Mr. Brezhnev criticized these steps as a
return to the cold war, but never acknowledged the Soviet Union's responsibility
for provoking them.

Instead, in his statements and speeches, Mr. Brezhnev sought to portray his
country as still open to arms reductions talks and detente, not only with the
West but also, with increasing emphasis as relations with the West deteriorated,
with China.

In February 1982, the Soviet leader proposed a two-thirds cut by 1990 in both
sides' medium-range nuclear arsenals in Europe. He said the Soviet Union was
ready to reach agreement not only on the complete termination of all tests of
nuclear weapons but also on ending their further production and on the reduction
and subsequent elimination of their stockpiles.

Early in March he announced that Moscow was suspending its deployment of new
medium-range missiles in the European part of the Soviet Union. He said this was
intended to set ''a good example.''

But United States officials saw his moves as attempts ''to convey the impression
of restraint while diverting attention from the enormous growth of Soviet
capability.''

In a public appearance in Tashkent on March 24, Brezhnev issued a new appeal to
Peking to revive the search for ways to end the Chinese-Soviet feud. ''We
remember well the time when the Soviet Union and People's China were united by
bonds of friendship and comradely cooperation,'' he said. Negotiations with the
Chinese did resume in the fall of 1982, and Mr. Brezhnev, in a speech to an
audience of Soviet generals shortly afterward, said that while the prospects of
a real improvement in relations were slim, the Soviet Union had an interest in
pressing for them.

Regarding detente with the West, the still unratified arms control treaty with
the United States entailed some Soviet concessions, but on several other issues,
Mr. Brezhnev's approach to the policy - called ''peaceful coexistence'' under
Mr. Khrushchev - accomplished much for the Soviet Union.

These accomplishments included strategic nuclear parity with the United States;
an increase in conventional military strength on land and at sea; acknowledgment
by West Germany and the rest of Western Europe of the division of Germany and of
Europe; recognition of East Germany and its admission to the United Nations;
increasing imports of Western technology to modernize the Soviet economy, and a
growing role in the Middle East and Africa.

Concession on Emigration

These were attained with few concessions to the West. A major concession -or
certainly the most publicized - was the Soviet willingness to permit some
emigration, mostly for Jews, starting in the late 1960's.

The policy of allowing emigration for Soviet citizens was, however, a
controversial one within the leadership, and there were periodic indications,
especially from the police apparatus, of disquiet with this relaxation of
traditional curbs. The most recent tightening came in 1981 in response to
stiffening Western positions over the intervention in Afghanistan.

In addition, there was some evidence that Mr. Brezhnev's critics in Moscow felt
that he had not gained sufficient trade and credit advantages in bargaining with
the United States.

Efforts in Washington to make improved commercial ties dependent on further
relaxation of emigration restrictions illustrated one of the practical problems
of detente. Mr. Brezhnev could not explicitly lift emigration barriers because
this might be construed as bowing to external pressures, and the United States
could not do less than insist, owing to its domestic pressures.

Although Mr. Brezhnev and American Presidents were in accord on avoiding
situations that might lead to armed conflict, there were world areas where the
interests of the two superpowers clashed. In the Middle East, the Soviet Union
supported Arab nationalism with arms and technical experts and carried on a
campaign to discredit Israel. Syria and Iraq were among the main beneficiaries
of Soviet backing.

When strikes and rioting in Iran in late 1978 began to build up into a
revolution, Mr. Brezhnev issued a warning against ''outside interference,
especially military interference'' by the United States. At about the same time,
he cemented Moscow's ties with the new pro-Soviet regime in Afghanistan by
signing a 20-year treaty of friendship and cooperation, binding the two
countries to close economic and military links.

In the Horn of Africa, the power balance was reversed as Ethiopia, once a client
of the United States, shifted to the Soviet camp, while Somalia, once close to
Moscow, effected a rapprochement with Washington.

Invasion of Czechoslovakia

There was also an adversary conflict over India. In Southeast Asia, Soviet
military aid helped North Vietnam to victory over Americansupported South
Vietnam. In Central America, the Reagan Administration charged that the Soviet
Union, through its Cuban allies, was trying to expand Communist influence in
Nicaragua under the Sandinist regime that came to power in 1979, and by
supporting the leftist guerrilla movement in El Salvador.

In Europe, on the other hand, the superpowers were less at daggersdrawn. One
evidence of this was the change in Western attitudes toward Czechoslovakia after
1968. In that year, Soviet-led forces went into Czechoslovakia to depose
Alexander Dubcek, the Communist leader who had become an apostate from Kremlin
orthodoxy.  Mr. Brezhnev, defending the incursion, found his name associated
with ''the Brezhnev Doctrine'' - that the Soviet Union had a right to enforce by
arms its control in Eastern Europe.

The bluntness of Mr. Brezhnev's interventions in Czechoslovak internal affairs
was as much condemned then as the baldness of his doctrine. Ranged against him
were not only a large segment of public opinion in the West, but also dissenters
within two major Communist parties in Western Europe.

Both the French and the Italian parties rebuked Mr. Brezhnev, and their
assertion of independence from Moscow developed into the separate line of
Communist development known as Eurocommunism, though it also faded towards the
end of his rule.

Despite the Czechoslovak episode, Mr. Brezhnev managed to maintain the
cohesiveness of Eastern Europe, and only independent-minded Rumania was the odd
man out in retaining cordial relations with China.

But the cohesion among Moscow's allies in Eastern Europe came under strain -
more even perhaps than occurred over Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968
- as the rise of the Solidarity trade union movement in Poland in 1980 fostered
a wide-ranging liberalization of Polish life that ended in December 1981 with
the imposition of martial law.

Chinese-Soviet Dispute

With China, Mr. Brezhnev maintained strictly correct relations at the
governmental level while hurling anathemas against the Peking leadership, both
in the last decade of Mao Zedong's life and under Mao's successors. For a long
time, the Chinese-Soviet dispute was both doctrinal and territorial, and it
involved a struggle for hegemony over nationalist and revolutionary forces in
the third world. Soviet policy toward the Chinese fluctuated in response to
changes in the situation.

At first, Mr. Brezhnev made a number of efforts to convoke a congress of
adherents to Moscow's version of Communism that would read China out of the
world Communist movement, but he was unable to gather a sufficiently impressive
alignment.

This failure was ascribed partly to an underlying distaste among Communists,
even in the Soviet Union, to a formal splitting of the Communist movement;
partly to Peking's stature in strategic areas of the third world, and partly to
hope among substantial segments of pro-Moscow Communists that the Soviet Union
and China could ultimately be reconciled.

The confrontation never escalated to the point of war. When China invaded
Vietnam early in 1979, Mr. Brezhnev duly warned Peking to halt its ''brazen
bandit attack,'' but the statement was relatively subdued in tone. Tentative
moves to improve relations betweeen the two countries followed; at the same
time, Vietnam fell clearly into the Soviet sphere of influence.

Mr. Brezhnev's power within the Soviet Union derived from his position as the
head of the ruling party rather than from his assumption of the nation's
presidency - for the second time - in 1977. In the gradual loosening of the
Soviet system of one-man rule, Mr. Brezhnev was not, however, the single
dominant leader, as Lenin, Stalin and Khrushchev had been, and he sought, not
always successfully, to reduce many of the trappings of ''the cult of
personality'' that Stalin and then Khrushchev had nurtured.

Because Mr. Brezhnev's power was more circumscribed than that of his
predecessors, he was obliged to come to terms with often competing interests.

One of the groups that Mr. Brezhnev had to take into account was the military
establishment. Like their counterparts in Western countries, Soviet military
leaders tended to favor large budgets, impressive displays of weaponry and
conservative mentalities. But the Soviet leader was never so much at odds with
his ''militaryindustrial complex'' as some Western politicians and analysts
thought and hoped.

In the slow-moving negotiations on the limitation of strategic arms, Mr.
Brezhnev bargained carefully with American Presidents, constantly checking
during the negotiations with other Politburo members, including the
representatives of the military. He always seemed careful to move in tandem with
the military on all significant policy issues.

On the other hand, Mr. Brezhnev, by wheeling and dealing (how was never made
public), altered the complexion of the Politburo over the years so that he was
able to accumulate a large measure of personal power without arousing his
colleagues' fears of a return to one-man rule. Shortly after the collective
leadership was installed in 1964, he neutralized Aleksandr N. Shelepin, an
ambitious Politburo member, by shifting him from control of the security police
to the trade union leadership.

And in December 1965, he persuaded Mr. Podgorny to yield a key party secretary's
post to become chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, a ceremonial
post equivalent to that of President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
Mr. Podgorny was to hold the presidency for 12 years until Mr. Brezhnev himself
assumed that post in addition to the party leadership.

Subject to Scrutiny

In 1971 four new men, all Brezhnev supporters, were elected to the Politburo.
And two years later he eased out Pyotr Y. Shelest and Gennadi I. Voronov, both
considered opponents of detente. Despite this seeming majority in the Politburo,
which was further consolidated in subsequent years, Mr. Brezhnev was subject to
scrutiny on such matters as the performance of the economy, the size of the
grain harvest, corruption in the party machinery and the development of Siberia.
In addition, of course, the detente policy was examined from time to time in
terms of specific Soviet advantages, political and commercial.

One of Mr. Brezhnev's dreams was to oversee the rapid development of Siberia
with the aid of outside credits and technology. Blocked by United States
reluctance to commit substantial capital to the venture, he turned increasingly
to Western Europe and Japan for partners in Siberian development projects.

The ebullience Mr. Brezhnev displayed abroad or to foreign visitors was in
contrast to his staid and conservative deportment in Soviet public life. There
he was very much the Communist in the gray flannel suit, proper and formal and
serious. The air he projected was one of realism, calmness and stability.

He was not much in the public view, except on ceremonial occasions. Nonetheless,
there seemed to be a conscious effort to humanize him in official photographs
that showed him, for example, in shirtsleeve talks with Chancellor Brandt of
West Germany, greeting women factory workers in Yugoslavia with a kiss on the
lips, hoisting up young children in Poland, or wearing dark glasses and an
opennecked windbreaker and leaning against the gunwales of a yacht.

Although Mr. Brezhnev appeared to enjoy the limelight, he was careful to let a
share fall on his principal colleagues. Both Mr.  Kosygin and - while he was
President - Mr. Podgorny journeyed abroad from time to time, and Foreign
Minister Andrei A. Gromyko, who was elevated to Politburo membership under Mr.
Brezhnev, remained the principal Soviet spokesman abroad.

Mr. Brezhnev's attitude toward expressions of dissent in the Soviet Union was
firm. A number of intellectuals, artists and scientists opposed the Kremlin's
ideological policies in whole or in part, and there was restiveness among Soviet
youth.

Outspoken dissidents in the Brezhnev years often found themselves committed to
prison, mental institutions or deprived of their jobs.  Some were deported to
the West, notably Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, the novelist. Those who remained,
including Andrei D. Sakharov, were denounced as lacking in socialist
consciousness, which meant a refusal to place their talents at the disposal of
the ruling ideology.

Describes His Views

As Mr. Brezhnev described his views a couple of years ago: ''People who fall for
self-publicity, ready to make a name for themselves not through work for the
homeland but by any politically dubious means - and not disdaining to praise our
ideological opponents - sometimes fall into their net. The Soviet public harshly
denounces the abominable deeds of these double-dealers.

''Renegades should not expect to get away unpunished. The country's enemies
clutch with great tenacity at any manifestations of ieological immaturity or
hesitation among the intellectuals.''

Mr. Brezhnev left the formulation of ideology to others, chiefly Mr. Suslov, the
party ideologist and Politburo member whose close association with the party
leader grew in the years after the ouster of Mr. Khrushchev in 1964. Mr.
Brezhnev's speeches were often more pragmatic than ideological, although earlier
he had studded his remarks with Marxist references to the decline and corruption
of capitalism. But he avoided the flourishes that were associated with Mr.
Khrushchev, who once promised ''to bury capitalism.'' Nor did Mr. Brezhnev
contend, as his predecessor did, that the Soviet Union would become a wonderland
of material satisfactions while the United States and other capitalist societies
were developing into wastelands for their citizens.

Mr. Brezhnev and his colleagues displayed some uncertainties in handling Soviet
public opinion, especially regarding Stalinism.  Whereas Mr. Khrushchev had
pursued a clear-cut policy of de-Stalinization after denouncing Stalin's
excesses in l956, the Brezhnev group tempered the policy on the ground that it
was undermining the authority and unity of the Communist system.

The Stalin issue, with which the Soviet Union has not come fully to terms, was
hushed up, but a nostalgia for some aspects of Stalin's rule was permitted to
revive. His leadership in World War II was occasionally mentioned; his face
reappeared on movie screens; and his bust was mounted on his grave behind the
Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square.

The memory of Mr. Khrushchev was, on the contrary, long drowned in official
silence. The anniversaries of his death were not noted, nor was his regime
recalled in panegyrics.

But Mr. Brezhnev, in reminiscences published in November 1978 in the Soviet
magazine Novy Mir, gave Mr. Khrushchev some credit as an administrator of
agricultural policy - although he also described him as having been petulant,
stubborn and apt to use strong language.

When Mr. Brezhnev came to power after Mr. Khrushchev's ouster, his hold on the
Communist party seemed a little uncertain at first. In recent years, however, he
appeared to accept greater deference as due his position as both the nation's
President and the party's chief.

For Red Square parades, for instance, he usually mounted to the reviewing stand
on the top of the Lenin Mausoleum ahead of other members of the Politburo. When
the crowd applauded, he sometimes doffed his hat, waved and smiled in response.
Mr. Kosygin and others looked at the throng but refrained from responding to its
acclaim.

In contrast to the endless anecdotes illuminating Mr. Khrushchev's jaunty and
unpredictable personality, little humor surrounded Mr.  Brezhnev or his
colleagues. But Soviet citizens quietly exchanged jokes about the Soviet leader,
most of them unflattering.

He rode around Moscow in a ZIL limousine, modeled after the 1965 Lincoln
Continental, and he was often observed riding out of the Kremlin on a Sunday
afternoon through crowds of visitors. He was in the front seat beside the driver
with only one security guard in the back and no escort vehicles. The crowd
looked at him blankly, and he looked back in the same fashion.

Some Earthy Amusements

Because of his position, he had a choice of good housing, but he continued to
live in his old apartment on Kutuzov Prospekt. In moments away from his office
in the Kremlin, he seemed to enjoy earthy amusements and glad-handing.

Once at a circus performance, women performers in scanty costumes presented him
with bouquets of flowers. He thanked the first few with kisses. Then a few more.
And then he made certain that those at the rear were not omitted, for they, too,
received hearty, full-faced busses. Finally, he donned his glasses and settled
back to watch the performance, with the pleasure of one who finds a circus more
entertaining than the ballet or an opera.
makeup: pick up second add BREZHNEV ADV OBIT

Mr. Brezhnev's broad face with its dominating eyebrows often lost some of its
impassivity at cocktail parties, in the days when he could down an impressive
number of cognacs or straight vodkas. In the last few years, though, he was
under physicians' orders to cut down on drinking.

Before he assumed the party leadership in 1964 and when he traveled abroad on
good-will missions during a previous stint as President, he liked to unbend in
toasts. On a visit to Iran in 1963, after toasting a seemingly endless list of
worthy objectives, he lifted his vodka glass to exclaim: ''Down with protocol!
Long live freedom!''

In some private conversations he displayed a certain candor. In 1963, while
talking with Glenn T. Seaborg, then chairman of the United States Atomic Energy
Commission, he conceded that most Soviet buildings were hideous and suggested
that the Soviet Union might profit by sending some of its young architects
abroad to study.

Although Mr. Brezhnev did not have much time for hobbies, he was known to enjoy
hunting, swimming and watching soccer. He also collected antique watches and was
an ardent ornithologist, reputed to have one of the finest collections of live
birds in Moscow. He had an interest in agriculture and land reclamation.

Born in the Ukraine

Before his rise to eminence as Mr. Khrushchev's protege, Mr.  Brezhnev was not
conspicuous in Soviet life. Of Great Russian parentage, he was born Dec. 19,
1906, in Kamenskoye, now Dneprodzerzhinsk, in the Ukraine. His father was a
steelworker.

The boy began his working life at 15 in the local steel mill.  Starting in 1923,
he went to school nights and was graduated four years later from a land survey
and reclamation school in Kursk.

In this period he joined the Komsomol, the Young Communist League, and at the
age of 25 he was accepted as a member of the Communist Party. At the same time
he entered the steel engineering school in his hometown. He was graduated in
1935 and worked as an engineer for two years.

In May 1937 he was elected deputy mayor of Dneprodzerzhinsk, his first post in
government.  Having impressed party leaders with his abilities, he was promoted
the following year to a party secretaryship of Dnepropetrovsk Province at a time
when Mr. Khrushchev headed the party in the Ukraine. Their friendship is
believed to have begun at that time.

In World War II Mr. Brezhnev served with the Red Army as a political commissar
with the 18th Army in a beachhead on the Black Sea coast of the Caucasus, in the
Crimea and in the Ukraine. On his 60th birthday Soviet authorities reviewed his
war record and said:

''In the period of severe trials during the Great Patriotic War against Hitler's
aggressors, while directing the army's political department and the southern and
fourth Ukrainian front's political boards, you played a direct part in devising
and conducting combat operations; you experienced such historic engagements as
the battle of the Caucasus, and the liberation of Crimea and the Ukraine. The
fighting men and commanders of the Soviet Army know you as an outstanding
political worker and a man of great spirit and courage.''

Mr. Brezhnev's wartime exploits were also romanticized and effusively praised in
biographical articles that began appearing in the late 1970's. By then, he also
carried to honorific title of Marshal of the Soviet Union.

Mr. Brezhnev's war experience was the foundation for his many friendships among
Soviet military men, who were one of the chief sources of his later influence in
party and government affairs.

Mr. Brezhnev, returning to civilian life in 1946, was named to a series of
responsible party posts in the Ukraine, supervising postwar reconstruction, and
was then brought to Moscow in 1950 for further seasoning in the Central
Committee's secretariat.

In the middle of 1950 he was sent to the Moldavian Republic as party leader, a
post he held for two years. Simultaneously, he was elected a member of the
national Central Committee and a candidate member of its Presidium, as the
Politburo was then called. He was also named a national secretary, a position he
occupied until the death of Stalin in 1953.

When the party leadership was reorganized after the dictator's death, Mr.
Brezhnev was dropped from the secretaryship and from the Presidium, apparently
because he was not in the confidence of Vyacheslav M. Molotov, Georgi M.
Malenkov and others who took over from Stalin.

After a brief return to political work in the Ministry of Defense as the chief
political commissar of the armed forces, Mr. Brezhnev resumed his rise in the
party hierarchy in July 1957, when Mr.  Khrushchev ousted some of his rivals
from the leadership.

Supervised Virgin Lands

For his loyalty to Mr. Khrushchev, Mr. Brezhnev was rewarded with the leadership
of the republic of Kazakhstan. His job was to supervise Mr. Khrushchev's virgin
lands project, which brought vast acreage into productive use. In two years 87
million acres were placed under cultivation.

Mr. Brezhnev had proved the program a success, confounding experts who had
forecast its failure. The project later ran into difficulties, but not until Mr.
Brezhnev had earned a splendid reputation as an administrator, a man who could
accomplish the impossible.

After being called back to Moscow, Mr. Brezhnev was made President of the Soviet
Union in 1960, replacing Marshal Kliment Y. Voroshilov.  As President, Mr.
Brezhnev became a traveling salesman for the Soviet system, visiting Italy,
North Korea, Finland, Morocco, Guinea, Ghana, Yugoslavia and Iran. His travels
and his friendship with Mr. Khrushchev convinced many observers that he was
being groomed as the party leader's successor.

That speculation increased in 1963, when Mr. Brezhnev combined his job as
President with that of second national secretary of the party, in charge of
personnel selection. Then, in the summer of 1964, he stepped down as President
to devote full time to his party tasks.

Suddenly that fall, criticism of Mr. Khrushchev within the party councils came
to an abrupt climax, and he was obliged to retire, ostensibly because of his age
(he was in his 70's) and his health.

Although there was no official bill of particulars, it became known that he had
been ousted on accusations of bungling the Cuban missile crisis with the United
States in 1962, mishandling the Soviet rift with China, mismanaging the Soviet
economy and supporting a cult of personality.

Although he defended his policies, his removal from office by the Central
Committee's Presidium was confirmed by the committee itself.  In his stead the
collective leadership of Mr. Brezhnev, Mr. Kosygin and Mr. Podgorny took over.

Four days later Mr. Brezhnev and his associates appeared atop the Lenin
Mausoleum at a celebration for three astronauts, the first to circle the earth
in a multiseat spacecraft.

Speaking in a deep baritone and reading his address through darkrimmed glasses,
Mr. Brezhnev promised to spur the economy, lift living standards and insure
social democracy. In foreign matters, he said, the Soviet Union would continue
efforts toward peaceful coexistence with capitalist states.

Seeking to assure the Soviet public, to which he was virtually unknown, he also
promised that the party's new leaders would ''constantly feel the pulse of the
people's life.''

Mr. Brezhnev subsequently became, of course, well known to the Soviet public,
and in recent years the state of his health became a continual subject of
speculation in the Soviet Union as elsewhere.

He seemed to lack stamina, to have become unable to put in the long work days
that his position required, to be leaning more heavily than in the past on such
aides as Konstantin U. Chernenko, who became a full member of the Politburo in
November 1978.

At the same time several other allies of Mr. Brezhnev were promoted to the inner
circle of the Soviet leadership, but the shifts gave no hint of who his eventual
successor might be.

Mr. Brezhnev held a number of decorations. In 1961 he was made a Hero of
Socialist Labor ''for outstanding services in the development of rocket
technology and in guaranteeing the successful flight of man into outer space in
the Sputnik spacecraft 'Vostok.' '' The citation did not elaborate on his
contributions to that flight, nor did his official biography specify his role.

He also held five Orders of Lenin and was twice given the title of Hero of the
Soviet Union, on his 60th and 70th birthdays.  In keeping with Soviet practice,
little of Mr. Brezhnev's family life was in the public domain. It was known that
he and his wife, Viktoriya, had three children; two sons, one of whom, Yuri, is
a First Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade, the other a student at Moscow
University; and a daughter, Galina, who works as a journalist at Novosti, the
Soviet news feature agency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Leonid Brezhnev during his career as head of
Soviet government photos of Brezhnev as president of Communist Party

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
THE REASON WHY

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 844 words


''I think the names that are being read are of men who died for freedom just as
surely as any man who ever fought for this country.'' - Ronald Reagan

The names being read in the National Cathedral were those of nearly 58,000
Americans who were killed in Vietnam. But if what President Reagan said about
them were so, the weeklong memorial that began on the eve of Veterans Day would
not have the special poignancy that sets it apart from every other such occasion
in the nation's history.

That these Americans died honorably is not in question. Some, indeed, thought
they fought for the ideal of freedom, or for freedom in South Vietnam. Others,
more skeptical, believed they fought for their country.

Even those many who had no clear idea why, in a far and mysterious country, they
fought an enemy they mostly could not see, in a war they could not understand -
even these, however reluctantly, did what they conceived to be their duty:
Theirs not to make reply, Theirs not to reason why, Theirs but to do and die.

But what tore this country apart for nearly a decade was the inability of three
Presidents to persuade enough Americans that freedom was at issue in Indochina,
to a degree that warranted an exhaustive, expensive, destructive American
intervention -the dearest price of which was paid with 58,000 lives.

The argument was not fundamentally about the despotic nature of the regime in
Hanoi, despite the naive few who extolled it, and those who unwisely waved the
Vietcong flag. At root, the question was whether Western values and interests
were so threatened as to warrant the war that was fought ostensibly on their
behalf, and the destruction wrought in their name.

All these years after the last helicopter took off from the U.S.  Embassy roof
in Saigon, Mr. Reagan says that ''we're beginning to understand how much we were
led astray at the time ... to appreciate that they were fighting for a just
cause.'' And Gen. Maxwell D.  Taylor writes to The Washington Post that in ''the
early 70's'' he was able to compose this concise statement of national purpose
in the war:

''Since 1954, the U.S. objective has been to assure selfdetermination for South
Vietnam and to defeat Hanoi's aggression. We made good progress until we abetted
Diem's overthrow in 1963, which required our direct intervention in 1965. We
have now frus-trated the aggression and have a constitutionally elected Saigon
Government.''

But like all those other justifications that used to pour in dreary Presidential
succession from the same television sets that brought us the more convincing
images of destruction, General Taylor's is not persuasive.

South Vietnam did not even exist, for example, until 1954, when its political
creation was made subject to later elections for a reunified Indochina. Those
elections, with the tacit consent of the U.S., were never held. So the subject
of ''self-determination'' only raises the question whether South Vietnam had
historical or political or ethnic justification for a separate identity -
whether the Indochina war in which the U.S. intervened was an aggressive war
against a legitimate state by another state, or a civil war for dominance of
what was more nearly one state.

And did Diem's overthrow really ''require'' American intervention in such an
ambiguous war? No, it only posed a later policy choice for the Johnson
Administration. Even as General Taylor tells it, one bad move - Diem's overthrow
- begat another - intervention. That scarcely made the intervention ''just,'' as
Mr. Reagan claims, or ''required,'' as General Taylor argues.

If the ''aggression'' was ''frustrated'' for a time, moreover, there was never
any convincing evidence that the American military had the power, or knew how,
to halt or defeat it. If anyone was ''led astray'' it was those who believed
there was light at the end of the tunnel.

So Vietnam memorial week is different from the usual pro forma remembrance of
the nation's war dead; and more than any parade could be, those veterans in
their old fatigue jackets are profoundly moving, as they stand silent and
wondering before the black-walled monument in Washington.

That's why the American war in Vietnam must be remembered, and mourned - not
just bundled off to history as one more bit of national virtue or glory. Because
it was not a war to end wars, or to save freedom, or to make the world safe for
democracy. It was a war entered into for dubious policy reasons, defended on
disputed, sometimes false grounds, prosecuted beyond hope of useful results.

The 58,000 whose names line the monument's walls couldn't help or change that;
but the ''majesty and burning'' of their deaths - ''the mankind of their going''
- should not be blasphemed by any further pretense about the cause.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AN APPARATCHIK AND A BIG FAILURE

BYLINE: By Harrison E. Salisbury

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


Leonid I. Brezhnev died Monday, Nov. 10, 1982, one month short of his 76th
birthday, a leader who had failed in his two great goals - peace and security
for the Soviet Union and a maturing prosperity for his people.

He came into office as a protege of the powerful old Stalinist ideologist,
Mikhail A. Suslov, who died last January. Mr. Brezhnev's failure can be
attributed in large measure to the qualities that won him the backing of his
fellow Politburo members.

President Brezhnev was a firm centrist, a middle-of-the-road bureaucrat - no
flair, no charisma, not an ounce of originality, the epitome of the conventional
party apparatchik.

The bureaucrats who put in Mr. Brezhnev could not tolerate Nikita S.
Khrushchev's expediency, his cavalier attitude toward Marxist rules, his
determination to try anything once -whether growing Iowa corn or planting
missiles in Cuba.

The men who put Mr. Brezhnev into office wanted no nonsense. They got none, and
in this lay the seed of the Brezhnev failures.  In foreign policy, Leonid I.
Brezhnev proved unable or unwilling to reverse the ever-heightening Sino-Soviet
hostility. In relations with the United States, he grasped the opportunities
offered by Richard M. Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger to move toward detente and a
cap on the arms race. But Mr. Brezhnev lacked the zest or know-how to keep the
ball in play once Jimmy Carter and then Ronald Reagan came into office.

Russians who knew Mr. Brezhnev, including members of his intimate entourage,
attested to his desire to go down in history as a man of peace. He had hoped to
have detente as a monument to his regime. But he did not possess the dynamism to
move these causes forward once the world situation began to sour.

He backed generous arms programs. He poured Soviet assets into defense but his
efforts proved counterproductive because they stimulated the United States to
match and exceed the Soviet Union in the arms race.

It was in military and foreign affairs that President Brezhnev's failures proved
most dramatic. He permitted the Soviet military to dabble extensively in
adventurist undertakings in Africa - Angola, Ethiopia -which aroused United
States antagonism without adding materially to Soviet strategic power. He
committed Soviet support to Vietnam and Vietnam-controlled Cambodia in the
dubious pursuit of a southern base against China. He expanded the Soviet Navy
without evaluating what genuine strategic weight this would give to his country
- outside of ''showing the flag'' and, possibly, providing a dubious naval
blockade of the China coast in case of necessity.

None of this, perhaps, would have counted large in the final assessment of Mr.
Brezhnev had it not been for Afghanistan and Poland. By his choice of military
intervention in Afghanistan and a military dictatorship in Poland, he cast away
any last hopes for overall detente, improvement of relations with the United
States, the ending of the arms race and achieving world peace and security.

In domestic affairs, his failures have been equally pervasive - the slow loss of
vitality in Soviet industry and the deepening morass of Soviet agriculture.

To the end of his days, Mr. Brezhnev's fellow citizens for the most part
perceived him as a man who wouldn't rock the boat. Perhaps not, but in his 18
years in office the holes in the rusting hull grew bigger, the engines faltered
more and more and the outside waves dashed higher and higher.

Leonid I. Brezhnev's successor faces a formidable task and one that he will, my
opinion, waste no time in tackling.  Contrary to speculation, the new skipper of
the Soviet ship may already have been picked. Over the funeral meats, he may -
if his name happens to be Yuri V. Andropov - be already setting his compass on a
new course.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Harrison E. Salisbury, former Moscow correspondent and retired Associate Editor
of The New York Times, is author of ''Black Night, White Snow,'' a revisionist
examination of the Russian Revolutions of 1905 and 1917.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Robin Herman and Laurie Johnston

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 127 words


Salute to Veterans
AStaten Island ferry took a new route yesterday, sailing up the E ast River as
far as the United Nations. Carrying supporters of the N ational Human Rights
Committee for POW-MIAs, it paraded American f lags and its protest signs before
the Vietnamese Mission in W aterside Plaza at East 23d Street.

Amid the national focus on those who served in Vietnam, New York had, along with
its traditional wreath-layings and Fifth Avenue parade, some new approaches to
Veterans Day. Vietnam-era poets of the Veterans Ensemble Theater Company read
their words and sang their songs at the Public Theater. Columbia University
joined 400 American colleges with a conference on the nuclear arms race.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM WAR MEMORIAL: RANCOR, TEARS AND SONG

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 646 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


In a bittersweet echo of the 1960's, Vietnam veterans wept and partied together,
stared and shouted at the memorial to their war dead today, finally having to
bury one fitful burst of rancor by singing hymns to their dead colleagues.

''Brothers, we fought in Nam, so what are we fighting for?'' one man shouted
from the throng that gathered at midday at the black granite memorial on which
are listed the names of the 57,939 Americans killed or missing in the Vietnam
War.

The man turned this way and that, as if lost in the crowd, repeatedly shouting,
''What are we fighting for?'' The man, crying out that he was a Marine Corps
veteran, distracted separate groups of people crowded by the memorial who were
weeping, posing children for photographs, sipping bottles of beer, searching for
names and touching the long, stony list of the dead. A few listeners were
angered by the man's anguished question and his lack of an answer.

A Broken Chorus of Dispute

''Why don't you shut your mouth!'' a bearded veteran shouted down from the top
of the memorial hill at the first man, and suddenly a broken chorus of dispute
began across the grief-swept crowd.

''Let him talk!'' a third veteran shouted across the autumnal chill of the
somber, trench-like memorial, and the debate was picked up by other bearded men
from the '60's, many of them proudly wearing their old fatigue jackets.

''Get it out, brother!'' one man yelled.  Disjointed shouts followed. ''Give us
a war and we'll win it!'' someone shouted.  ''The man had grass for breakfast,''
one veteran bellowed, drawing brief laughter with his reference to a war that,
some participants assert, was fueled mainly by marijuana.

'Act Like a Marine!'

''Turn those damn TV cameras off and he'll shut up,'' another man said, furious
at this interruption in what was a long day of gentle reunion and painful
remembrance.

But the first man's shouted question came again, studded now with the familiar
vulgarisms of the Vietnam era. And this was too much for a clean-cut man who
shouted, ''You call yourself a marine, act like a marine!''

But the first man, fairly spinning amid the crowd, would not be quiet. ''Why are
we fighting?'' he shouted.  Finally, a lantern-jawed Marine Corps master
sergeant wearing two rows of campaign ribbons attempted an answer. ''We fought
so you got the right to shoot your mouth off,'' he said.

The crowd was finally quieted when a small group of veterans wearing black
berets began a handsomely harmonized chorus of ''Amazing Grace.''

Awash in Memories of Vietnam

The rancor and shouting were instantly stilled, and the tears returned for many
in the crowd as the men in berets added another song that resounded as a kind of
coda to the moment as much as to the newly completed memorial.

''Find the cost of freedom, buried in the ground,'' they sang.  ''Mother Earth
will swallow you, lay your body down.'' The capital was awash this Veterans Day
in memories of the Vietnam War, and the day was dedicated to one of the most
open exhibitions of emotion in this ritualized city in the last two decades.

''His name was Jonesy, Jonesy,'' one veteran told a memorial guide who leafed
through the thick locator book, searching for the right name.

''Perhaps it was Jones,'' said the guide, whose locator carried an enormous list
of dead soldiers named Jones.

Searching for a Name

''All we did was call him Jonesy,'' said the veteran, staring anxiously at the
dark wall where the name of his dead friend was engraved.

Farther down the wall, a barrel-chested Army sergeant quickly raced through a
search of the stone panels.  ''His middle initial was 'T,' and we called him 'T
for Trouble,' '' the sergeant told a companion. Suddenly, etched sharply in the
stone, he saw the name he sought. The sergeant made a fist, slammed it against
the letters and burst into tears.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Viet Nam vets

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BLUE AND GRAY, A SKETCHBOOK

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words


IN the 1920's in New York, some of them were still around. They talked
familiarly among themselves of places small boys had only read about in history
books: Vicksburg, Cold Harbor, Gettysburg and, with lowered voices, a terrible
place called the Wilderness. In their cups they would mention ''Lyss'' and
''Cump,'' nicknames for Ulysses S. Grant and William Tecumseh Sherman. They
never called it the Civil War; they called it the War of the Rebellion.

Each year on Memorial Day they would turn out, against the strident advice of
sons and daughters, to march up Riverside Drive in facsimiles of the grotesque
uniforms in which they had gone to war.  Some in baggy Zouave trousers, others
in the braided dolmans of hussars.

They are gone now. Few think about the Civil War, the most costly conflict ever
fought on this continent. No one has ever made war in all its ghastly faces real
to those who do not know it. But it seems to me that the sketches of Civil War
scenes now on view at the National Academy of Design give us a better
understanding of that war than most mediums.

The camera was there. But the cumbersome, wet-plate equipment of the 1860's made
action shots almost impossible. What Mathew B. Brady and his colleagues produced
was a somber record of carnage; how things looked before or after a battle.

An avid public had to be given some pictorial reportage on the war. The Union
armies were followed by combat artists who sketched the war. Among the soldiers
were others who drew the day-to-day incidents of army life. Finally, there were
the professional illustrators for the Century magazine whose work ultimately
appeared, along with a great many rather confusing photographs, in the seminal
''Battles and Leaders of the Civil War.''

The exhibition of 53 sketches at the National Academy includes 37 depicting
battles or troops on the move. Although some of the artists strove, as artists
and writers have for a century, to depict war as an organized, rational affair,
they failed.

The Incoherence of Battle

The lines of marching troops, the cannon bowling along behind the gun teams, the
studious staff officers are there. But through the sketches comes the
formlessness, the incoherence of battle. This was what Fabrice encountered in
that matchless chapter on Waterloo in Stendhal's ''The Charterhouse of Parma,''
a book written, incidentally, by a man who as a staff officer for Napoleon had
seen some of the great battles of history.

Battle has not altered much in the 117 years since Gen. Robert E.  Lee saw Gen.
Edward O. Ord's corps moving on him and knew that the game was over.

The ''Defense at Cage's Ford,'' drawn by Harry Fenn, could be, with some
adjustments, a sketch of any defensive action in World War II, Korea or Vietnam.
The front line is prone, firing at the Confederates across the river - Union
soldiers called them ''Rebs'' not Confederates - and the second line is inching
forward. One officer is standing and waving his sword, a gesture more favored in
the romantic South than in the prosaic North.

But any infantry officer of today would judge that the officer had deployed his
men on the best available position and that, given the absence of modern
artillery and aircraft, he would probably be able to hold. Naturally, there
would be criticism. The Union infantry is bunched. The second rank should be
digging in.

A Stay-at-Home's Image

The sketches are more real when they concentrate on such minor actions as that
at Cage's Ford. When Alfred R. Waud portrayed the attack of William F. Smith's
corps at Cold Harbor, Va., on June 1, 1864, the result is an extension of any
reliable report by a correspondent. Men advance shoulder to shoulder on a broad
front led by an officer on horseback. The wounded are escorted back from the
battle or limp back alone. A field gun races around the flank. Off in the
distance, shells are bursting, but what they meant to the recipients is not
shown. This was war as the stay-at-homes envisaged it.

Gettysburg and Vicksburg were the turning points of that war. The two sketches
of the fighting at Gettysburg in those terrible days of July 1863 are moving -
one an attack on Culp's Hill, the other the fighting in the Devil's Den. Those
tiny figures say it all; the confusion, the bravery, the cowardice, the
suffering.

Vicksburg, which made Grant, was what today would be called an amphibious
operation. Here, as depicted by Harry Fenn, is Adm. David Farragut's squadron,
steamships still wearing sails, augmented by what looks like one of the first
ironclads. Fenn tried hard, but the picture is a failure because no one could
catch the ebb and flow of naval operations on paper.

Of Things to Come

Some pictures foreshadow the military wrath to come 50 years later when World
War I burst on Europe. One of these, by Theodore R. Davis, shows the explosion
of a mine under the Confederate works at Vicksburg. The mine was dug by a
Pennsylvania outfit manned by coal miners. They are not visible, unless the
shirt-sleeved figure in the foreground was one of them, but the officers and
men, all at ease, are.

Fifty-odd years later the British broke the German position on the Messines
ridge by the explosion of 19 huge mines. There was a difference in power, but
not in the tactical idea.

Do we learn anything from these sketches? Not much. But we are reminded of some
salient facts about our country. A nation, predominantly pacific and viscerally
interested in getting ahead and making a stake was transformed in four years of
fighting into a battleground. The poor white farmer from the South and the mill
worker from the North fought it out. The Americans are not and never have been a
militarist people, but they are a martial one.

Hours for the show, which runs through Jan. 4, are noon to 5 P.M., Wednesdays
through Sundays, noon to 8 P.M. on Tuesdays. Admission is $1.50, free after 5
P.M. on Tuesdays. The academy is at Fifth Avenue and 89th Street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Alfred Mathews painting

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

RESTAURANTS;
Tastes of Vietnam and a bustling pub.

BYLINE: By Mimi Sheraton

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1752 words


UNTIL recently, the intricate and savory specialties of Vietnam have been only
meagerly and indifferently represented in New York.  Now the void has been
filled most capably and deliciously by the Dao family, which owns and operates
Saigon, a tidy little downstairs restaurant on Mulberry Street in Chinatown. The
family, Chinese in origin, lived in Vietman for four generations, came to this
country four years ago and opened this restaurant last April.

Vietnamese food has been described as halfway between the cuisines of Thailand
and China, but that description hardly prepares a diner for the subtle
intricacies and seasonings that make this food so beguiling. From the Thai
kitchen come such seasonings as lemon grass, fish sauce, coriander, curry, hot
chili peppers, scallions and mint.  And resembling Chinese dishes are all of the
stir-fry combinations, the hoisin and soy sauces and an array of fried and
steamed dumplings.

But Vietnamese specialties have a little more dash to them, and combinations
come as engaging surprises. The appetizers are exceptional, and an assortment of
them could make up one of the best dim-sum-type lunches in the city. Chao tom
-ground shrimp barbecued on sugar-cane skewers -is a gently sweet and pungent
classic. So is nem nuong, tiny barbecued pork balls topped with chopped peanuts,
all to be rolled in lettuce and dipped in the astringent fish and vinegar sauce.
Pork rolls, steamed in soft rice-flour wrapping (banh cuon), spiced pork and
garlic cracklings on crisp shrimp wafers (banh tap) and Vietnamese salami, a
sausage of finely ground pork served both steamed and in a more peppery baked
version, are among the tempting first courses. Shredded pork roll (bi cuon) is
wrapped in rice flour crepes, with vegetables and slivers of pig's ears adding a
crackling texture. But spring rolls and rock shrimp with pork wrapped around
them, both too greasy, were disappointing.

Delicious cold salads can be shared as appetizers, a favorite being slivered
chicken with shredded icy white cabbage, seasoned with chili paste, vinegar and
a mellow homemade hoisin sauce.

Chili can enliven many dishes, but at the Saigon it is used a little too
meagerly, even when intense spiciness is requested. One really fiery soup is pho
tom satay, tiny shrimp with noodles in a peanut-and chili-flavored tomato soup.
Hot and sour fish or shrimp soups are thinner and flavorful, but canned
pineapple adds an unpleasant touch.

A number of dishes that are not called soup turn out to be soup by Western
standards. A few delicious examples are tiny boneless eel in a peppery
curry-and-lemon-grass sauce bolstered with slippery beanthread noodles, and all
so-called satay dishes - chunks of meat or fish in hot soupy sauces.

The fish barbecued at Saigon is pickerel, which twice had a heavy muddy flavor.
Better seafood dishes are crab, shrimp or lobster (really giant crayfish or
prawns), fried in a pungent mixture of salt, pepper and garlic, or one of these
shellfish steamed in beer with egg white.

Two beef dishes are cooked at the table: Saigon special beef (thit bo vi) is
thinly sliced and fried in hot oil with minced lemon grass and ginger. Thit bo
nhung giam is raw beef dipped into hot, strong beef stock sharpened with rice
vinegar; after the beef is eaten, the scallion-flecked soup is served as a
bracing finish. Tender cubes of rare sauteed beef and chunks of barbecued pork
chops with lemon grass are also excellent, and so is the light and spongy pork,
crab and egg cake. Spicy curried chicken on rice (cari ga) is better than the
tough cuts of curried chicken with noodles (pho ga cari).

Desserts combining sticky rice and beans tend to be hot and soupy and not worth
ordering. Fresh fruit would be a welcome alternative.  Chopsticks, forks, spoons
and fingers are used interchangeably at Saigon, and finger bowls of jasmine tea
are passed frequently, with one bowl to be shared by all at the table. The
delightful staff is polite and helpful, but service may be a bit slow at busy
times.  Prices are low, and a copious dinner can be had for $10 to $12 a person,
including tip but not drinks.

Since it opened in 1976, Jim McMullen has become one of the busiest restaurants
on the Upper East Side. This huge and handsome pubrestaurant, with brick walls,
etched glass and Art Nouveau decorative accents, caters to a six-deep bar crowd
every evening, and the bustle and clatter in that area spills over into the
hectic dining rooms.

Although the quality of cooking has declined over the years, this does not seem
to discourage its fans. Late in the evening, highfashion model types appear,
while in the earlier hours the crowd suggests a reunion of aging preppies. The
food is bland, pallid, soft and characterless. Generally acceptable choices are
such plain broiled dishes as chicken, veal chops, steak sandwiches, a paillard
of chicken and a sauteed chicken piccata. Roast beef and calf's liver are also
usually acceptable, but the kitchen's performance is uneven. Lamb chops, though
well flavored, are untrimmed and fatty.

Clam chowder used to be abundant with clams and properly pungent; now it is a
thick, often tepid vegetable soup with a clam or two to each portion.
Beef-barley soup may be fine or may be reduced to the consistency of porridge.
Cream of spinach soup is more dependable.  Mussels vinaigrette, which once could
be recommended, had to be sent back on our last visit because the mussels were
sandy and stale.  They were replaced by cool and plump oysters on the
half-shell.  Marinated vegetables were so raw and hard that they were too
filling for a first course, and did not absorb any dressing.

Shepherd's pie - ground meat baked under a mashed-potato topping - was soupy and
reminiscent of cafeteria lunches. An overchilled salade Ni,coise must have been
stored in the refrigerator, arranged in its bowl and ready to go.

Spinach salad is a cut above other dishes, but pastas are overcooked and
undersalted, and the strands are often matted together. Sometimes chicken-pot
pie is delicious; at other times its crust is scorched. Burning was also a flaw
with roast-beef hash at lunch one day. Cold tortellini in a salad were doughy,
and a combination of tomato and mozzarella swam in a sea of oil. Broiled fish
used to be a safe choice, but a recent order of scrod was overcooked to the
point of crumbling.

Desserts are disappointing, with a maraschino cherry topping a second-rate hot
fudge sundae and a brownie pie that was oversweet and dry. Deep-dish apple pie
is good if it is not burned.

Bread is served only on request, and if it's your unlucky night, your serving
may be a single soggy raisin pumpernickel roll. Or you may get a white roll that
is stale and reheated. Service is often chaotic: orders are confused, it is hard
to get utensils, and you may be subjected to the kindergarten ''we,'' as in,
''Are we ready for our coffee?''

Even at moderate prices, Jim McMullen now seems only a fair value.
A la carte

Le Petit Robert, at 314 West 11th Street, is a popular bistro in Greenwich
Village. After two meals there, I felt the food was promising, if somewhat
expensive, but worth pursuing. I made a reservation for four on a Saturday
night. When we arrived, we were told there was no reservation and that none
could have been made.  When I said that I had made it myself the managaer said I
should have confirmed. I explained that no one had asked me to confirm, not for
that reservation or for the two previous ones. ''In that case, Madam,'' said the
manager, ''you are lying.'' Additional visits seem pointless; no food could make
up for that brand of hospitality.

Saigon Restaurant

**

60 Mulberry Street, near Bayard Street, 227-8825.  Atmosphere: Simple and tidy
luncheonette setting with full bar service; service polite and helpful if a
little slow at peak hours.  Recommended dishes: Spring roll, shrimp on sugar
cane, barbecued pork ball, steamed or shredded pork roll, spiced pork and shrimp
crackers, salami, shrimp and pork roll, chicken salad; shrimp, crab or lobster
fried in salt and pepper or cooked in beer, Saigon special beef, beef dipped in
vinegar, beef cubes, pork chops or chicken with lemon grass, steamed pork with
crab and egg, curried eel with lemon grass, steamed chicken rice, noodles and
shrimp in satay sauce. Price range: Lunch and dinner, a la carte, with main
courses $2.50 to $10. Credit Cards: MasterCard and Visa. Hours: Lunch and
dinner, 11 A.M. to 10:30 P.M. daily. Reservations: Necessary on weekends.

Jim McMullen

Fair

1341 Third Avenue, between 76th and 77th Streets, 861-4700.  Atmosphere: Large,
noisy and attractive pub with Art Nouveau accents and a jam-packed bar-scene;
staff good-natured but slow and careless.  Recommended dishes: Spinach soup,
oysters on halfshell, broiled chicken, roast beef, veal chop, chicken paillard
or piccata, steak sandwich, spinach salad.  Price range: Lunch and supper, a la
carte, with main courses $4.95 to $8.95; dinner, a la carte, with main courses
$7.95 to $12.95 (includes vegetable).  Credit Cards: None.  Hours: 11:30 A.M. to
2 A.M. daily.  Reservations: Not accepted.

----
What the stars mean: (None) Poor to fair * Good ** Very good *** Excellent
Extraordinary These ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and
price in relation to comparable establishments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ON BARREN HILL, A FATHER'S MEMORIAL TO SON KILLED IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: EAGLE NEST, N.M., Nov. 10


Back in May 1968, when word came that young David had been killed in Vietnam,
Victor Westphall vowed, like so many bereaved parents in those bitter years, to
do something that would honor and preserve the memory of his son.

So, on a barren hillside deep in the fir-covered mountains of northern New
Mexico, Mr. Westphall set out to build a monument, a memorial ''not only for
David, but for all the veterans of Vietnam.''

''I just couldn't imagine, back then, that these young men would be damn near
forgotten by this nation,'' he said.  For 11 years the memorial has loomed over
the Moreno Valley near here, two sweeping wings of concrete 28 feet high framing
a small, stark chapel. Inside, there is a simple white cross and, along a
curving wall, 125 neatly framed photographs of other young men whose families
were determined to remember their sons' part in a war that so many others chose
to forget.

In scale, the Vietnam Veterans Peace and Brotherhood Chapel pales in comparison
with the sleek new memorial unveiled this week in Washington, which bears the
chiseled names of all 58,000 Vietnam War dead.

A Single-Minded Creation

But unlike the Washington memorial, the chapel here is the singleminded creation
of one man, obsessed with the war and the death of his eldest son, a 28-year-old
first lieutenant in the Marine Corps.

Mr. Westphall, a retired building contractor who holds a Ph.D. in history from
the University of New Mexico, built the chapel largely with his own hands, time
and money.

Even now, he lives here alone, except for Lady, a St. Bernard, in a cramped,
one-room cabin on the hillside beneath the memorial. His wife, Jeanne, lives
separately, in their home in Springer, N.M., 65 miles away.

''It is too difficult for her to come here, because of the memories,'' said Mr.
Westphall, who is 69 years old and hobbles about with a cane because of
arthritis. ''But I have to be here,'' he went on. ''It's a job that had to be
done, as if some greater destiny, larger than all of us, has assigned it to
me.''

He says the cost of building and operating the chapel over the last 11 years has
been about $220,000. The initial $30,000 investment in the project came from the
insurance benefits the Westphalls received from the Government after their son's
death.

Veterans Group Helped

Most of the remaining funds have come from the Westphall family, in addition to
about $60,000 contributed over the last six years by the Disabled American
Veterans, the only outside group to take an official interest in the project.

Mr. Westphall says the veterans' organization took over the deed to the
five-acre memorial site in September and will administer the chapel as a
charitable foundation. Under the terms of the agreement, Mr. Westphall says, he
will stay on as director.

Last summer, in the tourist season, as many as a hundred people a day visited
the memorial. It is marked by a single sign along U.S.  Route 64, though its
graceful wings, which sometimes remind Mr.  Westphall of an angel come to earth,
are easily visible from the road.

At night it is floodlit. In the day, the lyrics of popular songs from the 1960's
and 70's, music strongly evocative of the Vietnam years, mixes with the mountain
winds as it is broadcast from two speakers mounted in front of the chapel and
connected to a tape deck inside.

No Federal Recognition

These days, Mr. Westphall is a bit melancholy about the attention being paid to
the new memorial in Washington. It is not a matter of sour grapes, he says, but
over the years repeated efforts by Senator Pete V. Domenici, a New Mexico
Republican, to obtain some sort of formal Federal acknowledgement of the chapel
here were repeatedly rebuffed.

''I think, in many ways, that the whole idea for the Washington memorial began
right here, many years ago,'' Mr. Westphall said.  ''Back then, there was still
open hostility to Vietnam. I think what we did here helped a lot of Vietnam
veterans to come out of the closet, because they knew that someone did care and
did remember.''

He says his obsession with the memorial has grown out of a longheld personal
conviction that the living must do what they can ''to encourage humankind to
preserve rather than destroy.''

''In this world, humanitarianism and brotherhood too often get short shrift,''
he said.

Photos From Bereaved Families

Over the years, as news of Mr. Westphall's memorial spread, he has received
letters and photographs from other families who lost their sons in Southeast
Asia. Even now, he has more photographs than he has room for in the chapel.

He has also heard from the survivors, young men who came home from Vietnam to a
country that no longer wanted to hear about the war.  Last month a veteran from
Seattle sent him the flag that once flew over Khe Sanh, a besieged hilltop in
the northern highlands where marines held out against constant bombardment.

''The flag is for all the people that went and did the best they could and have
now melted back into the crowd,'' wrote the veteran, who asked to remain
anonymous. ''For all of us, thank you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of memorial photo of Victor Westphall map of New
Mexico

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 702 words


Touching History

It was the Week of The Wall.  Finally, it seemed, the dam holding back the
lingering human emotions of the Vietnam War, feelings rooted more in grief than
in rancor, gave way. Families of victims, along with thousands of veterans, some
of them haunted faces in faded combat fatigues, made an anguished pilgrimage to
Washington to sing and weep, to remember and relive, and, above all, to find and
touch the names of the dead on the black marble wall that was constructed near
the Lincoln Memorial.

Most of those who had participated in the Johnson Administration's escalation of
the war left Washington long ago. Only Robert S.  McNamara, Defense Secretary in
the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, has remained, and this Veterans Day he
was in his office, catching up on work that accumulated while he was out of
town, in some ways as far removed from the Vietnam activities as Dean Rusk in
Georgia, Walt Rostow in Texas or McGeorge Bundy in New York.

Mr. McNamara, chairman of the Overseas Development Council, was asked for his
thoughts on this week of war remembrance. ''I continue to hope,'' he began,
''that scholars will address the subject in a way they have not yet done.'' He
added that he would like to see a ''thoughtful analysis of the decision points''
of that period so that war lessons will stand as starkly as the memorial wall.

Had he seen the wall of names yet? No, said Mr. McNamara, who was one of the
recipients of this year's Albert Einstein Peace Prize for his advocacy of
nuclear arms controls, he had not, other than catching a glimpse of it in its
construction phase.

Mr. McNamara said he planned to visit the memorial soon, adding, ''I am looking
forward to viewing it.''
Pepper and Boll Weevils

W ill Representative Claude D. Pepper, Democrat of Florida, give up the
chairmanship of the Select Committee on Aging to head the Rules Committee? Will
Democrats take Representative Phil Gramm of Texas and other boll weevils to the
woodshed to set an example for Democratic freshmen who might be tempted to
support President Reagan more than their own party?

These are some of the questions feeding Capitol Hill speculation in this period
of post-election ennui. Mr. Pepper, who is 82, has used the Aging Committee to
establish himself as a champion of senior citizens, especially on the Social
Security issue. Whether he would give up that forum for the Rules Committee
chairmanship, an important post but one that rarely attracts the spotlight, is a
question Mr.  Pepper is not ready to answer.

''The joke going around,'' said one House staff member, ''is that Pepper will
take the Rules Committee job and change the rules to allow him to keep the Aging
Committee.''

Mr. Gramm, the best-known boll weevil, does not view reports that the Democratic
leadership wants to strip him of his seat on the Budget Committee as a joke. The
Texas Democrat, called a boll weevil because he has consistently supported
President Reagan's economic legislation, along with other Southern Democrats, is
lining up support to try to keep his committee assignment.
Intrepid Reading

T he Telex machine at the Federal Bureau of Investigation recently began
clacking with a message from a former British spy. At first bureau officials
couldn't believe what they were seeing on the printer. Was it a coded message?
No, it was just what it appeared to be, a list of spy novel titles recommended
for the reading pleasure of William H. Webster, F.B.I. director.

The recommendations came from Sir William Stephenson, who was chief of British
intelligence in World War II. The two men met recently in a foreign city. Sir
William was pleased to meet Mr. Webster, an avid reader of spy novels, and the
bureau chief was pleased to meet Sir William, whose intelligence career was the
subject of the book, ''A Man Called Intrepid: The Secret War.''

Sir William kept his promise to send Mr. Webster a list of his 10 favorite spy
novels.

Phil Gailey

Warren Weaver Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS' PARADE A BELATED WELCOME HOME

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1121 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 13


Thousands of Vietnam veterans marched away from a decade of indifference today
and paraded proudly past the White House to a memorial whose history recalls the
divisiveness of their war.

Disabled veterans hobbled along with canes, gamely responding to cadence counts;
paraplegics wheeled themselves or were pushed; blind veterans listened to
reports of what was happening from their friends, and an army of marchers and
walkers, dressed in everything from baggy fatigues to camouflage suits to
full-dress uniforms or sport jackets, moved slowly along Constitution Avenue,
waving tiny American flags and raising their fists in triumph.

It was a catharsis for openly moved spectators and for veterans who have long
felt themselves a neglected, discarded army - reviled by some as ''baby
killers,'' often scorned by others for failing to win, largely ignored by a
public eager to forget an unpopular war.

The camaraderie was almost palpable as veterans embraced in the streets or
locked hands in ritual handshakes. After years of selfdoubt and resentment at
public indifference, they were staging their own celebration, a coming-out party
given by veterans for veterans.

But it was not the heroes' welcome, the ticker-tape parade with roaring crowds
and an outpouring of gratitude, that many veterans openly long for. Long
sections of the viewing stand were half empty, and some blocks along the
10-block parade route had but a single broken line of spectators on each side.

The marchers, their number estimated by the organizers at 15,000, counting
Vietnam veterans, veterans of other wars, bands, military units and other
supporters, were led by, among others, Gen. William C. Westmoreland of the Army,
retired, the commander of American forces in Vietnam. Afterward, the general
called the march ''quite an emotional experience - something I never thought
would take place.''

The five-day ''National Salute to Vietnam Veterans,'' which culminated in the
march to the new memorial, was designed, according to its chief organizer, Jan
C. Scruggs, ''to stimulate the long overdue national recognition that has
largely been denied to those of us who served in our nation's longest war.''

But on this raw, blustery morning in the capital, with winds gusting enough to
spill coffee out of cups and put goose pimples on the majorettes, there was
little indication that any vast segment of the public had rallied to their
cause.

Crowd Estimated at 150,000

The National Park Police estimated that perhaps 150,000 people attended some
portion of the parade or dedication ceremonies, but if that many were there,
they were swallowed up in the expanses of the mall. A District of Columbia
policeman commented that the crowd was far smaller than he had been led to
expect. And James Weber, of West Haven, Conn., a 27-year-old spectator, lamented
that ''there should be millions here,'' not simply a crowd comparable to that at
''a pro football game.''

Those who did brave the gusts kept up a steady patter of clapping, punctuated by
bursts of louder applause and cries of ''Thank you, Indiana, thank you,'' or
''Yeah, Iowa,'' or ''God bless you'' as the various state delegations passed by.

But every now and then a hint of the old divisions over the war broke forth.
James Mahoney, a Navy veteran from Washington, D.C., was brandishing a sign
urging ''No More Wars, No More Lies, No More Stone Memorials'' when an
unidentified member of the New Jersey delegation wrenched it from his hands and
smashed it. ''He said he didn't agree with me,'' Mr. Mahoney said later.

Another protester, Peter Poccia of New York City, a former medical corpsman in
the Marines, joined other antiwar groups at the end of the line of march,
carrying his own hand-lettered sign: ''We Killed, We Bled, We Died for Worse
Than Nothing.''

At the end of the parade, marchers and spectators alike continued along
Constitution Avenue to dedication ceremonies at the site of the new Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, about 200 yards from the Lincoln Memorial, in a corner of the
Mall.

Expression of Gratitude

Here the theme was healing and long overdue recognition for a job done without
thanks. Helen J. Stuber, national president of the American Gold Star Mothers,
whose only son was killed in Vietnam, expressed her gratitude that ''after all
these years, our country is pausing to honor the Vietnam veterans.''

The memorial itself remains an object of dispute. It is essentially a V-shaped
wall of polished black marble on which are etched the names of all 58,000
American servicemen who died in the war, arranged chronologically by date of
death.

Almost from the start, those who supported the war have complained that the
memorial diminishes those it seeks to honor. The V shape, they say, is
reminiscent of the peace symbol flashed by antiwar demonstrators. The black
color, they say, is too negative. The situation of the marble slabs, in a
depression on the Mall, is, they say, offensively inconspicuous, not like the
heroic monuments associated with war memorials.

Those conflicts were partially resolved by a recent decision to add a sculpture
of three servicemen as well as a flagstaff next year. The statue will be off to
one side.

Dissension Among Veterans

And dissension over the memorial continues to run high, even among the veterans.
''We want a statue and a flagpole, too, right at the apex of the memorial,''
said Donald Sherman, a paralyzed veteran who watched the parade from his
wheelchair. ''The flag is what we fought for, isn't it?''

But John Beam, an Army artillery veteran from Baltimore, carried a sign opposing
the additional statuary as a glorification of war that ''will stand in silent
approval as we march by on our way to the next war.''

At the memorial site, Al Keller Jr., national commander of the American Legion,
which raised more than $1 million of the $7 million cost of the memorial, sought
to heal the still festering wounds.

''There are those who say the war in Vietnam brought shame on America,'' he
said. ''There are those who say this memorial would bring shame on those who
fought the war. But there is no shame in answering the nation's call. There is
no shame in serving with honor and courage in difficult times. And there is no
shame in enshrining the names of fallen comrades in immutable stone for
generations to recall.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of parade (page 36)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 1982

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 673 words


International
The U.S. lifted the trade sanctions it imposed on the American and other
companies participating in the Soviet natural gas pipleline to Western Europe.
President Reagan announced that he was doing so because the United States and
its key allies had reached ''substantial agreement'' on an overall economic
strategy toward the Soviet bloc. Mr. Reagan said the trade pact was ''a victory
for the allies.'' But France announced that it ''was not a party to the
agreement.'' (Page 1, Column 6.)
The East-West trade pact that President Reagan linked to lifting the Soviet
pipeline sanctions represented little in terms of new commitments by the United
States' main European allies, Western European officials said. With one apparent
exception -an undertaking not to sign or approve new contracts for the purchase
of Soviet natural gas while studies are made - the pact covers areas where
attempts have been made for years to coordinate Western policy.  (1:6.)
A huge gathering of world leaders is expected in Moscow for the funeral of
Leonid I. Brezhnev, possibly the largest gathering of foreign leaders in Soviet
history. (1:4-5.)
Lech Walesa did not appear in public in Poland despite the Government
announcement that he had been freed. Speculation grew that he was still in
custody or had been spirited to a secret place by the church. (3:1-3.)
National
Thousands of Vietnam veterans marched in Washington to the recently completed
memorial to the servicemen who died in the war, culminating the five-day
National Salute to Vietnam Veterans. But it was not the heroes' welcome that
many veterans openly longed for. Long sections of the viewing stand were half
empty, and attendance was spotty along the 10-block parade route. (1:1-2.)
Americans must be reassured that Social Security will continue indefinitely
without radical change, the 15 members of the bipartisan National Commission on
Social Security Reform agreed, while indicating that Congress should join them
in providing those assurances. The commission adjourned a three-day meeting in
Alexandria, Va., until Dec. 10, still divided largely on partisan lines on such
basic issues as funneling income tax revenues into Social Security, revising the
formula for cost-of-living increases in benefits and scaling back benefits for
those who will retire. (31:1.)
California faces a $3-billion deficit if government spending is not sharply
reduced and taxes raised, state officials said. A report by the Director of
Finance forecasting a deficit of at least $665 million in the current fiscal
year, was followed by one from the State Comptroller projecting an additional
deficit of $2 billion to $3 billion in the next fiscal year. (28:1-3.)
Metropolitan
New or increased taxes are planned by the Koch administration, to raise $200
million for the next fiscal year. City Hall officials said the Mayor plans to
suggest more taxes than he actually expects to be approved. The new taxes would
include a capital-gains tax on large real-estate transactions. Such a tax was
approved last year as part of a financial package to aid the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority, but was later repealed when Mr. Koch said it was
uncollectable. Taxes that would be increased include the commuter income tax,
the New York City realty tax and the tax on entertainment admissions. (1:3.)
An aspect of the plea-bargain deal under which former Representative Frederick
W. Richmond admitted to various crimes and was sentenced last week to prison may
be appealed by the Justice Department. The department is considering an appeal
of a judge's ruling that declared unconstitutional an agreement sought by the
prosecution by Mr. Richmond to resign from Congress and end his re-election bid.
(51:1-6.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Ellen Hemminger Wed to Peter Manian

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 94, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 239 words


Ellen Marguerite Hemminger, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Arthur J.  Hemminger of
Massapequa, L.I., and Southbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter George
Manian, son of Esther Manian of North Attleboro, Mass., and the late Dr. Samuel
H. Manian. The Rev. John O. Mellin performed the ceremony at the First
Presbyterian Church in New York.

Ellen Haight Trivers and Samuel R. Manian, brother of the bridegroom, were
matron of honor and best man.  The bride, special assistant to the director of
public affairs for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, was graduated
from Mount Holyoke College and received a Master of Arts in Teaching degree from
the University of Massachusetts. Her father retired recently as president and
chief executive officer of Fritzsche Dodge & Olcott Inc., a flavor and fragrance
manufacturer, of which he remains a director.

Mr. Manian, a certified public accountant, is director of financial analysis for
Arista Records in New York. He was graduated from Brown University and received
an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.  The bridegroom served as a
lieutenant with the Navy during the Vietnam War. His father was a chemical
engineer, who retired from the National Academy of Sciences in 1966 as assistant
director of the Office of Critical Tables for the Physical Sciences.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
WHAT AILS TODAY'S BROADWAY MUSICAL?

BYLINE: By Frank Rich

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2778 words


It seems like only a faint memory now, but there actually was a time when it was
a joyous experience to go to a Broadway musical.  You'd dash down Shubert Alley
with the cocky assurance that you were in for a lift. There was the ecstatic
anticipation of hearing a rousing overture, of feeling that electric charge that
comes when the house lights dim, of watching the curtain rise on performers who
would sing and dance their hearts out. And if the show proved to be ''Bajour''
instead of ''My Fair Lady,'' you wouldn't feel heartbroken, just disappointed. A
bad musical could be laughed off like a junky movie.

Those pleasures have pretty much vanished in recent years. The most durable of
American theatrical commodities, the escapist musical, has lost so much fizz
that we've lived to see the once unimaginable day when a British musical,
''Cats,'' can steal Broadway's thunder. The great promise of the serious musical
has atrophied to the point where the only one to be produced this season, ''A
Doll's Life,'' can fold in five performances. What has brought both types of
musical to a state of creative depletion is a steady retreat from fresh
inspiration into an endless regurgitation of Broadway's past. What has dampened
the excitement of going to nearly all musicals is a radical change in the
musical theater's ambiance.

It's no longer a casual thing to go to a show when orchestra seats can go as
high as $45 (for ''Cats'') and even the ''cheap'' seats in the upper balcony
(now known as the ''rear mezzanine'') can cost the equivalent of five first-run
movie tickets. Nor can there be much spontaneity -the spontaneity that should
distinguish live theater - when most musicals are ridiculously overproduced and
overamplified.  No matter how hard the performers work, their efforts come to us
through a numbing fog of noise and glitter; though a strong star (such as Jim
Dale in ''Barnum'') can sometimes cut through the blare by sheer force of
personality, weaker ones (such as Raquel Welch in ''Woman of the Year'') can be
reduced to robots.

Even the orchestra often isn't present in the pit anymore, but is piped in from
backstage; other shows seem piped in in their entirety, since they play in
cavernous modern auditoriums (the Minskoff and the Uris) best suited for ice
hockey. To go to a musical these days is an anxiety-inducing rather than a
lighthearted outing: you fear that your senses are going to be assaulted by
electronic overkill and that your bank account will be taken for a ride.

The mood has become so heavy in Broadway houses that it may forever kill off the
satirical or purely farcical musical comedy that only aims to make us laugh and
hum. If ''Guys and Dolls'' or ''A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum''
were produced in today's theatrical environment, their effervescence would be
smothered by the miking and synthesizers, the high ticket prices, the physical
extravagance - all of which are antithetical to laughter. ''42d Street,'' the
foremost current example of an old-fashioned light musical on Broadway, has its
virtues, but does anyone really find it giddy and carefree? It's so overwhelming
a contraption that it exhausts rather than lifts the spirit.

No wonder that few people even attempt to write such shows for Broadway anymore.
The unpretentious joys of the comic musical are best discovered and savored Off
Broadway, as is the case with the current ''Little Shop of Horrors,'' a show
that spreads simple delight in the way a ''Pajama Game'' or ''Bells Are
Ringing'' once did uptown. Escapist musicals still exist on Broadway, but,
occasional exceptions like ''Annie'' notwithstanding, they're mostly
repackagings of old material rather than new works with fresh books and scores.
If they're not stage adaptations of movie musicals (from ''42d Street'' down to
''Seven Brides for Seven Brothers''), then they're revivals of past Broadway
hits or vintage songbook anthologies. The assumption seems to be that because we
already know the jokes and tunes going into the theater, we'll respond by
Pavlovian habit. Appropriately enough, even the laughter and applause can sound
canned as they waft through the electronic din.

It's in this context that ''Cats'' is different. Uneven as this Americanized
British import may be, it does posit a new approach to the escapist musical.
Rather than pretend that the old theatrical rules still apply in this time of
big money and high-tech mechanics, the creators of ''Cats'' have gone ahead and
conceded that the spectacle is the show. The effects aren't grafted on to
otherwise conventional settings to create glitzy, decorative stage pictures, as
they are in most other big-budget musicals -they're used instead to create a
whole new theatrical environment.

The strategy works in ''Cats'' to the extent that it does because the spectacle
is often wondrously conceived. John Napier's set is not just a huge expenditure
of money - though it's certainly that - but it's also a transporting piece of
artistic ingenuity. Rather than merely decorate the Winter Garden, the designer
has turned a proscenium house into a disorienting fantasy world that keeps our
eyes constantly on the move, that takes us into a feline universe that's
reinforced by the costumes, performers and T.S. Eliot verses.  Perspectives are
altered with a daring that makes Broadway's previous free-flowing musical
spectacles (''Hair'' or the 1973 ''Candide'') seem timid; even the stage walls
and auditorium ceiling seem to be obliterated. If only ''Cats'' had a dramatic
shape and choreography as bold as the physical production and as buoyant as the
cast and score, the whole show might have lifted off in an orbit new to the
musical theater.

At the same time, it's possible that the techniques of ''Cats'' won't be refined
in the future, but coarsened. When this show uses its special effects for their
own vulgar sake, rather than to create its cat's eye environment - as it does in
the climactic appearance of a ''Close Encounters'' spaceship - one sees how this
kind of entertainment could disintegrate into the theatrical answer to a
videogame or the most soulless imitation Spielberg-Lucas movies.

The successors to ''Cats'' may cross that line more often, by fashioning
special-effects musicals that squeeze out music, performers and dance entirely.
The recent, short-lived ''Rock 'n Roll! The First 5,000 Years'' took a step down
that path. In that revue, some extremely clever and well-executed multi-media
spectacles dominated the stage to such an extent that they completely dwarfed
the performers. You felt as if you were watching a projection television screen
or an entirely automated Disneyland exhibit - not that you were at the theater.
Only at the curtain call, when the slide shows stopped, did the cast come out
from under the electronic shroud to make direct human contact with the audience;
it was as if suddenly someone opened a door to let in a gust of fresh air.

Maybe the possible proliferation of such shows wouldn't be so troubling a
prospect if the serious Broadway musical (or the concept musical, or whatever
one chooses to call it) were in healthy shape.  If we could believe that a new
''West Side Story'' or ''Fiddler on the Roof'' or ''Company'' were waiting in
the wings, it might be easier to tolerate an onslaught of video-arcade
extravaganzas: the two types would counterbalance each other just as Billy
Rose's ''Jumbo'' might once have coexisted with ''Porgy and Bess.'' But as
''Cats'' has pointed a potentially dangerous direction for future escapist
musicals, so the season's other lavish Broadway musical, the short-lived ''A
Doll's Life,'' is a poignant dramatization of the bankruptcy that now threatens
the serious musical theater.

''A Doll's Life'' was a sincere effort, created primarily by three people - the
director Harold Prince, the librettists Betty Comden and Adolph Green - who owe
no apologies, for they have done more than most to enliven the Broadway musical
since World War II. Their brave notion this time was to write an operetta-like
sequel to ''A Doll's House.''

Yet once again one immediately wondered why such a musical should have been so
elaborately mounted. No one would produce a revival of the Ibsen play with huge,
towering sets and amplification; to do that with a purported sequel seemed a
decadent contradiction in terms. It was no surprise that the overproduction of
''A Doll's Life'' led only to overblown and counter-productive Pirandellian
staging conceits that seemed more designed to keep the machinery busy than to
enlighten or move an audience.

What was most distressing about ''A Doll's Life,'' though, was not its
extravagance or even its failures of artistry. The real question raised by this
musical - and by many other similarly ambitious recent musicals - is whether it
was really serious, or merely pretentious.  To write a show in 1982 that
espouses a primer-like feminist credo - as if feminism had only entered the
public mind yesterday - seems, in its own way, a form of escapism (and not even
an entertaining form at that). Why should sophisticated theatergoers be hectored
as if they'd never previously heard of such notions as equal pay for equal work
or a woman's right to the same sexual satisfaction as men? However pure the
intentions, such heavyhanded preaching of received ideas can strike an audience
as condescension.

If this confusion of attitudinizing with weighty content seems familiar, it's
because it has also muddied other latter-day Prince musicals, many of which were
rich in theatrical merits. The 1976 ''Pacific Overtures'' was implicitly an
attack on the United States involvement in Southeast Asia, but it was produced
almost a decade too late - long after the Vietnam war had been rejected by most
of the American public. The show's strident, accusatory finale ended an often
adventurous work on an unjustified, holier-than-thou note. In ''Evita,'' the
audience is angrily addressed by the narrator, Che Guevara, as if it were
somehow responsible for the Peron regime's rise to power - or as if fascist
Argentine history were a cautionary tale directly applicable to our own society.
Since the librettist, Tim Rice, never successfully made this case -he just
presented it as axiomatic - the supposedly important message of ''Evita'' became
frivolous.

A similar kind of scattershot guilt-mongering also needlessly damaged ''Sweeney
Todd,'' a musical whose Stephen Sondheim score is one of the great treasures of
Broadway history. By inflating a Dickensian tale to cosmic proportions, the
enormous production seemed to imply that the audience were guilty of the
Victorian injustices that led to Sweeney's murderous acts of revenge. Might not
the hero's tragedy have better stood simply and intimately on its own? The
answer could be found last month on cable television, where ''Sweeney Todd''
proved far more moving and biting once the camera had stripped away the original
production's elaborate, overpopulated Brechtian effects.

Mr. Prince is not the only one who indulges in superficial seriousness in the
musical theater; he's merely left holding the bag because he's most strenuously
set the fashion. In ''Nine,'' the highly inventive Tommy Tune staging and lovely
Maury Yeston music sit on top of a libretto that purports to describe a film
director's emotional breakdown but in fact does nothing of the kind. One would
be hard-pressed to argue that any of this show's many female characters, who are
ostensibly the dominant figures in its hero's troubled psyche, amounts to more
than a camp cartoon.

In ''Nine,'' like nearly every musical on Broadway, we also find the other major
form of deja vu in the current musical theater: the incessant recycling of
directorial ideas. Mr. Tune has come up with many original sequences for this
show, but nonetheless the most Felliniesque pageant he offers, the ''Casanova''
opera parody, is strongly reminiscent of the surreal (and brilliant)
''Loveland'' sequence of Mr. Prince's 1971 ''Follies.'' (In both shows, a
monochromatic set is suddenly filled with color, as a gaudy showwithin-the-show
drops down to resolve the story's emotional conflicts through fantasy.) In
''Cats,'' the English director Trevor Nunn harks back to Mr. Prince's 1973
''Candide,'' just as his staging of ''Nicholas Nickleby'' owed something to both
''Candide'' and ''Sweeney Todd.''

Since everyone else is cannibalizing Mr. Prince, it perhaps only follows that he
would do the same: ''Evita,'' ''Sweeney Todd'' and ''A Doll's Life'' are at
times indistinguishable from one another in terms of staging. How one wishes
that this director, who did so much to destroy the cliches of musical staging
that existed on Broadway when he began his career, would once again leap ahead
of the fray.  His innovations of the 1960's and early 70's have now become as
calcified as the conventions he once helped overthrow.

There are some bright spots. One major director of Broadway musicals who has
avoided most of his peers' traps is the Michael Bennett of ''Dreamgirls.'' (This
wasn't always true of Mr. Bennett, whose ''A Chorus Line'' dipped back into
''Follies,'' on which he had collaborated with Mr. Prince.) Like it or hate it,
''Dreamgirls'' doesn't look like any other show. It doesn't use its mechanized
production to create overelaborate, gilded versions of otherwise routine
pictorial sets but instead to create an ever-changing abstract space that allows
the staging the freedom of fast, innovative movement. ''Dreamgirls'' also avoids
the potential pitfalls of its content, which deals with black singers who sell
their souls to cross over into mainstream white American show business. Rather
than glibly point a finger at the audience to blame it for all the mishaps that
befall the characters, this show eschews knee-jerk rhetoric and suggests that
the people on stage are at least partially responsible for their own anguish.

In addition to ''Dreamgirls,'' what also gives one some hope for the musical is
that Mr. Prince and Mr. Tune, like Mr. Bennett, do try to work with new
performers and new writers in their shows.  ''Dreamgirls,'' ''A Doll's Life''
and ''Nine'' all had relative unknowns in at least some of their principal
roles; in each of their last three productions, Mr. Bennett and Mr. Tune have
employed composers and librettists new to Broadway.

This is essential, because, without the push of superstar directors, producers
are unlikely to gamble $4 million budgets on the young, untried talents who
might help recharge the writing of musicals. One hopes, too, that these
directors might try to restore dance to the serious musical - ''Dreamgirls,''
''A Doll's Life'' and ''Nine'' all have scant choreography - even as they search
for truly meaty and contemporary themes to build their shows around.

Yet all such efforts will be for naught if the musical theater's artists don't
take charge of the new Broadway technology before it takes charge of them. The
impact of that technology has been so pervasive that it even has changed the way
we listen to Broadway original cast albums. A show record used to be an adjunct
to the show itself - a tool for recreating an exciting theatrical night in the
mind's eye. Today, one often finds oneself listening to an original cast album
to get the theatrical experience that one missed in the first place: the scores
and performances of many present-day musicals seem much more immediate and
intimate when heard on a stereo at home than when encountered in the daunting,
overbusy productions that encumber them in the flesh.

That equation must be reversed. If theatergoers are to dash to musicals with
exuberance again, we'll have to be reconvinced that Broadway is a street of
human dreams, and not just another conveyor belt ushering our culture into the
no man's land of future shock.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Frankie Faison and Burt Young (page 25) drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS FORUM;
Economic Affairs / Barbara R. Bergmann;
SOCIAL SECURITY'S OVERBLOWN PROBLEMS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1264 words


THE nation is facing a choice on Social Security. The issue can be put very
simply: Do we, or do we n ot, want to continue to provide our old people with
the level of r eal benefits they are now getting?

Proposals currently being considered would reduce those benefits, which average
about $400 a month for an individual. Some of these proposals would allow the
purchasing power of Social Security benefits to be partially eroded by
inflation, while others would change the age at which retirement at full
benefits could take place.

But the debate on these questions has been confused by a myth about the the
basic nature of the Social Security system. The myth is that under the normal
operation of the system, retirees only get back the ''contributions'' they and
their employers made into their ''individual accounts'' through the payroll tax.

The myth has served to foster two mistaken notions which are widespread. The
first mistake is that the country's ability to pay Social Security benefits is
somehow threatened. In fact, our ability is as robust as it ever was. The second
notion is that our current method of financing benefits from the payroll tax is
the only respectable one. In fact, an infusion of funds from other sources would
make more sense. The irreverent suggestion of House Majority Leader Jim Wright
that the system be refreshed out of a liquor tax is in precisely the right
spirit, although refreshment from general Treasury revenues would be even
better.

Anyone who has been paying even minimal attention to the news and who has
swallowed this individual accounts view of the system is bound to be worried.
People have become painfully aware of the fact that there are no funds in their
accounts, and have quite naturally leapt to the conclusion that the wherewithal
to pay their pensions has disappeared. Pollsters who have asked the question,
''Will Social Security be there when you need it?'' have found a considerable
part of the working population worried that it will not be.

As a result, it has become easy for Social Security's enemies, like President
Reagan, to sell the idea that the system is about to go bankrupt and needs to be
saved. The people hostile to the system are, it turns out, generous enough to be
willing to advise us as to how to save it. Their advice is to reduce both the
benefits and a beneficiary's protection against inflation. In other words, they
suggest that we save the system by dismantling it in part. Rather reminiscent,
one might say, of that famous and unfortunate town in Vietnam, the one of which
it was said that we had to destroy it in order to save it.

Before taking the advice of Social Security's enemies, let us look at it from
another angle - that of ''resource flow.'' The bread our retired citizens eat
this week was baked this week by younger citizens. The dollar a retired citizen
uses to buy that bread was taken in taxes this week from younger citizens
currently working.  Looked at it this way, the system is a mechanism to funnel
resources from the economically active to those who are economically inactive
because of age.

From the resource-flow point of view, the particular taxes that finance the
flow, and the particular formulas used to relate benefits to previous earnings,
become of secondary importance. What is of primary importance is the generosity
of the body politic toward its older citizens. In fact, current benefits are
more generous than what could have been financed by the retirees' payroll taxes.
Under the resource flow concept, this is not in the least improper.

APART from the temporary stringency of the recession, which should not affect
long-run policy, we are far more affluent than we were 25 years ago, when the
average retiree was making his or her average contribution. We can afford to be
more generous. The whirlwind of citizen opposition that arises whenever
politicians suggest that Social Security benefits be lowered is not the
disgusting demonstration of public immorality that it is sometimes portrayed to
be. Quite the contrary, it is an expression of the morally admirable fact that
our citizens, both young and old, are virtually unanimous in not wanting the
current level of generosity to the elderly to be materially reduced. However,
the public is somewhat buffaloed by the cries of ''bankruptcy.''

The enemies of the system want to keep the debate focused on the individual
accounts because of the opportunity it gives them to push the bankruptcy panic
button. They also use it to push the idea that young people's membership in the
system is an investment, which should be voluntary, rather than a tax
obligation, which is properly compulsory.

The friends of the system are also hooked on the individual accounts myth. They
remember that for many years the concept protected Social Security from
accusations that it was socialistic.  They also believe that it is important to
sharply differentiate the system from welfare, and worry that framing the issues
in a resourceflow context would lead to the denial of benefits to people with
substantial amounts of other income. Such a denial might, in their view, attach
a stigma to taking the benefits. Most important, they believe that the fiction
of the individual accounts version is needed to sustain the public's commitment
to pay the benefits.

This insistance on the individual accounts myth has had seriously pernicious
effects, however. It has meant that an inflationary payroll tax which
discourages employers from hiring workers and which hits lower-paid workers
proportionally the hardest, has been fastened around the economy's neck. The
myth has made it more difficult to subject Social Security benefits to taxation
because the beneficiaries have been led to believe it is their own money. Such
taxation, which would only fall on the receiptients who have substantial sources
of other income, would be desirable from the point of view of fairness. The myth
has also permitted Federal employees to escape their fair share of taxation, on
the dubious ground that they have a right to be fenced off in their own system
and need make no contributions to anyone else. It has also required a
paradoxical rise in the benefits for the most highly paid and best provided-for
workers as the price for getting more taxes from them.

It is time to start conducting the debate in terms of the resource flow concept,
which is more realistic. When we do, it will probably become obvious to a
majority that, although we are temporarily in the economic dumps, we are
affluent enough to continue the long-term policy of allowing people to retire at
65 and protect them against inflation.

It should also become clearer that raising payroll taxes or cutting benefits in
a recession would be a terrible mistake. In short, it will become obvious that
it makes sense to pay Social Security benefits, like defense, out of our general
revenues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Barbara R. Bergmann is a professor of economics at the University of Maryland
and is one of four economists who regularly write for the Sunday Business
section.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TANZANIA: A DREAM DEFERRED

BYLINE: By Leonard Levitt; Leonard Levitt returned to Africa last year on a
grant from the Rockefeller Foundation. His latest book is ''The Healer,'' an
investigative account of medical malpractice and murder.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 138, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5322 words


I first arrived in Tanzania in 1963, as a teacher in the Peace Corps, in the
heady days just after independence from Britain. The school I was assigned to
was in the southern highlands, in blue mountains shadowed by clouds and mist. It
was a setting as pristine as the ideals that had brought me there.

The school was named Mpuguso, after the surrounding village of mud huts and
shambas, small plots where farmers kept cattle and chickens and where they
planted banana trees and tea and coffee shrubs.  Mpuguso was an upper primary
school - that is, it included grades 5 to 8, and the students' ages ranged from
10 to 20; proper birth records had not been kept. The school consisted of a
complex of brick buildings: classrooms, dormitories, a dining hall and teachers'
houses. Below the dining hall lay a large soccer field, the grass cut short by
cattle the villagers led there to graze.

My students, nearly all of them boys, were as bright and hard working as any I'd
ever known. Many walked 10 or 15 miles each day from their villages to Mpuguso.
During the masika, or long rains, when we wouldn't see the sun for days or
weeks, they'd arrive each morning, barefoot and sopping wet in their white
school uniforms, with long, green banana leaves over their heads. The boarders -
those whose fathers owned enough cows to sell in order to pay the 150 shillings,
or $20-a-year fees -studied in their classrooms until midnight by a kerosene
lamp hung from a rafter. Hunched over their desks, they squinted and scribbled
as the light became fainter and fainter.

The goal of each student was to pass his exam for secondary school, where there
were places for only a quarter of them. Passing the exam was the first step
necessary to leaving their villages and entering the modern world of the 20th
century, which to them meant a world where everyone wore new clothes and shoes,
listened to transistor radios and rode in cars and airplanes. To my students,
this was the promise of uhuru, or independence from British rule.

Uhuru had been won by the young and charismatic President Julius K. Nyerere, who
so eloquently urged a new and better life for Tanzania and for Africa. The son
of an illiterate tribal chief from a village not unlike Mpuguso, Nyerere had
been a teacher himself -hence his Swahili title of Mwalimu. Educated in Britain,
he had translated Shakespeare's ''Julius Caesar'' into Swahili. More important,
Nyerere had persuaded the British to quit Tanzania without firing a shot.  Among
Western liberals and intellectuals, he came to be regarded as a kind of African
philosopher-king. He was perceived as a selfless leader, a man who disdained
violence; a nonracist who offered Tanzanian citizenship to any European or Asian
who wished to remain; a benevolent socialist who wished to rid Tanzania, indeed
all Africa, of its triple plagues - ignorance, poverty and disease.

In retrospect, there was an almost touching naivete about all he sought to
accomplish and about American eagerness to believe and support him. We Americans
were certain that we could help transform Tanzania, quickly and painlessly, into
a modern nation - one that would incorporate the best aspects of Western culture
without sacrificing its own African identity.

And we were not alone. Tanzania came to be viewed as a model developing country.
Billions of dollars and thousands of volunteers poured into Tanzania, not only
from America, but also from Europe, Canada, Israel, the Soviet Union, China,
Japan and even other undeveloped nations such as Brazil. Tanzania became the
second largest recipient nation, on a per capita basis, of foreign aid in the
world.

Despite the money and the hopes - and, to an extent, because of them - Tanzania
today is a tragedy. Nyerere's political party - the only party in the country -
now controls the Government, the military, the press. His ideals have atrophied
into an ideology, called ''African Socialism,'' that seems to combine the worst
features of East and West. Business and industry have been nationalized and have
become dependent on foreign subsidies.  Corruption is epidemic. There are no
goods in the stores, and no foreign currency to purchase spare parts when
machines break down.  If, outside Tanzania, the Mwalimu is still regarded as the
eloquent champion of African and third-world aspirations, his own people are now
poorer in almost every way than they were before independence.

In September 1981, 18 years after I first arrived in Tanzania, I returned to
find my students, and from them, perhaps, to learn something of what had
happened to the country. They were all as delighted to see me as I was to see
them, and to my surprise they remembered even the most obscure details about our
time together - words I'd spoken, lessons I'd taught, books I'd given them.

On the surface many members of this first generation of uhuru's beneficiaries
appeared to have prospered. Of the 10 I saw, half had studied abroad; nearly all
held Government jobs. Yet there was a quality of despair and desperation about
all of them. They were, without exception, disillusioned in some way: frustrated
in their careers, disappointed in their lives, unfulfilled in their
expectations. They seemed not to understand why the dreams they had been told
were rightfully theirs had not been realized. For them, as for Tanzania, the
road from the village to the 20th century had proved more tortuous than they or
I had imagined.

Tanzania is not unique in any of this. Many, if not most, of the African nations
that a generation ago gained their independence in a rush of self-confidence and
optimism today resemble defeated nations, countries where prosperity now appears
to be farther out of reach than ever, where basic freedoms have never been
granted, where the participation of the people in the governments that rule them
seem as remote as it was during the days of colonialism.  Tanzania's decay is
evident as soon as one arrives. I drive from the airport to Dar es Salaam in a
sagging, unpainted airport bus whose rear door bangs open in the wind. It is a
Sunday evening, and a gasoline shortage and a ban on Sunday driving have emptied
the streets of cars. Green-leafed banana trees and mud-brown huts with
corrugated roofs line the road, while barefoot children in unwashed shorts
wander down dirt-filled side streets. In the dusk, once-white buildings appear
yellow and brown, stained with dirt and neglect.  Windows are broken, panes of
glass missing. Downtown, along Independence Avenue, near the harbor, storefronts
are bare of goods.  There are, I learn, shortages of all staples - sugar, salt,
butter, rice, soap, light bulbs. Each day a line of people winds around the
block from a bakery, waiting for bread.

I am staying at the Kilimanjaro Hotel, which is said to be the best hotel in Dar
es Salaam. It is nine stories high, with a balcony outside each room, and with a
swimming pool. In this tropical city of two-and three-story buildings, it seems
out of place. The hotel was built by the Israelis in the mid-1960's, and managed
by them until Nyerere broke relations after the 1973 October War. Now it is
managed by a Dutchman. Over the last six years, the Dutch have provided Tanzania
with more than $300 million in aid.

My window overlooks the harbor to the Indian Ocean, where huge Soviet and
Yugoslav ships lie at anchor while tiny wooden dhows of another age sail past
them. Though the temperature and humidity in Dar both approach 100 degrees, the
hotel's air-conditioning barely functions. At night, with my balcony doors open,
the stench of the harbor at low tide floods my room. Some mornings there is no
hot water. A valve has broken, the hotel operator explains, and there are no
spare parts. A few months earlier, I learn, the water came out the taps
mud-brown because the city's water system had run out of aluminum-sulphate
purifier.

In the lobby of the Kilimanjaro I meet one of my former students, whom I will
refer to here as Rashid. I remember him as a small, light-complexioned boy,
younger than the others. Now, though he is still short, his color has darkened
and he has gained weight, giving him the portly appearance of prosperity.

''So, Mr. Levitt. How are you?'' he says to me, standing in the lobby. He is
wearing slacks and an open-neck sport shirt, the dress of the urban Tanzanian.
He smiles. ''How are things?''

This colloquialism reminds me of the fine linguist Rashid was.  Remarkably, at
Mpuguso, he learned to speak English with barely an accent.

''Do you remember the book you gave me, Mr. Levitt, when you left Mpuguso?'' he
says. ''Inside you wrote, 'To Rashid, you have been a pleasure to teach. I am
sure one day you will study in the United States.' Well, Mr. Levitt, I have not
yet been to the United States, but I have studied in Europe.''

We walk upstairs to the hotel lounge and order two Kilimanjaro beers (which,
when available, cost 20 shillings, or $2.50, a bottle) while Rashid begins
telling me about himself. ''As I am sure you know, Mr. Levitt, I passed my exam
for secondary school. After secondary school, I passed Form V and Form VI on my
own and was accepted at the University of Dar es Salaam, where I received a
degree with honors in international marketing. I am now,'' he says proudly,
''the manager of a small, private tourist company. So you see, Mr. Levitt, I am
doing very well.''

A few days later, I visit Rashid at his office. It is in an Indian, or ''Asian''
- as Indians are called - section of the city, and consists of a small room off
the sidewalk. The room is filled with old men in Muslim skull caps and long
white gowns.

Perhaps to explain why his small tourist company is smaller than he indicated,
perhaps because he decided he would rather confide in me than attempt to impress
me, Rashid begins speaking in a rapid voice.  ''You see, Mr. Levitt, with my
degree in international marketing, I became an assistant manager with the
T.T.C.,'' he said, referring to the Government-run Tanzania Tourist Corporation,
which has taken over most segments of Tanzania's once-lucrative tourist
industry. ''I did very well there. I was sent to Sweden for a year's course of
study.  And I received a scholarship to study in France and was studying French
in preparation.''

He pauses. ''Mr. Levitt, my superior was jealous of me. I was better educated
than he, and he resented my success. A year ago, a woman tourist made a
complaint against me, and my superior dismissed me. I was in Sweden at the time
and was recalled. My scholarship to France was canceled. I was out of work for
nine months. I was married to a young girl, and we had two small children. I had
no money and the poor girl was so upset she ran away. I had to send the children
back to my mother near Mpuguso.''

He waits for my reaction, but I can say nothing. I am thinking of what those
nine months must have been like for him - no job, no money, abandoned by his
wife, left with the two small children. It would have been difficult for any
man. For an African accustomed to traditional family roles, one can only imagine
the pain.

''Mr. Levitt, life is not good here in Tanzania,'' he says, now in a whisper.
''There is no longer opportunity here. The Government controls everything, and
now that I no longer work for them they do not care about me anymore. I want to
leave Tanzania. I want to move to Nairobi, to Zambia, even to Botswana, but
without sponsorship they will not let me. When I lost my scholarship, I wrote to
the French Government, but they said without Government sponsorship they could
not give me one. Perhaps you know of some way I could go to the United States.
Perhaps I could get a scholarship. There is nothing here for me anymore.'' There
are two ways to travel overland to Mpuguso. A new tarmac road built by the
Americans runs from Dar southwest to Mbeya, the regional capital of the southern
highlands; from Mbeya, another new tarmac road, built by the Germans, runs south
past Mpuguso, 50 miles away, and continues down to the Malawi border. The
problem with these roads - all of which are foreign built - is that they are not
maintained.  Sections are filled with potholes; bridges are collapsing. Some are
already impassable, so that now it takes more time to travel from, say, Dar to
Arusha in the north than it did 20 years ago.

There is also the Tazara Railway, built by the Chinese, which runs from Dar to
Mbeya, and then southwest into Zambia. Completed in 1976, it, too, has
deteriorated - as I discover when I take it. The cars are dirty; toilets do not
flush. The Tanzanians have not maintained the tracks and trains are out of
service for days and weeks at a time.

I share my compartment with two Asians, a father and son. The father says he is
a retired schoolteacher who owns a duka, or small shop, outside Mbeya. He has
just returned from Canada, where two other sons have emigrated, and he says he
and this son will soon be going there, too. Echoing Rashid he tells me, ''There
is nothing here for us in Tanzania anymore.''

Unlike Uganda, where Idi Amin confiscated their businesses and then expelled
them, Tanzania originally permitted Asians to live in relative calm and
prosperity as its merchant class. Then, in 1977, Nyerere began abolishing the
village dukas, virtually all of which were owned by Asians. Nonracist that he
professes to be, Nyerere claimed the measure was not directed against the Asians
but was, rather, in keeping with the philosophy of ''African Socialism,'' a
first step in nationalizing all business in Tanzania. For the Asians, the effect
was little different from Uganda.

We arrive in Mbeya, about 50 miles from Mpuguso, early the next morning. I
remember it as having been a lovely place set in the mountains, with purple
jacaranda trees and Asian dukas lining its two main streets. In its center was
the British settlers' Mbyea Club, with a bar, squash court and nine-hole golf
course with ''greens'' of black tar, and which only the year before uhuru began
accepting African and Asian members. But now, as the train pulls into Mbeya,
nothing seems familiar. The land is bare and dusty. A haze covers the mountains.
We arrive at a white-brick station on the town's outskirts that had not existed
when I was there. Later, when I walk through the town, I see many of the dukas
have been shuttered. The windows of others are bare of goods.  What does remain
is the Mbeya Club. Its door is unlocked. Its brick walls have holes in them.
Through its cracked rear window, I can look down the hill that had been the
first hole of the golf course and that is now filled with half-completed
mud-brick houses.

The Mbeya Hotel also remains, a relic of the colonial past where visiting
Tanzanian dignitaries from Dar es Salaam are now put up and where, at night, at
the bar, the elite of Mbeya's officials congregate. The hotel is seedy with age.
The windows are broken or missing panes of glass, and its flowers have been
destroyed by a herd of goats that grazes on the front lawn.

I introduce myself to the young African at the front desk, but I am unprepared
for his reply. ''Are you the Mr. Levitt from Mpuguso school?'' he asks. He
introduces himself as Azim A. Mwinyimvua, though he prefers to be called Bwana
Simba, or, in English, Mr.  Lion. Bwana Simba remembers me, he says, because as
a schoolboy he visited Mpuguso for a track meet and attended the Friday night
debates when I was debate master. We had debated topics of the students'
choosing, such as ''Resolved: It Is Better to Marry an Educated Girl Than an
Uneducated Girl,'' or ''Resolved: It Is Better to Have One Wife Than Many
Wives.''

Bwana Simba, it turns out, is the manager of the Mbeya Hotel. He apologizes for
the state into which it has fallen, explaining that although he studied hotel
management in Nairobi and in Italy, there is no money and no trained staff to
maintain its former standards. He does his best for me, however. He places me in
the hotel's deluxe suite, which consists of a bedroom, sitting room and bathroom
with a light bulb, and a chandalua, or mosquito net, with a hole the size of my
fist. In the corners of the room, a stream of red ants eats away at the unbaked
brick walls, which, in a few more years, I fear, will no longer exist. At
meals,I am offered the finest carvings of goat meat, which come from the herd on
the front lawn. Bwana Simba assigns special staff members to clean my room and
serve my meals.

Yet sometimes at meals there is no meat, no bread, no milk, no sugar. Sometimes
in the bar there is no beer, and Bwana Simba is forever using his ingenuity to
procure these items. Each Saturday night he acts as a host at a disco and
charges 30 shillings a head, then uses the money to purchase such items as
curtains. Other money goes for soap or light bulbs, or for such minor luxuries
as Coca-Cola or Fanta orange soda, which are smuggled in over the Zambian border
or purchased, with a bribe, from the Government-run corporations that supply
them. What he cannot purchase are new panes of glass; the materials no longer
exist in Tanzania.

While I am at the hotel, Bwana Simba tells me he has received Government
permission to attend a two-week course in hotel management in England. He awaits
only the final call to proceed to Dar es Salaam. But the call never comes. When
I leave the hotel and return to Dar es Salaam, he is still waiting.  There is a
group of Swedes living at the hotel. They are part of a Scandinavian aid program
that from 1976 to 1980 provided Tanzania with more than $600 million. In Mbeya,
the Swedes have built three factories to produce sweaters, wooden clogs and
plastic toys. It is as ridiculous a project as can be imagined, for the raw
materials are purchased abroad and the finished products are too costly to sell
effectively on the export market. As for the Tanzanians themselves, they have
little need for sweaters, clogs or plastic toys.

The factories have been operating since mid-1981, but because of the lack of
water, electricity, diesel fuel and generator maintenance and breaking of the
cooling pipes, they are operating at one-third capacity.

''Recently a Swedish aid official visited Mbeya,'' says Thomas Gotting, the
Swedish manager of the sweater factory. ''But he visited our factory for only
five minutes, then gave a lunch at the Mbeya Hotel for the Africans where they
all made speeches praising each other. You see, the Swedish Government gives 1
percent of its gross national product away in foreign aid. And the bureaucrats
care only about giving it away, not if it does any good. The man who came here
made no attempt to find anything of the kind.''

''In Sweden, people don't understand how much time it takes to learn,'' adds
Anders Otterstram, the Swedish technical adviser to the plastic toy factory.
''In Sweden it took us generations, with many mistakes. When I was home last
year, I tried to explain this to people, but they do not listen. When I tell
them things are not working in Tanzania, they call me -what is the English word?
-they call me a racist.''

There is also a Peace Corps worker in Mbeya. The Peace Corps was dismissed in
the late 1960's by Nyerere, ostensibly in protest against the United States'
involvement in Vietnam. Meanwhile, in the villages, the Government spread rumors
that Peace Corps workers were spies. Ten years later, in the late 1970's,
Nyerere was feted at the White House by President Carter. Subsequently, he
proposed that the Peace Corps return.

In keeping with its new image of pragmatism and practicality, as opposed to my
generation's unskilled idealism, the Peace Corps worker in Mbeya is a forestry
specialist. Her job is to plant trees, as the Tanzanians have denuded their
hillsides by cutting down too many for firewood. The problem, she explains, is
that the Tanzanians insist on planting European pine and cypress, which mature
faster than the indigenous eucalyptus. But the pine and cypress do not retain
the soil's moisture as well as eucalyptus does. Thus the topography is changing
and the land is becoming dusty and bare.  In Mbeya I find one of my students,
whom I will refer to as Henry, and who is now a teacher. Like Rashid, he was one
of my brightest and most hard-working pupils. He was gifted in all subjects, but
was especially interested in English and history.

He has grown a beard but I recognize him immediately. And he recognizes me.
''Levitt! Is it really you?'' he shouts as I arrive at his school. He tells me
he is not teaching English or history, as I'd imagined, but science. ''At
secondary school my headmaster encouraged me to pursue a degree in
agriculture,'' he explains. ''I received a scholarship to study abroad - a
six-year course in the Soviet Union.''

He was there three years, he tells me, but returned home. ''I became sick there,
Mr. Levitt. I could not work. I could not concentrate on my studies. I was
laughing, and crying. I do not know why. I was sent back to my village and
remained there an entire year. When I became better, I took this job.''

He tells me he does not enjoy teaching science and has applied to the university
in Tanzania to complete his degree in agriculture, so that he can go abroad
again. ''I want to travel. I want to go to the West, to Europe, to America.
Then, after some years, I will return to Tanzania.'' But without his degree, he
says, he will be unable to leave Tanzania. ''Mr. Levitt, if I am not accepted at
the university, I do not know what I will do.''

He also tells me he married last year. His wife is a teacher and she is three
months pregnant. But he is not pleased about becoming a father as most Africans
would be. He is afraid. ''When my wife has the baby and stops working, it will
be very hard for us. It is very expensive here in Mbeya. I do not know how we
will live.''

Listening to him, my former student who is now a man, who has traveled abroad
and suffered a breakdown, who is married and is soon to become a father, I find
myself thinking back 18 years to when he was a young boy in a white Mpuguso
school uniform. Hard as he had worked, hard as he had studied, in retrospect his
life seemed simple then. He had had a goal. He had succeeded. He had passed his
exam, graduated from secondary school and gone on to study abroad. Yet something
had gone wrong. He had achieved his goal, but his success had created other,
unforeseen problems.

No longer was he content to be a teacher, to have a wife and children, as he
might have a generation before. Now he wanted something else - to travel to the
West -something, I feared, that now lay beyond his grasp. I imagine him waiting,
like Bwana Simba, for a call from Dar es Salaam, a call that, like Bwana
Simba's, may never come.

Afterward, I invite Henry and his wife to the Mbeya Hotel for tea or Cokes. It
is a treat for them, he tells me, as they can afford such luxuries only once a
month. His wife, a lovely young woman of 23, wears her best clothes - perhaps
her only dress clothes -a dungaree skirt and white blouse. Though she
understands English, she is too shy to speak it. As they prepare to leave, he
says to me, ''Mr. Levitt, I beg you not to write about me. I am ashamed of my
life. I do not want people knowing about me.'' I tell him I will change his
name. I am to travel to Mpuguso the next day, so we agree to have lunch together
when I return to discuss it further. But he never appears. I never see him
again.

Mpuguso has also changed. It is no longer an upper primary school; instead,
refresher courses for school teachers are now given there.  One of Tanzania's
proudest boasts is that it has provided free primary education for all
school-age children. In each village I pass on the way to Mpuguso, a primary
school stands by the side of the road. But while school children roam outside,
most of the classrooms are empty.

At Mpuguso, I walk along dirt paths I remember, past rows of brick houses where
we teachers lived, past my own brick house, where two African women sit in the
doorway. A new row of classrooms has been built alongside our old ones, but when
I look into the windows, they, too, are empty. Where are the students who worked
until midnight by the light of a kerosene lamp? Where are the students who
walked 10 to 15 miles to school each day? I remain in Mpuguso less than an hour,
struggling to recapture something that, for me, is lost forever.  Before I
return to Dar es Salaam, Bwana Simba takes me to a political rally. The rally is
to be held in the stadium across from the hotel. It is organized by Nyrere's
Revolutionary Party and is to celebrate the women of the region. And all that
morning, the road into Mbeya is filled with dilapidated buses and open-backed
trucks carrying loads of women from the outlying villages.

The rally's organizers have arranged a series of races for the women - 100-yard
dashes, quarter- and half-mile runs and relays - and, as the women run, their
kangas (colorful cotton material wrapped as a skirt or a dress) flap wildly
around their legs. The crowd laughs and shouts in delight. Each winner is then
brought to the podium and awarded a prize - a bar of soap, which, like so many
items, is unobtainable in the stores.

When the races end, the speeches begin. The crowd has heard them all before and
quickly grows restless. The women begin moving toward the stadium's two large
gates, which have been locked to prevent their premature departure. Watching it
all, my eyes travel upward to the green billboards emblazoned with Swahill
slogans, political jargon of a long-forgotten age. ''Kazi Ndiyo Msingi Wa
Maendeleo'' - ''Work Is the Foundation of Progress. ''Nchi Maskini Haiwezi
Kuendelea Kwa Nsingi Wa Fedha'' - ''A Poor Country Will Not Progress If It
Depends On Aid.'' ''Nchi Maskini Haiwezi Kugitawala Kama Inategemea Misada Toka
Nje'' - ''A Poor Country Cannot Rule Itself If It Relies on Foreign Help.''

Reading these slogans, rendered absurd by the direction Tanzania has taken, I
imagine a more apt one: ''Njia Ya Jahanum Inatengenezwa Kwa Nia Njema'' - ''The
Road to Hell Is Paved With Good Intentions.''

The reasons why Tanzania has become a mockery of its own slogans are, of course,
complex. Some - such as the rising price of oil and turbulence in the world
economy -were clearly beyond the small nation's control. Tanzania had always
been a poor country, with few natural resources. Nyerere's well-meaning but
authoritarian attempts to redistribute among the country's 18 million people
what little wealth there was only led to a decline in production, to endemic
corruption and, finally, to the withdrawal of thousands of citizens from the
official economy and their returne to the subsistence farming of their
ancestors. Finally, Nyerere's Government has become as oppressive and out of
touch with its own people as the colonial sytem he sought to replace.  Back in
Dar es Salaam I meet with my student George. He is a communications officer for
the meteorological department at the airport, an imposing-sounding title. He'd
been an excellent student, with a gift for mathematics. He was older than most
of the boys and he had a steadiness and maturity beyond that. He'd wanted to
become an engineer. I expected much from him.

''Mr. Levitt,'' he begins, ''you will be very disasppointed in me when I tell
you about my life.'' He tells me that he passed his exam at Mpuguso and was
accepted at Tusamaganga secondary school, one of the best-known in the country.
But in 1967, his second year, he contracted a severe case of malaria. ''I was in
Iringa Hospital five months,'' he says. ''When I came out, I found I could not
concentrate on my studies. And I especially could not concentrate on
mathematics. I failed my exams. Mr. Levitt, you will not believe this, but I
failed mathematics.''

So George dropped engineering and instead joined the meteorological department.
''But I am only a communications officer.  Not a meteorological officer. I
simply push papers. When I try to concentrate, to use my brain, I cannot.'' I
meet a Canadian psychologist, Dr. Morris Block, at Dar es Salaam's Muhimbili
Hospital. When I mention George to him, he offers to see him. Afterward, Dr.
Bloch tells me George's symptoms suggest a mental disorder peculiar to educated
Africans that has been reported in psychiatric journals He and Dr. William
Lucieer, a Dutch psychiatrist at Muhimbili, explain there is no organic reason
why one should be unable to concentrate as a result of malaria. Rather, Block
and Lucieer say, for reasons doctors cannot explain, a surprisingly large number
of educated Africans suddenly become depressed, unable to sleep or concentrate.
The disorder, they say, usually occurs after emotional shocks or disappointments
- in George's case, probably set off by the malaria.  Of all my former students,
the most successful turns out to be Oscar Mwamwaja, who has become a pilot for
Air Tanzania. It is a prestigious job, for there are few qualified African
pilots. Of the 40-odd pilots at Air Tanzania, half are foreigners.

We meet on a Saturday evening in the lounge of Dar es Salaam's Kilimanjaro
Hotel. Little Oscar - who was smaller than the other boys - is now tall and
thin, a few inches taller than I. He is wearing his navy-blue Air Tanzania
uniform and he walks with jaunty confidence, in the manner of pilots everywhere.

''I was in the States, you know,'' he says. ''I trained for two years in Texas.
I've also been to Europe and to India, where I trained to fly the 737's.''
Watching him so poised, listening to him speak so casually of being a pilot, it
is difficult to remember Oscar had once been a ''day boy'' at Mpuguso school,
living in a mud hut outside Tukuyu, walking six miles each day to and from
school.

''Life is not good here in Tanzania now, Mr. Levitt,'' he says, leaning toward
me and lowering his voice. ''Our salaries have been cut. The best pilots are
leaving the country.''

As he speaks, a young African plunks himself down at our table and sits staring
off into space. Gradually, he joins our conversation.  When he leaves, Oscar
looks at me. ''Do you know him?'' he asks. I shake my head. ''A stranger sits
down at our table,'' he says. ''Who is he? Maybe he is a spy. You know, Mr.
Levitt, there are spies at all the hotels. They are there to spy on foreigners,
like yourself.''

Although I was not to see Oscar again, I was to hear of him. Last February,
after I'd left Tanzania, an Air Tanzania 737 on a domestic flight was hijacked
by three men and forced to fly to London. There, the hijackers surrendered,
released their passengers and read a proclamation demanding the resignation of
President Nyerere.

A few weeks later, I received a letter from Rashid in Dar es Salaam. ''You will
get a shock to learn that the Air Tanzania plane which was hijacked to London
was being manned by Oscar Mwamaja as copilot,'' he wrote.

Then last month, I received a letter from Oscar himself. He was in Nigeria.
''This surely will be a surprise for you,'' he began, ''especially to hear from
me being in Nigeria. ... Maybe you know I was involved in the hijacking which
happened in Tanzania in February. That was a terrible experience.'' He went on
to say he had been shot in the back, but no major organs had been touched and in
London the bullet had been removed. He said he had resigned from Air Tanzania
and left the country ''for my peace of mind.''

He told me he was now working as a flying instructor in Nigeria, and that he
hoped to go to the United States. He asked me to write him a recommendation to a
university in California. He gave no indication that he had any intention of
ever returning to Tanzania.  Even Oscar, the most successful of the young
Africans I had known, no longer saw a future for himself in Tanzania. ''At the
moment, I don't miss home much,'' he wrote. ''I have a lot to do here and life
isn't that difficult.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a Tanzanian family

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A HARD LINE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 31, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 252 words


English caricature, as practiced by two of its masters, James Gillray and Thomas
Rowlandson, was known for its grotesquerie. These social satirists mercilessly
lacerated kings, generals, clerics and aristocrats through savage graphic
exaggerations and distortions. Virtually all cartoonists who came after were
sweet by comparison. In the 1960's, when Gerald Scarfe began publishing
caricatures of wellknown personalities in the leading British satiri-cal weekly,
Private Eye, the tradition was continued. GERALD SCARFE (Thames and Hudson,
paper, $12.95) is a collection of sardonic and horrific cartoons culled from his
20-year career.

Drawings of his favorite targets, fallen leaders all - Helmut Schmidt (left),
Richard Nixon (right), Idi Amin and Ian Smith - are included, as are drawings
done while he was a reporter for The London Sunday Times. (Mr. Scarfe covered
Senator Barry M. Goldwater's campaign for President, spent time on the
battlefield and in the hospitals of Vietnam and reported on the 1967 Six-Day War
in Israel.) The book also has color photographs of mammoth three-dimensional
caricatures, such as his Gulliver, made for the 1970 Osaka Expo in Japan, and a
leather ''Chairman Mao'' chair. There are sketches for animation segments in the
recent film ''The Wall'' and an autobiographical essay about Mr. Scarfe's
experiences as an illustrator and an animator. - S.H.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT BOOKS AND AUTHORS

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 684 words


ARMCHAIR TRAVELER Mark Twain summed up one school of literary thought when he
said, "War talk by men who have been in a war is always interesting; whereas
moon talk by a poet who has not been in the moon is likely to be dull." But
perhaps the predominant view was expressed by John Updike, who in a recent
interview in the New York Times said, "Ideally, it seems to me a writer sitting
in New England should be able to write a perfectly persuasive novel about slum
life in Mexico City." Anthony Grey would no doubt second Mr. Updike's position,
for he wrote his new 789-page novel, "Saigon," without ever visiting Vietnam.

"It isn't as if I haven't wanted to gothere; I've tried, but I've been told
there's just no prospect of getting in," said Mr. Grey, a former Reuters
correspondent who was arrested in Peking by the Red Guards during the Cultural
Revolution. Although never officially charged with a crime, he was imprisoned
for 806 days, including a year in solitary confinement, before being released
late in 1969. His "Hostage in Peking" was published in 1972, after which he
wrote several novels.

For the new novel, "I worked at the British Museum and then went to Paris to get
to know the large Vietnamese community there," he said in a telephone
conversation from London. "I succeeded in getting to know several families very
well and attended many of their ceremonies and visited their pagodas. I spent
time at the archives of the French Ministry of Colonies, because the book deals
with the 1920's and 30's, and I felt this was one of the great historical keys
to the whole Vietnam story. I also spent time at Versailles newspaper library,
where you can read the stories published by colonizers in Saigon and Hanoi."

After six months in Paris Mr. Grey moved to Washington for two years and settled
in at the Library of Congress. "Much of the novel was written in the library,"
he said. "They have an enormous number of books on Indochina, including many in
French. I also looked at thousands of documents and at every foot of news film
at the National Archives. It's amazing how many books there are about Indochina,
even 18th-centry travelogues filled with details."
TIME CAPSULE:2013 The Sylvia Plath Collection - some 4,000 pages of the poet's
manuscripts, including more than 200 poems in successive drafts and 850 pages of
unpublished journals - recently opened at Smith College in Northampton, Mass.
The colelction also includes about 150 books from the personal library of Miss
Plath, who graduated from Smith in 1954 and spent a year as an instructor in the
English Department.  Housed in the library's rare book room, which already
contains Plath first editions and some unpublished poems and letters given by
alumnae, the collection is available to scholars. In certain cases, however,
readers will have to make do with expurgated typescripts; portions of the
journals that comment on people still living have been sealed until the year
2013. The collection, parts of which will be on exhibit at the college library
through this month, was acquired form the estate of Miss Plath, which was in
possession of her husband and literary executor, Ted Hughes.
TITULAR OBSESSION Many writers pride themselves on the titles they give to their
books; that was certainly true of Ernest Hemingway, even though he claimed to
have some 30 other titles in mind in case his editor, Maxwell Perkins, did not
share his enthusiasm for "For Whom the Bell Tolls." Wright Morris, the prolific
author of books bearing such titles as "Plains Song," "A Life" and "Will's Boy,"
said that titles have always been important to him. "When I was living near
Philadelphia," he said during a recent interview, "Loren Eiseley and I would
spend hours trying to get the right titles for our next books. It even got to be
such an obsession that once I got him on the phone at 2 in the morning and said,
'Listen to this one.'" After Mr. Morris told him his idea, there was a pause for
several seconds. Then Mr. Eiseley finally replied, "It sounds good, but how
about if I let you know after I wake up?'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 863 words


MRS. HARRIS: The Death of the Scarsdale Diet Doctor. By Diana Trilling.
(Penguin, $3.95.) For Diana Trilling, the Jean Harris case seemed the stuff of
art, but our reviewer, Elinor Langer, thought the book succeeded as reportage. A
best seller in hard-cover, ''Mrs.  Harris'' now appears in paperback under two
separate covers that express a slightly different dichotomy: The sedate,
all-type version in purple, peach and white is designed, the publisher says, for
''those who recognize Mrs. Trilling's work as an enduring social document of our
time,'' while the version that features photographs of the leading characters on
a silvery background is for ''those drawn to the sensational aspects of this
tale of love and revenge.''

IN THE HEART OF THE COUNTRY. By J.M. Coetzee. (Penguin, $4.95.) Now that
''Waiting for the Barbarians'' by the South African writer J.M.  Coetzee has won
critical acclaim, Penguin has released an earlier (1977) novel in paperback.
Cast as the diary of a young woman living on an isolated farm, it records her
loneliness, anger and eventual madness. In a review of Mr. Coetzee's work,
Irving Howe characterized this novel as ''a study of social and sexual
entanglements between whites and blacks that showed patches of high talent but
finally broke down under the weight of overwrought Faulknerian prose.''

NOTES FROM THE CENTURY BEFORE: A Journal from British Columbia. By Edward
Hoagland. (North Point Press, $10.) Edward Hoagland spent ''an exuberant,
staccato summer'' in Canada's still largely undeveloped province of British
Columbia in 1966, talking with ''the doers themselves, the men ... who give the
mountains their names and who pick the passes that become the freeways.''
Through his diary entries he takes the reader along as he gets to know the
old-timers and their wild land. Originally published in 1969, his journal
vividly memorializes a vanishing way of life.

SOCIAL STUDIES. By Fran Lebowitz. (Pocket Books, $3.25.) The author of
''Metropolitan Life'' is in fine form in her second best seller.  Nothing is
sacred in this compendium of acid remarks and observations about the strange
ways of our species, and quite a few things are funny.

THE MIND'S I: Fantasies and Reflections on Self and Soul. Edited by Douglas R.
Hofstadter and Daniel C. Dennett. (Bantam/New Age, $8.95.) Readers who liked
giving their wits a workout with Douglas Hofstadter's Pulitzer Prize-winning
''Godel, Escher, Bach'' will also enjoy the explorations of consciousness
''composed and arranged'' here. Mr. Hofstadter and Mr. Dennett have included
works of fiction as well as essays and running commentary in a collection they
say is ''designed to provoke, disturb, and be-fuddle its readers, to make the
obvious strange and, perhaps, to make the strange obvious.''

ARTHUR'S HONEY BEAR. Written and illustrated by Lillian Hoban.  (Harper & Row,
$2.95.) When Arthur the chimp holds a tag sale at which his little sister,
Violet, buys his teddy bear, he's desolate for a while; but by the end of this
''I Can Read Book'' for young children - which George Woods termed ''vintage
Hoban'' in his review - Arthur's ''woebegone, just-before-tears look'' brightens
because he's created a new relationship with his toy.

A CENTENARY REMEMBRANCE: FDR 1882-1945. By Joseph Alsop. (Pocket
Books/Washington Square, $3.50.) As a journalist and a distant relative of
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Joseph Alsop had ample opportunity to observe his
subject in both personal and political spheres of action. These recollections
and reflections, liberally laced with anecdotes and photographs, make lively
reading.

AMERICAN WOMEN ARTISTS: From Early Indian Times to the Present. By Charlotte
Streifer Rubinstein. (Avon, $12.95.) Zipping along on her roller skates, this
New York slum child sculpted in bronze in 1906 is the work of Mary Abastenia St.
Leger Eberle, a member of the Ashcan School and one of hundreds of artists
examined in this fact-filled paperback original. The survey, generously
illustrated in color and black and white, covers painting and sculpture era by
era and devotes separate sections to art by American Indians and folk art.

THE BARKING DEER. By Jonathan Rubin. (Avon, $3.25.) In Jonathan Rubin's powerful
1974 novel, a 12-man team from the United States Special Forces in Vietnam
battles the Vietcong for control of a mountain village. Mr. Rubin, who served in
Vietnam as a Special Forces sergeant in the early 60's, vividly and pointedly
evokes the war as soldiers and villagers saw and felt it.

THE MAN FROM THE SEA. By Michael Innes. (Harper & Row/Perennial Library, $2.95.)
Neither Inspector Appleby nor the high-toned high jinks so common in Michael
Innes mysteries figure in this suspenseful story about a turncoat atomic
scientist. Praising the book in his 1955 review, Anthony Boucher said it was
''firmly constructed both as a thriller and as a psychological novel.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CATHOLIC BISHOPS ARE TO OPEN NUCLEAR ARMS DEBATE TODAY

BYLINE: KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1433 words


The Roman Catholic bishops of the United States have achieved a consensus on the
need to speak out against many aspects of the arms race but will debate some
unresolved questions, principally nuclear deterrence, starting today at their
annual meeting in Washington.

Their overall antinuclear stand, which is reflected in a proposed pastoral
letter to be taken up in the debate, already places the bishops at odds both
with some Government officials and some of their fellow Catholics.

The scheduled debate has also shaped up as a dramatic test of the degree to
which the church's attitudes toward military strategy have undergone significant
change in the last 15 years.

Most bishops, putting aside differences in theology and policy, appear to agree
on the essence of the letter, since many of their comments were considered as it
was being drafted. However, most are not stating their positions publicly now,
preferring to wait for the discussions and to avoid aligning themselves with
either side as they go into the debate.

The question of deterrence is most likely to provoke spirited debate. As defined
by the draft of the pastoral letter, deterrence is ''morally acceptable'' only
if used as a means to negotiate disarmament. Some bishops believe that even
partial allowance for nuclear weapons contradicts the statement's basic
condemnation of nuclear war. Other bishops would prefer a clearer justification
for a nuclear arsenal.

Among other things, the draft condemns nuclear war, rejects a strategy of first
use of nuclear weapons and calls for a two-way freeze in nuclear arsenals.

On these and other points, the committee's proposal differs from policies
advocated by the Reagan Administration, and it has drawn fire from some
Catholics who fear that it would endorse a position that would illegitimately
weaken the nation's ability to defend itself.

But in advance of their meeting, many influential bishops said they thought the
statement had strong support and that few, if any, major changes would be made
in the text.

''My sense is that there is broad support for the pastoral,'' said Archbishop
Joseph L. Bernardin, who headed the committee that drafted the letter and made
it public Oct. 26. ''I'm sure there are some bishops who would have taken a more
pacifist stance. And there are a few who feel it goes too far. But I would be
very surprised if there is a great deal of unhappiness.''

However, the bishops range from total pacifists to those who would draw the line
at all nuclear weapons and, in a more traditional vein, those who hold with the
conventional theory that allows for justified war under certain strict
conditions.

The section on deterrence echoes the stance of previous church documents. The
committee used the term ''morally acceptable,'' found in the message of Pope
John Paul II to the United Nations last summer, in an effort to find common
ground.

But some bishops, including Leroy Matthiesen of Amarillo, Tex., a leading peace
activist, argue that nuclear deterrence cannot be justified because it is an
evil means used to accomplish a moral end. Those who hold this view are expected
to push for an amendment to the letter that would go one step further and
condemn even the possession of such weapons.

''The Catholic left is upset because the bishops have not gone further,'' said
Thomas Fox, editor of The National Catholic Reporter, an independent journal.
''To this point they have condemned stockpiling, use and threatened use of such
weapons. All that remains is to condemn possession.''

On the other hand, Catholic conservatives oppose the statement's strong note of
restraint as going beyond the Pope's intentions.

'Paradox of Deter- rence'

''It doesn't deal adequately with the paradox of deterrence,'' said James Finn,
a Catholic writer who analyzes such issues for Freedom House, an organization
that monitors human rights.

''The deterrent quality of our nuclear weapons depends on having them and
deploying them and having the will to use them,'' Mr. Finn added. ''The
statement of the bishops seems to sever that political will. We would have the
weapons but we'd take almost a declared position of not using them. It's the
threat that deters others from using them.''

Another point of discussion over the draft statement is whether it is
sufficiently practical and political.  ''The recommendations are too fluffy,''
said David O'Brien, a professor of church history at Holy Cross College. ''What
we should say to Catholics is that the only way to become directed to moral ends
is to get involved in politics. We're opening ourselves into political politics
without being, in a sense, political enough.''

After debating the proposed letter, the bishops will return it to the committee
that drafted it to complete by next spring. It will then be distributed to
Catholics nationwide as guidance on the nuclear issue.

In taking an antinuclear stand, the bishops ''want to be seen and heard as
witnesses for peace,'' said the Rev. J. Bryan Hehir, head of the international
justice and peace office for the United States Catholic Conference. ''They want
to be seen as clearly condemning the direction of the arms race and to support
the statement of their president that we must say 'no' to nuclear warfare.'' He
was referring to Archbishop John R. Roach of Minneapolis.

At the same time, Father Hehir said, the bishops ''are not at the same place''
with regard to the ''complicated matter of deterrence.''

Increased Social Involvement

The activist approach to war and peace by the 285 active members of the National
Conference of Catholic Bishops fits a more general heightening of social
involvement. Among other things, the bishops have fought abortion, criticized
American policy in Central America and advocated aid for the poor.

''Bishops have to be involved in issues of public order,'' said Bishop Thomas
Gumbleton of Detroit, a leader of Pax Christi, a Catholic peace movement that
includes 55 bishops. ''We can't dodge that responsibility as we sometimes did in
the past.''

Since the Second Vatican Council called for a new look at the issue of war and
peace, bishops in this country have expressed growing concern over the dangers
posed by nuclear weapons and have closely followed papal pleas for activism on
behalf of peace.

The surge toward agreement on many elements of an antinuclear stance can be
traced to several landmark events. A major pastoral letter, ''Human Life in Our
Day,'' in 1968, addressed many areas of war and peace. By 1971, the bishops
decided that the Vietnam War was not defensible by the standards of the just-war
theory, and they upheld the right of conscientious objection.

''I think the turning point was the bishops' attitude toward Vietnam,'' said
Archbishop Rembert Weakland of Milwaukee. ''It came late, but it caused the
bishops to look more carefully at the U.S.  position in the world.''

The fight against liberalized abortion, conducted on the basis that all life is
sacred, carried over into the hierarchy's attitudes toward the detructiveness of
war.

Past Letters on Military Policy

In another pastoral letter in 1976, the bishops declared that both the use of
nuclear weapons and the declared intent to use those weapons against civilian
targets was wrong. In 1978, the bishops backed the proposed treaty on limitation
of strategic arms and, in a dramatic turning point, John Cardinal Krol of
Philadelphia delivered their decision in a strong antinuclear statement before
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

The entrance of Cardinal Krol, a respected conservative, into the antinuclear
issue is considered extremely important. His word carried weight not only in
affirming the bishops' stand but by rallying much conservative support to
further examination of the issues of war and peace. The cardinal's antinuclear
position has been strongly expressed on several occasions since last year's
bishops' meeting.

Meanwhile, papal statements have increasingly emphasized the need for bilateral
accords on disarmament and an end to the arms race.  By 1980, the climate among
the bishops strongly suggested that they were prepared to deal more extensively
with the issue in the form of a pastoral letter. At their annual meeting that
year, four bishops rose to address their concerns about the growing nuclear
threat. As they finished, ripples of applause began quietly, then became louder
and sustained.

By the summer of 1981, the committee had been formed, made up of bishops of
differing positions, and they began formulating their consensus.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Archbishop Rembert Weakland (page B6) photo of
Archbishop Joseph Bernardin (page B6)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 15, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LEADERS OF DELEGATIONS TO BREZHNEV'S FUNERAL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Nov. 14


Following are the leaders of national and other delegations arriving in Moscow
for the funeral of Leonid I.  Brezhnev on Monday:

National Delegation Leaders
Afghanistan - President Babrak Karmal, party secretary Austria - President
Rudolf Kirchschlager Bangladesh - Rear Adm. M.H. Ali Khan Belgium - Prime
Minister Wilfried Martens Botswana - Akuna Mpuchane, Ambassador to Britain
Britain - Foreign Secretary Francis Pym Bulgaria - President Todor Zhivkov, the
party secretary Cambodia - President Heng Samrin, the party secretary Cameroon -
Agriculture Minister Samuel Ebua Canada - Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau
China - Foreign Minister Huang Hua Colombia - Hector Cherry, representative at
the United Nations in Europe
Cuba - President Fidel Castro, the party secretary Cyprus - President Spyros
Kyprianou Czechoslovakia - President Gustaf Husak, the party secretary Denmark -
Prince Henrik East Germany - President Erich Honecker, the party secretary Egypt
- Mamdouh Salem, the presidential secretary Ethiopia - Chairman Mengistu Haile
Mariam Finland - President Mauno Koivisto France - Prime Minister Pierre Mauroy
Greece - Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou Hungary - Janos Kadar, the party
secretary India - Prime Minister Indira Gandhi Indonesia - Vice President Adam
Malik Italy - Amintore Fanfani, President of the Senate Japan - Prime Minister
Zenko Suzuki Jordan - Prime Minister Mudar Badran Kenya - Foreign Minister
Robert Ouko
Laos - Prince Souphanouvong Lesotho - Deputy Prime Minister Evarist Sekhonyana
Libya - Abdul Salam Jalloud.  Malta - President Agatha Barbara Mongolia -
President Yumzhagiin Tsedenbal, the party secretary Mozambique - President
Samora M. Machel Netherlands - Deputy Prime Minister Gijs Van Aardenne Nicaragua
- Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the junta leader Nigeria - Vice President Alex Ekwueme
North Korea - Vice President Pak Sung Chul Norway - Prime Minister Kare Willoch
Pakistan - President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq Philippines - Imelda Marcos, wife of
the President Poland - Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, the Prime Minister and party
secretary Portugal - Foreign minister Vasco Futscher Pereira Rumania - President
Nikolae Ceausescu, the party secretary
Southern Yemen - President Ali Nasser Mohammed al-Hassani Spain - Foreign
Minister Jose Pedro Perez Llorca Sweden - Prime Minister Olof Palme Syria -
President Hafez al-Assad Tunisia - Justice Minister Mohammed Chaker Turkey -
Prime Minister Bulent Ulusu Uganda - Vice President Paulo Muwanga.  United
States - Vice President Bush Venezuela - Foreign Minister Jose Alberto Zambrano
Vietnam - President Truong Chinh West Germany - President Karl Carstens
Yugoslavia - President Petar Stambolic Zimbabwe - President Canaan Banana

Other Delegation Leaders
Chile - Luis Corvalan, party leader France - Georges Marchais, party leader
Italy - Enrico Berlinguer, party leader Palestine Liberation Organization -
Yasir Arafat, chairman Portugal - Alvaro Cunhal, party leader United Nations -
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar United States - Gus Hall, party leader
Uruguay - Rodney Arismendi, party leader Vatican - Prof. Giovanni Battista
Marini Bettolo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 16, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Area Reported Devastated by Typhoon

ROME, Nov. 15 (AP) - Cardinal Trinh Van Can of Vietnam, the Roman Catholic
Archbishop of Hanoi, was quoted today as saying that nearly 200,000 people had
lost their homes after a typhoon devastated the province of Nghe Tinh last
month. The province is north of the old DMZ.

In an appeal for international help for the victims broadcast by the Vatican
radio, the cardinal said the typhoon had also killed an unspecified number of
people and destroyed 200,000 tons of rice.

The cardinal arrived here last week to attend the annual meeting of Roman
Catholic cardinals beginning Friday.

----

PARIS, Nov. 15 (Reuters) - Vietnamese troops are preparing a major attack
against military forces fighting Cambodia's Hanoi-backed Government, a guerrilla
leader said today. Son Sann, one of the heads of a recently formed group of
guerrilla organizations in Cambodia, said he would go to Peking this week to
seek arms from China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 318 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          November 17, 1982 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

'ASHES AND EMBERS'

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Cultural Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 316 words


HAILE GERIMA, the Ethiopian born film maker whose ''Bush Mama'' was included in
the New Directors/New Films series several years ago, has now made ''Ashes and
Embers'' in a similar style. ''Ashes and Embers,'' which opens today at the Film
Forum, explores the experience of a black Vietnam veteran trying to come to
terms with American life.

It's a rambling, almost dreamlike film that drifts between Washington, where Ned
Charles, its protagonist, (played by John Anderson) wanders past ghetto streets
and war memorials; Los Angeles, where he hopes to find his future, and instead
winds up in police custody; and the rural setting of his grandmother's
farmhouse. His grandmother is one of the main forces in the film, talking with
Ned about his troubles, his culture and his history. Another key influence is
his politically active girlfriend, often seen engaged in group discussions that
are among the film's most interesting sequences.

There is a lot of talk in ''Ashes and Embers,'' and it is better focused at some
times than at others. Some of this is attributable to poor sound recording, and
some is a result of Mr. Gerima's impassioned but sprawling style. The film's
concerns emerge as heartfelt even when they aren't clearly expressed. On those
occasions when clarity prevails the style becomes emphatic and tough, but at
other times it tends to preach and to wander. But the rarity of new films about
blacks in America is reason enough to overlook some of the haziness of this one.


Readjustment Woes

ASHES AND EMBERS, written, produced and di- rected by Haile Gerima; distributed
by Mypheduh Films Inc. At the Film Forum, 57 Watts Street. Running time: 120
minutes. This film is not rated.

Ned Charles . . . . . John Anderson
Grandma . . . . . Evelyn A. Blackwell
Jim . . . . . Norman Blalock
Liza Jane . . . . . Kathy Flewellen
Kimathi . . . . . Uwezo Flewellen
Randolph . . . . . Barry Wiggins

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 17, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OUR TROOPS IN LEBANON

BYLINE: By Thomas F. Eagleton

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President Reagan's deployment of United States Marines in Lebanon should have
rekindled debate about the line between Congress's constitutional power to
declare war and the power of the President as Commander in Chief, and on the
scope of the War Powers Act of 1973.

Having been intimately involved in drafting the War Powers Act, I believe that
the President is violating the spirit if not the letter of that law. Equally
important, his decision not to comply with certain crucial provisions of the act
illustrates the weakness of the act itself.

Most Americans believe that the act reasserted Congress's authority to declare
war - a historic reaction to the danger of Presidential war-making that was
dramatically demonstrated by America's involvement in Vietnam without a
Congressional declaration of war.

The war powers measure did originate in that spirit. Legislation approved by the
Senate would have reaffirmed Congress's constitutional responsibility to declare
war; under that legislation, the President could have committed troops to likely
combat situations without prior Congressional approval only in carefully
specified, emergency situations. However, subsequent compromises with the House
over a different bill it approved resulted in Congressional surrender and
actually turned the Constitution on its head. For the first time, Congress gave
the President carte blanche to wage war or move troops into situations where
hostilities were imminent for up to 90 days without Congressional approval.

The Lebanon situation shows that even the 90-day deadline - to its defenders,
the redeeming feature of the act - can be an illusion. The difficulty is that
while the legislation does require the President to report to Congress in every
case where troops are introduced into a foreign country while equipped for
combat, the 90-day limit on the President's unilateral decision applies only
when troops have been introduced ''into hostilities or into situations where
imminent involvement in hostilities is clearly indicated by the circumstances.''

That language seems to apply to the sending of marines to Lebanon.  The risk of
placing our troops in West Beirut was clearly evident when Mr. Reagan dispatched
the original 800-man contingent on Aug.  25. Subsequent tragic events - the
assassination of President-elect Bashir Gemayel, the slaughter of Palestinians
in the Shatila and Sabra camps - only intensified the risks when the President
returned 1,200 marines on Sept. 29. The accidental death of one marine in a
land-mine explosion and the injury of four more illustrates the potential
jeopardy facing our troops.

Moreover, news media reports have indicated the possibility that the American
troops' mission might be expanded and that the multinational force might be
substantially enlarged.  Yet, under the War Powers Act, the Administration has
been able to avoid the 90-day deadline and proceed unilaterally simply by
asserting that ''there is no intention or expectation that U.S.  armed forces
will become involved in hostilities.'' The Administration took the position,
during debate over sending military advisers to El Salvador, that the
imminent-hostilities test is not satisfied unless troops have been authorized to
''accompany foreign forces into the field on operational missions.'' No,
Congress did not intend ''imminent hostilities'' to be viewed so restrictively.
A House committee report on the act, for example, defines ''hostilities'' to
include situations where ''there is a reasonable expectation that American
military personnel will be subject to hostile fire.''

The substance of the policy is not the issue. I share the President's view that
Middle Eastern peace demands a stable Lebanon and that risks must be taken to
help President Amir Gemayel's Government. Congress undoubtedly would approve the
commitment of troops as part of the multinational force. But if the War Powers
Act and the lessons of Vietnam stand for anything, they should mean that the
President cannot unilaterally commit troops to situations in which they are
severely jeopardized for an indefinite time. The policy is strengthened, and the
Constitution respected, if Congress approves the action.

The Lebanon experience suggests that the act did not succeed in reasserting
Congress's authority or in substituting the rule of law for political pulling
and hauling between Congress and the executive branch. Conceived with the
noblest of intentions, the act still depends on Presidential good will. If a
President wants to evade the teeth in the act, he can do so with impunity, for
no court will take him to task. A law that relies so much on Presidential
discretion and willingness to share power cannot be an effective check on
executive power.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Thomas F. Eagleton, Democrat of Missouri, is a member of the Senate Defense
Appropriations Subcommittee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 17, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Robin Herman and Laurie Johnston

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 272 words


Vets Help Vets

The veterans groped their way through the dark entry of Studio 54, black columns
gleaming under red and purple beams, and past the big red bar. On and around the
dance floor, with its strobes and spotlights unlighted, consultation tables were
set up.

The disco was headquarters for Vets Help Vets Day yesterday. Some of several
hundred who came laughed at their chances of ever being inside it, but serious
things were on their minds. They pored over screens projecting job openings.
''Mostly they want skills and experience,'' said 27-year-old Wilbert Patterson
of the East Bronx.  ''All I have is a high school diploma and an honorable
discharge.''

There were counselors from government and private agencies, including a squad -
disabled veterans themselves - from the state's Disabled Veterans Outreach
program. A Vietnam veteran, now working in a bank, asked about colleges but
mostly wanted information about Agent Orange: ''My four children are all
retarded, severely or borderline.''

A young man with ''bad paper'' consulted with the Veterans Upgrade Center about
getting a damaging code number removed from his discharge.

Many took away bumper stickers saying ''I'm a Proud Vietnam Veteran.'' Some,
like 22-year-old Charles Townsell of the West Bronx, left beaming. He'd been
referred for a 3 P.M. interview for a job as a general clerk.  Robin Herman
Laurie Johnston

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 17, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: ED PINCUS MAKES 'DIARIES' OF HIS OWN LIFE

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 31, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words


''DIARIES,'' which opens today in the Agee Room at the Bleecker Street Cinema,
is Ed Pincus's filmed record of his own life and times from 1971 through 1976.
It's a nearly 3 1/2-hour memoir about Ed, his wife Jane, their two children,
Sami and Ben, their dog Tapper, some of the women Ed had affairs with, several
colleagues, as well as Ed's travels to and from Vermont, California, Arizona and
New York City.

Though it's long, it's surprisingly easy to endure. It's entertaining, but it's
also troubling both for esthetic and for moral reasons, which may be the same
things.

The concept of the film belongs very much to the movie-mad 1960's and early
1970's, the time of Jean-Luc Godard, who forever changed the look and sound of
cinema, and the time when newly portable camera and sound equipment made
possible the cinema verite revolution.  Truth, which had been eluding mankind
for several millenia, was now at hand, or so many young film makers believed.
All one had to do was to go out and point a camera at it.

Some fascinating films came out of that era - films by Albert and David Maysles,
Frederick Wiseman, D.A. Pennebaker, Jonas and Adolfas Mekas and Richard Leacock.
Mr. Leacock, a film-teaching colleague of Mr. Pincus at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, appears in ''Diaries'' from time to time.

The most poignant film of that time was - and remains - Jim McBride's brilliant
1967 satire, ''David Holzman's Diary,'' a hilarious mock-cinema-verite fiction
about a solemn young film maker who, rather like Ed Pincus, decides to find the
truth of his life by filming it in minute detail.

Actually I'm not at all sure that Mr. Pincus, a Boston-based maker of
documentaries (''Black Natchez,'' ''One Step Away'') who has taught at M.I.T.
and Harvard, was looking for truth more than he was simply interested in
recording some of the looks and sounds of his time. Whatever his goal,
''Diaries'' inevitably reveals a lot more and a lot less than meets the eye and
the ear. (Though ''Diaries'' covers some of the same events explored in ''Life
and Other Anxieties,'' an earlier film made by Mr. Pincus and Steven Ascher, the
new film is not a repetition.)

It's difficult to understand why anyone would want to make a movie of his own
life, unless one were a film maker in search of a subject. It's not the same
thing as writing about one's life. The camera is not a pen or even a typewriter.
Unlike writing, filming has nothing to do with repose and reflection, except
when the filmed material is subsequently shaped in the editing room.

The camera takes over any space it inhabits in much the same way that a stranger
does. It destroys all privacy. At the beginning of ''Diaries,'' Jane Pincus
grumbles that she feels as if she should be acting and she doesn't like the
idea. The camera may record everything but it understands nothing. It's a
mechanical extension of the person holding it, whom it transforms into an alien.
The camera can go beneath the skin only to the extent that the person being
photographed welcomes it or becomes oblivious to its presense.

On the surface, ''Diaries'' is five years in the history of the Pincus family,
during which Ed and Jane raise their children, attend funerals and weddings,
break up briefly, watch anti-Vietnam demonstrations and the rise and fall of
former President Richard M.  Nixon, and talk. Ed, Jane and their friends talk
endlessly. They don't talk about Vietnam much, at least when the camera is on
them.  They talk mostly about themselves, about their relationships and their
feelings. When Ed admits to having an affair, it's Jane who suffers the guilt,
which seems to be one of the burdens of their enlightened age.

The talk is not great, but it sounds absolutely accurate and painfully
authentic. Says Ann, one of Ed's lovers, long after their affair is over, ''Like
I think in our present lives any interaction we have is heavier for me than for
you.'' One listens to this and cringes. Is there any hope for a middle class
that talks such nonsense?

Among other things, ''Diaries'' is about a group of comparatively affluent,
well-educated Americans attempting to think and, instead, becoming fatally
entangled in their own jargon.

Ed, we learn, is afraid of his feelings, which may be why he puts a camera
between himself and his life. Making a movie thus becomes a substitute for
dealing coherently with the world around him. Jane, who spends a lot of her time
working out the hostility she feels toward Ed, his girl friends and the film
itself, discovers in the course of ''Diaries'' that she frequently sneezes to
avoid - I think the phrase would be - verbalizing a need.

In that Ed, Jane and their friends often sound much more foolish than they
probably are, ''Diaries'' does not tell the truth. As a docuementary, it records
only the superficial evidence of their lives. It takes fiction, something like
John Sayles's ''The Return of the Secaucus Seven,'' to get the truth. For
reasons of his own, Mr.  Pincus shows us very little of Ed, Jane and their
friends being aware of the world around them, or even making their livings,
which is what most of us spend most of our lives doing.

It's no accident that the film's most riveting moments have nothing to do with
wobbly self-analysis but with the chance appearance of Dennis Sweeney, the young
civil rights activist Ed met and worked with in the 1960's. Mr. Sweeney comes to
see Ed and Jane in Boston to discus his problem: he's receiving threatening
messages through his teeth.

Ed and Jane try to talk rationally to Dennis, They suggest that he seek what's
euphemistically called ''help.'' Later they learn that Deenis is blaming them
for those messages and is threatening them and their children. Not long
afterward, they hear that Dennis Sweeney has murdered former Representative
Allard Lowenstein.

These brief sequences illuminate the film. They are real drama.  They have the
effect of shutting off, if only temporarily, the obsessive self-absorption that
is otherwise built into this kind of movie making. According to ''Diaries,'' Ed
and Jane remain largely unaffected by Vietnam, Watergate, the cost of living and
almost everything else relating to real life.

Having said that, however, I should add that ''Diaries'' is also a fascinating,
technically expert recollection of the not-so-far-off 70's. It's not only about
the generation once labeled ''me''; it's a demonstration of it.

Me, Me, Me!
DIARIES, documentary directed by Ed Pincus; edited by Mr. Pincus, Moe Shore and
Ann Schaetzel. Running time: 200 minutes. This film is not rated.  At the Agee
Room, Bleecker Street Cinema, 144 Bleecker Street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Ed and Jane Pincus

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Mothers of 2 Veterans Angry at Vietnam List

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 253 words

DATELINE: PITTSBURGH, Nov. 17


The mothers of two Vietnam veterans whose names were not included on a national
memorial because of regulations said Tuesday that the exclusion brought back
bitter memories.

''I've been absolutely crushed and I'm living my nightmare all over again,''
said Jennie McGonigle, whose son, Charles, died of battle wounds.

''I'm very distraught and very disappointed,'' said Mary Brazen, whose son,
Harold, died in a plane crash in Hong Kong. ''It's bringing back a lot of old
memories,''

Robert Doubek, project director of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, said the
men's names could still be added to the memorial dedicated Sunday in Washington
if they were certified by the Department of Defense.

Jonathan Delano, an aide to Representative Doug Walgren, Democrat of
Pennsylvania, said Federal officials had promised to review the cases.

Specialist 4 McGonigle, a medic, fell into a coma after being shot while on
patrol in Vietnam on Aug. 8, 1970. He never regained consciousness and died at
home Dec. 19, 1972, at the age of 23.

Mr. Delano said the Defense Department certified only servicemen who died on
active service or within 120 days of discharge.  Lance Corporal Brazen, a
marine, was killed in a plane crash while returning from leave in Hong Kong. Mr.
Delano said he had not been listed because the death did not occur in the war
zone defined by a Presidential order.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 18, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AUTUMN AT THE MOVIES: FALLING BOX-OFFICE RECEIPTS

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 906 words


The best summer in the history of Hollywood has been followed by a depressing
fall at the box office.  The biggest successes in movie theaters this autumn
have, in fact, been two summer movies, Universal's ''E.T., The
Extra-Terrestrial,'' and Paramount's ''An Officer and a Gentleman.'' Of the fall
movies, only Orion's ''First Blood'' - with Sylvester Stallone as a berserk
Vietnam veteran who wages war on a whole police force and several army regiments
-can be considered a winner. Universal's ''Halloween III'' had a brief flurry,
and M-G-M/UA's comedy, ''My Favorite Year,'' with Peter O'Toole, which started
slowly, seems to be building something of an audience. Warner Bros.'s
''Creepshow'' has started strongly with an excellent $8 million box-office gross
for its first five days. Funeral services for most of the other fall movies have
been held quickly.

Among the movies that might as well have stayed at home in bed are the Rev. Sun
Myung Moon's $40 million ''Inchon,'' released by M-G-M/ UA; Orion's ''Amityville
II,'' a sequel to the extraordinarily successful 1979 ''Amityville Horror'';
Columbia's offbeat updating of Shakespeare, Paul Mazursky's ''Tempest'';
Paramount's cocaine comedy, ''Jekyll and Hyde Together Again,'' and Orion's
earnest movie about cults, ''Split Image.''

Three That Faltered

The biggest disasters of all appear to be two M-G-M/UA movies - ''Yes,
Giorgio,'' starring the opera star Luciano Pavarotti as an opera star, and
''Jinxed,'' with Bette Midler as a somewhat comic femme fatale plotting to kill
her lover. Twentieth Century-Fox's ''Monsignor,'' starring Christopher Reeve as
a priest with a taste for the sins of the flesh, opened moderately well but
plummeted rather quickly.

A lackluster fall at the box office is not unusual for the movie industry. Since
studios save their most enticing extravaganzas for the peak movie-going summer
months and Christmas weeks, autumn tends to be the repository of inept or
''difficult'' movies without much box-office allure.

However, there are usually a few pictures that strike it rich, such as last
fall's ''Time Bandits'' and 1980's ''Private Benjamin'' and ''Ordinary People.''
Whether because of the particular movies in the marketplace or because of the
poor economy, fewer movie tickets were sold this October than any October in the
last six years.

But primarily as a result of ''E.T., The Extra-Terrestrial,'' MCA Inc., the
parent of Universal Pictures, should break the industry record of total domestic
film rentals in any one year long before the end of December. That record of
$400 million was set by Universal in 1980. ''E.T.'' has already brought the
company more than $175 million in film rentals and is still selling more than $4
million worth of tickets each week.

The Wheel of Fortune

Success in Hollywood tends to be cyclical, and Universal has been on the top of
the wheel of fortune since last Christmas. The studio started 1982 with ''On
Golden Pond,'' which has earned more than $62 million in film rentals. Other
Universal successes this year include ''The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas,''
''Conan the Barbarian,'' and the low-budget ''Fast Times at Ridgemont High.''

M-G-M/UA, on the other hand, is still treading water, despite the success of
''Rocky III'' and ''Poltergeist'' last summer. Very few of the studio's other
movies have done even moderately well at the box office, and the company is
still weighed down by the debt it incurred when Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer bought
United Artists 18 months ago.

Interest alone on M-G-M/UA's debt was running nearly $100 million a year but is
now down to $75 million. Under the terms of a credit arrangement with a group of
banks that restructured its debt last summer, M-G-M/ UA can only spend $125
million on movie production in fiscal 1983.

In the fiscal year that began last September, M-G-M/UA plans to cut back to
eight or 10 movies from the 16 films it made the year before. Although M-G-M/UA
executives insist that there will continue to be two separate lines of product -
one from M-G-M and the other from United Artists - the total number of M-G-M/UA
movies will be equivalent to the output from a single studio.

Banks Limit Costs

The banks have also limited the costs of most individual M-G-M/UA movies to a
belt-tightening $8.5 million.

One of the movies that M-G-M/UA expects to be releasing in 1983 is
''Brainstorm.'' That $12-million science-fiction suspense thriller was within
two weeks of finishing production when its star, Natalie Wood, was accidentally
drowned at Thanksgiving a year ago.

After months of dispute between the M-G-M/UA Entertainment Co. and its insurance
companies, an agreement has been reached to complete the movie. Because Miss
Wood had not appeared in a few crucial scenes, the picture's future was in
doubt, even after Lloyds of London gave M-G-M $3 million last winter to finish
principal photography.

Douglas Trumbull, director of the movie, which also stars Louise Fletcher,
Christopher Walken and Cliff Robertson, has now been given the green light to do
the four or five months of editing and special effects necessary to finish the
movie.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of movie stars

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S NEWS CONFERENCE

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1402 words


Following are excerpts from a transcript of Secretary of State George P.
Shultz's news conference yesterday in Washington, as recorded by The New York
Times through the facilities of the Cable News Network:

Following are excerpts from a transcript of Secretary of State George P.
Shultz's news conference yesterday in Washington, as recorded by The New York
Times through the facilities of the Cable News Network:

Q. Mr. Secretary, what would you regard as a meaningful signal from the new
leadership in the Kremlin? A meaningful signal in the direction of easing
relations?

A. Well, I hear this word signal all the time, and it goes from little things
that affect the way you are treated, and I might say that we, the Vice President
and I and Ambassador Hartman, were treated with great courtesy throughout our
visit to the Soviet Union. People say that's a signal, and perhaps it is. But I
think the things that we're really looking for after all the signaling has taken
place is the substance of change in behavior on important matters.

Now, we are engaged in an active negotiation for arms reduction, in Geneva and
in Vienna. We are engaged in, with our European allies, with the Soviet Union
and others, active discussions in Madrid. So those are two settings, or three
settings, where discussions are going on right now and where we would welcome
movement.

Q. Would you expect to see, within the foreseeable future - in other words, are
you talking about meetings and sitting down - would you expect to see any kind
of a summit meeting?

A. The President has always been ready for a summit meeting if there is
something worthwhile to be accomplished by the meeting. A meeting for the sake
of a meeting doesn't really get you a lot, so I think there does have to be a
prospect of some genuine, positive result. And that has been the President's
position and it remains so now.

U.S. and Soviet Steps

Q. Would you specifically outline what steps the U.S. expects the Soviet Union
to take in the forms you just mentioned or elsewhere, before improved relations
can occur? And what specific steps the United States is prepared to take to
improve relations?

A. Well, as far as the details of steps are concerned, of course we'll conduct
our negotiations in those fora rather than this way.  But, obviously, if you are
engaged in a negotiation the process of give and take is something that you look
for and sense, and we would be looking for those signs and that kind of
movement. But I'm not - I don't want to try to specify any explicit point.

Q. Mr. Secretary, a number of Soviet spokesmen this past week have argued that
the United States is using trade as a political weapon.  Do you believe that the
U.S. has been doing this? Do you believe that the U.S. sees trade as part of a
larger political picture? And can you see trade possibly being divorced from
politics?

A. We must think of our relationships with the Soviet Union as - you know, all
of their dimensions. And while they aren't linked in any kind of tight way,
certainly they are related to each other. Now we have made that point. The
pipeline sanctions, in a way, made that point.

Trip to Latin America

Q. Mr. Secretary, at the end of this month you're going with President Reagan to
an area full of financial problems and crisis. I was wondering what you had in
mind that could alleviate the situation of those countries once you have left
them.

A. Well, that area of South America and Central America is not only full of
problems, like most places in the world are, but it's full of opportunities,
full of people, and it's our neighborhood. We - I'm sure what the President will
be wanting to underline and support as he travels through those countries is the
support that we give to the idea of democracy, of freely elected governments;
our support for economic development and, as you know, we have been trying to be
helpful and have been helpful in some of these financial difficulties that you
mention. And, of course, in the area of peace and security, in which we've been
working very hard.

I think it is notable that our hemisphere, as compared with other parts of the
world, has been notably peaceful over a long period of time. And that's been a
very important and helpful factor in the development of the United States and
the development of other countries in our hemisphere. And it's something very
important and very worthwhile, which we want to continue to support.

Q. Very few Americans, American officials, have had a chance to meet the new
Soviet leader, Mr. Andropov, as you have. There are stories that he likes
American food, American music, Chubby Checker records, that he speaks English.
Can you give us a little bit of your reaction to the man?

A. Well, there were Soviet soft drinks and Soviet food on the table where we
sat, so if he likes another kind of food I can't say anything about that. There
was no evidence of the things that you mention in the course of the meeting that
we had. So, what impact he will have as a leader of the Soviet peoples is
something that, of course, we're very interested in and watching, and that
remains to be seen.

Economic Aid to Israel

Q. Mr. Secretary, to what degree is economic aid to Israel linked to the West
Bank policy?  A. There hasn't been any link made. We have been very clear, I
think, from the beginning, that we think the settlements and the expansion of
them are not constructive at all, not a contribution to the peace process, and
so the President has been very clear in opposing them just as I think some of
the conditions on the West Bank are certainly not a constructive contribution to
the peace process.

Q. Mr. Secretary, could you give us some assessment of the recent diplomatic
contacts between the Soviet Union and China?  A. Well, of course, these
developments have been taking place.  We've been watching them, reading about
them. I'm not privy to them, of course. Don't know just what is taking place. I
do know some of the concerns the Chinese have. They're concerned about the
Soviet presence in Afghanistan. They're concerned about, and I've said so,
they're concerned about the behavior of the Soviet proxy state, Vietnam and
Kampuchea. So, if, through their discussions, they can persuade the Soviet Union
to get out of Afghanistan and, in effect, get out of Kampuchea, so much the
better.

Q. Mr. Secretary, going back to the question of trade with the Soviet Union, do
you see the possibility that trade might be a possibility, freer trade with the
United States might be an inducement to the Soviet Union to behave in a way that
you would like them to, as previous Administrations have offered?

A. I don't think it's worthwhile to think of things on a kind of a one-for-one
basis like that. You have to think of the whole relationship, which is
complicated and interrelated, and there are many important dimensions to it. And
we can all spell out what those are and the potential of trade is one of them,
but only one.

U.S.-Soviet 'Mood Music'

Q. Mr. Secretary, the United States and the Soviet Union seem to be exchanging
what might be described as conciliatory mood music; each side waiting for the
other to take specific steps. How long can just the mood music last?

A. We'll have to see what takes place. I was, of course, at the funeral,
standing on Red Square for two and a half hours and watching what was taking
place. And, of course, there is the mood music that everybody seems to have
focused on, namely, the statements that the President has made and like
statements made on the other side.

There was other mood music. It was quite startling. I don't know how many of you
watched the funeral on television, but after the body of Mr. Brezhnev was put in
the ground and the members of the Politburo came up on top of that structure
where they stand, it was as though somebody threw a switch and suddenly: martial
music and a long march-by of troops. So that was mood music, too, I thought.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
A 'Conservative' Union Man

BYLINE: By George Vecsey

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words

DATELINE: HEMPSTEAD, L.I.  Somebody wanted to know what was the greatest change
in Marvin Powell as he served as the player representative of the New York Jets
during the 57


day strike. Powell lifted his tattered practice T-shirt and exposed a roll of
flesh around his waist.

''That,'' he answered.  The roll was the souvenir of all the days and nights at
strike headquarters as Marvin Powell, self-styled ''laissez-faire capitalist''
and ''Churchillian conservative,'' served in the trenches of a long labor
battle.

He was exhibiting the flab as a badge of honor yesterday, proud of the cause he
had represented, reluctantly at first, enthusiastically after a while. Powell
wouldn't let on, but a representative from another club has said that Powell
took some of the strongest stands against a quick settlement.

Tough and smart, an all-pro offensive tackle and a student at New York Law
School, Powell has said he wants to be elected the first black President of the
United States by the year 2004, when he will be 49 years old.

If he makes it, he will not be the first President to have been active in a
union. The current President, after all, once served as president of the Screen
Actors Guild.

Powell has described himself as a ''moderate Republican'' who worked for George
Bush during the 1980 presidential primaries. He has engaged in philosophical
discussion in Sport magazine with none other than William F. Buckley Jr..

Perhaps there was a glimmer of Powell's potential as a labor representative two
years ago, when he said he admired Theodore Roosevelt. The old trust-buster
might have enjoyed taking on professional football, with its huge television
contracts shared equally by 28 members and a tacit agreement not to pursue free
agents, not even Walter Payton.

But it was Powell's stature as perhaps the best tackle in football that brought
him to this post. The Jets' players, like those on many other teams, had thought
that being named player representative was tantamount to developing leprosy.
Some Jets thought Burgess Owens and Clark Gaines had been shuffled away partly
because they were union representatives. Greg Buttle gave up the post because,
he said, it interfered with his outside businesses.

I t would be hard to find anyone less dispensable to the Jets than Marvin
Powell, 6 feet 5 inches tall and 268 pounds, in his sixth season. He is the son
of an Army sergeant who served as a medic in Normandy, Korea and Vietnam. Marvin
Powell also learned a lesson about service from his stepfather, who was killed
in Vietnam.

Powell did not seem thrilled about a strike, but he helped organize and inform
the Jets when it became a reality. For the next 57 days, he attended meetings.

''Aspirin and cigarettes and coffee,'' he said yesterday as the clubhouse filled
up with the familiar card games and pranks and teasing. ''I tried to play
basketball every day at St. Bartholomew's Church, right behind the hotel, but it
was hard to work out.''

One of the duties of a player representative is taking telephone calls from
teammates who may be getting low on money. ''A guy might be out in North Dakota
somewhere and hear the season was over,'' he said. ''Or he'd hear the season was
starting up. He'd call me. A few guys felt it was in their best interests to
take what was being offered.''

But Powell apparently was not one of the player representatives eager to settle.
He said yesterday: ''Let me tell you that we had no guarantees two weeks ago.
Our package got better. I'm not saying we won, because I don't think you win a
strike; you settle a strike.''

Asked if he thought the union should be unhappy with the leadership of Ed
Garvey, Powell seemed to grow even taller, wider and more militarily erect. He
said, ''Anybody who says Ed Garvey is to blame is dead wrong.''

There had been rumors that some of the Jets had been critical of Powell's
adamant stance on behalf of the union. Marty Lyons made no secret yesterday that
he considered the strike to ''not be worth it in dollars and cents when you lose
eight weeks.''

Powell did not want to discuss individuals. ''Certainly there were differences
of opinion,'' he said. ''Some are happy. Some are not happy. But we will take a
vote next Tuesday, and it will be registered then. I'll keep my opinions to
myself until then.''

A football clubhouse is not the best place to discuss economic and labor theory
with somebody as well-educated and self-possessed as Marvin Powell. He did not
stand on any figurative soapbox and deliver any fiery speeches yesterday.

But he gave the indication that more had changed about him than an extra pound
or two around his waist.  ''Anybody who's been through a thing like this comes
out with a higher issue consciousness,'' he said. ''I missed the '74 strike,
because I arrived here in '77. I'm certainly much more aware of the general
nature of the National Football League from this.''

There was a glint of unhappiness that the management of the Jets had chosen to
keep the players out of camp on Wednesday, wanting further assurances from the
league that the settlement was official.  But Powell said: ''That's over now.
There's no bitterness. That was a Jet policy. It's over now.''

Powell said he would eventually address his teammates but not until after the
Baltimore game this Sunday. He said: ''I'm just looking forward to playing
football. I'm friends with everybody here. We're here to play as a team, with no
differences. It was a pleasure to serve my teammates.''

Powell asked a teammate to help pull his practice jersey over his shoulder pads,
and he changed from red running sneakers into cleats.  Then, with
career-sergeant dignity, he walked toward the field for his first practice in
over eight weeks, to work off the effects of the aspirin and the cigarettes and
the coffee and the bad meals and the bad hours of a 57-day strike.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

H.J. GIBBONS, 72, ONCE VIEWED AS HOFFA'S HEIR

BYLINE: By LES LEDBETTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


Harold J. Gibbons, the St. Louis union leader who had been a high offical of the
International Brotherhood of Teamsters for decades, died of a ruptured aneurysm
Wednesday night in Inglewood, Calif., the Centinela Hospital and Medical Center
said. He was 72 years old.

Mr. Gibbons, once chief lieutenant, intellectual adviser and apparent successor
to the late James R. Hoffa as president of the Teamsters, was stricken at Los
Angeles International Airport Sunday night after a flight from St. Louis.

The Teamster vice president's rise to the top of the union was stalled when Mr.
Hoffa picked Frank Fitzsimmons to replace him.  Others thought Mr. Gibbons was
too closely associated with the union leader, who was convicted of jury
tampering and fraud.

But Mr. Gibbons remained one of the four powerful regional vice presidents of
the union - head of the Central Conference - and usually had the last word on
what went on in his region.

23d of 23 Children

Harold Joseph Gibbons was born the 23d and last child of Patrick Gibbons, a coal
miner, and the second Mrs. Gibbons, in Taylor, Pa., near Scranton.

''I grew up at the third table,'' he once recalled. ''And I want you to know
that when the miners struck there wasn't much at that third table.''

His mother pressed him to finish school rather than follow the family into the
mines. He never graduated from high school, but when he moved to Chicago in 1932
the University of Chicago waived its ususal entrance requirements and admitted
him.

Courses there and at the University of Wisconsin and Wellesley helped him get a
job as an adult education teacher with a Works Progress Administration project
in Chicago. Organizing his fellow teachers in that project got him a job as a
vice president of the American Federation of Teachers and as a union organizer
for the Congress of Industrial Organizations. Soon he led Chicago taxi drivers
through an organizing strike and was named regional director of the Textile
Workers Union in Louisville, Ky.

In 1948, he went to St. Louis for the C.I.O. and a year later he took over the
local Teamsters' union when that American Federation of Labor group lured away
all of the members of his C.I.O. local.

Battles in Court

Like many other leaders in the Teamsters, Mr. Gibbons had his battles in court
and before Congress. But the accusations and indictments resulted in no
permanent damage to his standing, and he explained that the charges stemmed from
his closeness to Jimmy Hoffa.

He once refused to surrender union records to a St. Louis grand jury on the
basis of the Fourth Amendment, pleading immunity against ''unreasonable search''
without a warrant or allegation of crime.  After a few days in jail in 1954, he
changed his mind.

Mr. Gibbons grew more conservative in his later years. He had been a member of
the Socialist Party in the 1930's. But he quit the party in 1941 and left the
executive board of the Americans for Democratic Action in the late 1950's.

On Nixon 'Enemies List'

He remained an independent political thinker and was one of the first union
leaders to oppose the Vietnam War and visit Hanoi. As a result, he temporarily
lost his union offices in the early 1970's, and his name was place on President
Richard M. Nixon's ''enemies list.'' He regained his union vice presidency in
1976.

Mr. Gibbons also led the Teamsters effort to make peace with the United Farm
Workers over representation in California's central farm valleys.

An imposing man at 6 feet 1 inch and 200 pounds, Mr. Gibbons dressed quietly but
worked furiously.  Former aides said that he would work 18-hour days, then take
naps of 20 minutes and go back to work. And most of his adult life he was a
chain smoker.

When not working for the union, he liked to teach. He lectured on collective
bargaining at major universities such as Harvard.  Mr. Gibbons was married to
Ann Cutler of Louisville in 1938. Two sons, Patrick and Lawrence, and a
daughter, Elizabeth, also survive.  Funeral plans were incomplete.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Harold Gibbons

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CBS-WESTMORELAND TRIAL IS MOVED

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C; Page 34, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 402 words

DATELINE: GREENVILLE, S.C., Nov. 18


A Federal judge today ordered the trial of retired Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against CBS moved from South Carolina to
New York.

The former commander of United States forces in Vietnam is suing over a Jan. 23
documentary charging that his reports to Washington on enemy troop strengths
were falsified.

Federal District Judge G. Ross Anderson Jr. issued the order after CBS requested
that the suit be dismissed or transferred to the Southern District of New York.
General Westmoreland's lawyers asked that the case be heard in Greenville
because he grew up in nearby Spartanburg. General Westmoreland, who lives in
Charleston, charged that the report was ''unfair, defamatory and malicious in
content and tone.''

Contact With South Carolina

Affidavits accompanying CBS's request contended that the individual defendants
had too little contact with South Carolina to support any personal jurisdiction
over them by the Greenville court. The network also argued that the case bore no
particular relationship to South Carolina and that as a matter of logic and law,
the case belonged where the broadcast was produced.

''We are pleased that Judge Anderson has agreed,'' a CBS spokesman said after
the 12-page decision was issued.  No one answered General Westmoreland's home
telephone, and a woman answering his office telephone said he was not in.  In
the suit, filed Sept. 13, the 68-year-old General Westmoreland said that the
program, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' contained false
information about the handling of enemy troop statistics. CBS has said General
Westmoreland's suit violated the network's First Amendment right to free speech.


Internal Report Sought

On Tuesday, General Westmoreland's lawyers asked Judge Anderson to give them 30
more days to collect information while preparing their case. They also asked
that CBS be forced to turn over documents they needed to prepare the case.

The principal document they are seeking is CBS's 68-page report on an internal
investigation into charges that the documentary was biased.

The request said CBS had filed so many objections, many of them ''frivolous'' or
in ''bad faith,'' that the plaintiff's lawyers had had to file two motions
asking for the information.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA SAYS BETTER TIES REQUIRE ACTION BY MOSCOW

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Nov. 19


Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang said today that any improvement in Chinese-Soviet
relations depended upon whether the Soviet Union took action to remove its
threats to China.

Mr. Zhao's comment, made during a second round of talks here with the visiting
Thai Prime Minister, Gen. Prem Tinsulanonda, suggested that Peking did not
expect immediate improvements in its longstrained relations with Moscow despite
exploratory consulations that the two countries began last month.

The New China News Agency said Mr. Zhao identified three frequently mentioned
complaints, all of which he said were threats to China.  These were the Soviet
deployment of troops along the borders with China and Mongolia, the Soviet
Union's occupation of Afghanistan and its support for Vietnam's invasion of
Cambodia.

Mr. Zhao called these actions ''manifestations of the Soviet Union's policy of
hegemonism and expansionism as well as of Vietnam's policy of regional
hegemonism.''

His remarks were the most authoritative from Peking since the death last week of
Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, and seemed likely to cool expectations in
Moscow of improving relations with Peking immediately.

Possible Reasons for Remarks

Some diplomats here thought Mr. Zhao was challenging the new Soviet leaders to
offer major concessions on these issues, each of which affects the Kremlin's
perception of its security and prestige.

Mr. Zhao's remarks may also have been meant to correct any misconceptions left
by Huang Hua when he returned to Peking on Thursday from Mr. Brezhnev's funeral.
Mr. Huang, who was replaced today as Foreign Minister, told reporters he was
optimistic about the prospects for the next talks with the Soviet Union, to be
held in Moscow next year. This left an impression in some diplomatic quarters
that Mr. Huang's 90-minute meeting with Foreign Minister Andrei A.  Gromyko had
already tacitly helped relations.

But Mr. Huang's expression of optimism was omitted from The People's Daily
account today of his return. One senior diplomat quipped that he had no idea why
Mr. Huang was optimistic but guessed he must have a reason.

Mr. Zhao was also evidently eager to reassure General Prem that China's
commitment to obtaining Vietnam's withdrawal from Cambodia was not affected by
the contacts with Moscow. Thailand is known to be nervous that an expected
offensive by Vietnam against Cambodian guerrillas could spill over into
Thailand.

Place of Cambodia in Talks

The situation in Cambodia is believed to be a major subject in the talks between
Peking and Bangkok, both of which back the Cambodian resistance coalition. In a
banquet toast after General Prem's arrival here on Wednesday, Mr. Zhao
reiterated that if Vietnam invaded Thai territory, China would give ''complete
support to the Thai people in their just stand of opposing aggression.''

Some diplomats here have interpreted this to mean that China might offer
military aid or perhaps even make a new incursion along the Vietnamese border to
force Hanoi to pull troops back from Cambodia for its own protection.

On Wednesday, the editor of the Soviet party newspaper Pravda, Viktor G.
Afanasyev, hinted to some Japanese journalists in Moscow that the Kremlin might
consider a mutual pullback of some troops along the border as a first step
toward normalizing relations. But Prime Minister Zhao's remarks made clear that
this in itself would be insufficient to improve ties.

Relations With the U.S.

Mr. Zhao today also told General Prem that China attached importance to
promoting its relations with the United States but was opposed to American
hegemonism in different parts of the world. In contrast to his criticism of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Zhao did not give any examples beyond saying that the United
States had to abide by the communique on Taiwan signed last August, which in
Peking's view commits Washington to phase out its deliveries of weapons to the
nationalists on Taiwan.

China's agreement to open exploratory talks with the Soviet Union appears to be
part of its strategy to carve out an independent stand that will not ally it
with either the United States or the Soviet Union. Chinese officials have made a
point of stressing their country's identification with the third world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Rebel Arrives in Peking

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 57 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Nov. 20


Son Sann, a leader in the Cambodian rebel coalition formed to drive Vietnamese
troops out of Cambodia, arrived in Peking today for a state visit, the official
New China News Agency reported.

Both Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the coalition's president, and Khieu Samphan, its
vice president, have been in Peking recently.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEOLOGY GETS DOWN TO CASES ON NUCLEAR ARMS

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The nuclear age has ushered in what many of the nation's Roman Catholic bishops
call a ''new moment'' in moral theology that demands a fresh way of thinking
about the ethics of war and peace. Last week, at its annual meeting in
Washington, the National Conference of Catholic Bishops took decisive steps to
draft a pastoral letter that solidifies the church's opposition to nuclear arms,
tentatively stakes out some new ground on deterrence and, in general, reflects a
striking change in attitude.

The bishops' stance, as contained in the second draft of the letter that
unofficially received a two-thirds backing, calls nuclear war ''immoral.'' It
condemns the use of nuclear arms as well as the threat to use them, and allows
for their possession only if linked to earnest efforts to achieve negotiated
disarmament. It also raises doubts about the possibility of fighting ''limited''
nuclear war and calls for a bilateral, verifiable nuclear freeze.

Criticism of the document came swiftly from the White House in a letter from
William P. Clark, President Reagan's national security adviser. Mr. Clark tried
with little apparent success to convince the bishops that American nuclear
policy is compatible with the church's moral standards. Complaints from small
groups of conservative Catholics also seem to have had little impact.

Despite the sudden attention given the draft document, much of it reflects
stands taken in the past by Popes, church councils and the bishops. But where
earlier statements tended to refer to the general state of the world, the
American bishops this time spoke, too, to their homeland and to its military
policies.

That trend has been evident for several years on other issues. The bishops are
heeding the direction of the Second Vatican Council by applying the broad
principles of the universal church to specific issues and in so doing have
become bolder critics of their own government. By 1971 they were opposing the
Vietnam war and within another two years speaking out against the Supreme
Court's decision to allow abortion. More recently, they have decried American
military aid to El Salvador, fought cuts in aid to the poor and, most
dramatically, rallied against the arms race.

The common theme is that all life is sacred. As Archbishop John R.  Roach of
Minneapolis, conference president, noted in his opening address, ''Where the
value in question is human life, the linkages go far beyond the surface and
deeply influence the whole cast of our moral lives. Selective reverence for
human life is a kind of contradiction in terms, not only as a matter of logic
but also as a matter of existential reality.''

Over the past decade, the relevance of that conviction to the arms race has
engaged the attention of a growing number of bishops. At various points along
the way, certain bishops have led the movement in an evolutionary direction,
through timely encouragement or example. Among the landmarks was the testimony
favoring SALT II by John Cardinal Krol before a Senate subcommittee in 1978.
Many believe the intervention by Cardinal Krol, a respected conservative from
Philadelphia, helped foster a change in direction among many who had been
reluctant to move away from the church's ''just war'' tradition.

Other bishops have set the tone and moved the issue along in their own dioceses.
Among them were Humberto Cardinal Medeiros of Boston, who conducted talks with
scholars from Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard before writing
his own pointed assault on nuclear weapons, and Bishop Walter Sullivan of
Richmond, Va., who became an outspoken critic of United States policy. Then
there was the leadership of Archbishop Joseph L. Bernardin of Chicago as head of
the special committee entrusted with drafting the pastoral letter.

The bishops called for such a letter at their 1980 meeting, and many at this
year's session showed signs of having undergone a recent conversion. A few
bishops still balked, but the vast majority were clearly on a course that
surprised many in and out of the church.  Their resolve was echoed in an
apparent rebuff of the Administration's criticism by Bishop Sullivan, who called
on the conference to ''stay the course for peace.''

On most every major point, the bishops stood together. The one area where they
were challenged to go beyond previous church statements on nuclear arms
concerned the justification for nuclear deterrence.  At issue was what Pope John
Paul II meant when he said that possessing nuclear weapons could be ''morally
acceptable'' if tied to sincere efforts to bring about disarmament. The problems
were twofold. One was that a questionable means, a nuclear stockpile, was being
justified in the service of a patently good end, maintaining peace. To some that
was a moral contradiction; Archbishop Rembert Weakland of Milwaukee asked the
Vatican to provide clear definitions. The other problem was the feeling among
many bishops that the Reagan Administration has not sincerely pursued negotiated
arms reductions with the Russians. Thus present United States nuclear deterrence
cannot be justified. Bishop Raymond Lucker of Wisconsin expressed that
conviction on the floor.

The view is still considered radical among the bishops, but it raises the
question and, in the opinion of some, has placed pressure on the Administration
to demonstrate good faith efforts. Far from the bishops' being influenced by the
Administration, some bishops believe the White House could increasingly respond
to the moral arguments set forth by the church's hierarchy.

At the risk of being called naive or accused of meddling in matters beyond their
competence, the bishops spoke boldly of being peacemakers. Warned that their
actions could divide the church, they showed no inclination to back down. Bishop
Kenneth Untener of Saginaw, Mich., said he had mailed copies of the draft letter
to 18,000 members of his diocese and was convinced from the response that it was
''an instrument of peace.''

A Gallup survey, released today, indicates that the bishops have solid backing
from the nation's 50 million Catholics on their proposal for a nuclear freeze.
It shows Catholics favoring a bilateral freeze 82 percent to 13 percent, with 5
percent undecided.  At the same time, they narrowly reject a universal freeze by
53 percent to 47 percent.

The bishops left Washington committed to voting on a final version in May. There
was little likelihood that differences over the morality of deterrence could be
ironed out to everyone's satisfaction, but the bishops seemed content to live
with the disagreements. Declaring ''our top priority must be the disarmament of
the human spirit,'' Archbishop John R. Quinn of San Francisco called on the
conference to endeavor to bring about ''the creation of a psychology of peace.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS NEED MORE THAN A SALUTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 256 words


To the Editor:

Though there is no doubt that the events marking the ''National Salute to
Vietnam Veterans'' were a source of pride to those who attended, it would be
wrong to think of the events as a watershed for the men and women who served in
Vietnam.§erious problems affecting the quality of life for Vietnam veterans are
still not being dealt with in a manner indicative of a real concern.

Unemployment among Vietnam veterans in New York State approaches 30 percent.
Education and training programs have largely disappeared.  The problems of Agent
Orange exposure, drug and alcohol abuse and post-traumatic-stress disorder have
not been adequately addressed.  The willingness and ability of the Veterans
Administration to understand and assist in the solutions to these problems is
highly questionable.

At no time during the five days of observance was there an indication that
Washington is ready to respond to the urgent needs of the men and women being
honored. Until the problems that prevent many of us from living full and
productive lives are dealt with in a serious manner, it is premature to say that
we have ''come home.'' ROBERT A. PTACHIK President, Brooklyn Chapter Vietnam
Veterans of America Brooklyn, Nov. 15, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS NEED MORE THAN A SALUTE;
*

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 83 words


To the Editor:

On Nov. 13, I listened with deep emotion to the radio coverage of the dedication
of the memorial honoring those who died in the Vietnam War. I am left with
humble gratitude and a question: How did the President, Secretary of Defense
Weinberger and Secretary of the Interior Watt spend their Saturday?  TAYE S.
TOWNLEY Pittsburgh, Nov. 14, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UP FROM TEXAS

BYLINE: By David Herbert Donald; David Herbert Donald is the author or editor of
34 books on American history, including a Pulitzer prize-winning biography of
Charles Sumner. He teaches Southern history at Harvard.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3035 words


THE PATH TO POWER The Years of Lyndon Johnson.  By Robert A. Caro.  Illustrated.
882 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $19.95.

THIS fascinating, immensely long and highly readable book is the fullest account
we have - and are ever likely to have - of the early years of Lyndon Baines
Johnson. The first in a projected three-volume biography, ''The Path to Power''
is the product of seven years of research by Robert A. Caro, who worked through
the voluminous files of the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library at Austin, Tex.,
interviewed virtually everyone who knew Johnson and lived for months at a time
in the barren and still isolated hill country of Texas where Johnson was born.
Like Mr. Caro's previous book, ''The Power Broker,'' a Pulitzer prize-winning
biography of Robert Moses, ''The Path to Power'' is intelligent, engrossing and
revealing. And, like ''The Power Broker,'' it is far too long, tediously
repetitive and fiercely polemical.

Mr. Caro is at his best in sketching a series of verbal portraits of Johnson
that are as sharp and memorable as the numerous photographs in this handsome
book:

* A toddler of 18 months,''striking not only for his huge ears but for the utter
maturity of his expression,'' who was constantly running away from home, so that
his mother lived in fear that he would fall into the Pedernales River or be
bitten by a snake.

* A youth in Johnson City (population 333), who was ''starting to shoot up now
into a tall, very skinny, gangling boy with long, awkwardly dangling arms,
white, pale skin, black hair and piercing eyes.'' So exasperatingly disobedient
was he and so indifferent to his school work that his father, Sam Houston
Johnson, angrily told his wife: ''That boy of yours isn't worth a damn, Rebekah!
... He'll never amount to a Goddamned thing!''

* A college student at San Marcos State, who ''had shot up to his full growth
now, six-foot-three-and-a-half inches,'' and whose ankles and wrists
embarrassingly stuck out of his clothes. Unpopular with many of his fellow
students, he was highly esteemed by his teachers.  On graduation day the
president of the college, handing Johnson his diploma, told the audience:
''Here's a young man who has so abundantly demonstrated his worth that I predict
for him great things in the years ahead.''

* A 23-year-old aide to Texas Congressman Richard M. Kleberg, learning his way
around Washington. With ''frenzied, driven, almost desperate energy'' he worked
both himself and his staff beyond the point of exhaustion, but he soon gained
recognition as a young insider who ''knew Washington'' and could ''get you in to
any place.''

* A 29-year-old candidate, making his first bid for elective office in the Tenth
Congressional District of Texas in 1937. Almost unknown at the outset, he
campaigned for 12 or 14 hours a day and solicited votes not merely in the cities
and towns and villages but from ''the people on the forks of the creeks.'' His
platform was unqualified endorsement of anything Franklin D. Roosevelt favored -
including the controversial plan to pack the Supreme Court - and he was elected
with the fewest votes of any of the nation's 435 Congressmen.

* The freshman Congressman who, learning that President Roosevelt was to visit
Galveston, rushed to the dock in time to edge himself into a photograph of the
President and the Governor of Texas. (In Johnson's later campaigns the
Governor's picture would be airbrushed out.) He made friends with the brightest
and best of the young New Dealers in Washington, like Thomas Corcoran and
Benjamin Cohen, William O. Douglas and Abe Fortas, and with their help gained
for his constituents so many Federal favors that Corcoran called him ''the best
Congressman for a district that ever was.''

* The 1941 candidate for the Senate, utterly confident of success, because
President Roosevelt endorsed him as a ''very old, old friend'' and because he
had the largest campaign fund in Texas history. Now when he appeared at public
rallies he was ''a dominant, powerful figure, tall, long-armed; the spotlight
glittered on his gold-rimmed eyeglasses, glistened off the waves of his black,
carefully pomaded, shiny black hair and highlighted the pale whiteness of his
skin, the blackness of the heavy eyebrows ... and the sheen of beard that was
present on the jutting jaw no matter how closely he shaved.'' But, despite his
confidence, he lost the election.

''THE PATH TO POWER'' is, however, much more than a gallery of Johnson
portraits. Mr. Caro takes seriously the title of his proposed trilogy, ''The
Years of Lyndon Johnson,'' and believes that Johnson's career can only be
understood as it ''was played out against a panorama vast in scope: the panorama
of the westward movement in America, and particularly in America's Southwest.''
In consequence this book is written on a scale almost as immense as distances in
the West. Lyndon Johnson is not even born until the fifth chapter, after 65
pages on his ancestors and parents. Throughout the book there are long passages,
and even chapters, in which Johnson is hardly mentioned: a short history of the
New Deal, a description of the Texas hill country, an account of the hardships
of rural life, a biographical sketch of Sam Rayburn. Some of these
interpolations are admirably done, but they slow down a story that is already
moving lethargically and may cause readers to forget that Mr. Caro is, after
all, writing a biography, not a general American history.

For it is on Mr. Caro's success in telling Lyndon Johnson's own story, from his
birth in 1908 to the outbreak of the war in 1941, that evaluation of ''The Path
to Power'' must be based. The book is stunningly successful when the author
restricts himself to recounting what Johnson did. His detailed account of
Johnson's back-breaking first campaign for Congress is a little masterpiece both
because of what it tells about Johnson and because of what it reveals about
American politics on the grass-roots level. In this contest Johnson exhibited
for the first time the traits that made him such a master politician: enthusiasm
and energy so great that Abe Fortas said ''the guy's just got extra glands'';
shrewd intelligence; a tenacious memory that never forgot the name of a voter,
never failed to recall family or other personal connections with his
constituents, and attention to the most minute details of the canvass.

The campaign also showed that Johnson had discovered how to build a coalition of
antagonistic elements - the kind of coalition he would rely on for the rest of
his public life. Success in a Texas election depended, in the first place, on
money - a great deal of money - from wealthy, ultraconservative businessmen.
Johnson had learned how to speak to them in their own language, and they got the
impression that, for all his publicized support of the New Deal, Roosevelt's
measures didn't mean much to him one way or another. Consequently they
contributed heavily to his campaign fund. But victory also depended on the
support of the voters in the hill country, ''one of the most remote, most
isolated, most neglected - and most impoverished - areas of a wealthy nation,''
who took little interest in elections since politicians always made promises but
never delivered. Talking to these country people in the crossroads stores, where
he would stop to have a hasty, indigestible lunch of sardines and a soft drink,
or walking across fields to interrupt a farmer who was plowing, Johnson
convinced them that ''he was a poor man like them,'' that ''he was fighting for
the President who was helping the poor,'' and they turned out in numbers
unequaled since the Populist crusade of the 1890's to give him the victory.

EQUALLY fascinating is Mr. Caro's account of how Johnson repaid his debts to
both elements in his coalition. In behalf of Texas businessmen he fought
tenaciously and successfully for Federal contracts - for dams, for Army and Navy
bases, for roads. For his poorer constituents, he battled just as fiercely, and
the most moving chapter in Mr. Caro's book tells how Johnson, by twisting arms
and breaking rules, forced the Rural Electrification Administration to extend
light and power to the isolated Texas hill country.

The most original and persuasive chapters in ''The Path to Power'' concern
Johnson's using ''money as a lever to move the political world.'' Drawing
heavily on the memoirs of George Brown, of the Texas construction firm, Brown &
Root, Mr. Caro learned that Herman Brown, George's brother and the firm's senior
partner, was so grateful to Johnson for expediting Federal financing for the
Marshall Ford Dam on the Colorado River that he promised to show his
''appreciation through the years to come with actions rather than words.'' That
meant that Brown & Root not only financed Johnson's re-election campaigns; it
also meant that, when Johnson asked for help, the company contributed money to
other Democrats who were in trouble in the 1940 elections. As untitled assistant
to the nearly defunct Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee that year,
Johnson also tapped ''the newly rich Texas independent oilmen'' and the
''sulphur and gas and defense barons of the Southwest,'' who belatedly came to
realize that if the Democrats lost control of the Congress, their cherished
depreciation allowances might be reduced or abolished.  Lyndon Johnson became
''the conduit for their cash.'' Serving as ''a one-man national committee'' for
Democratic Congressmen, Johnson ''in effect added a new factor to the equation
of American politics,'' namely, the practice of ''financing congressional races
across the country from a single central source.''

Persuasive when he recounts such stories, Mr. Caro is less convincing when he
sits in judgment on them. Almost without exception his judgments on Johnson are
not merely negative but hostile. At the very outset he announces his conclusion:
That Johnson had a ''hunger for power in its most naked form, for power not to
improve the lives of others, but to manipulate and dominate them, to bend them
to his will ... a hunger so fierce and consuming that no consideration of
morality or ethics, no cost to himself - or to anyone else - could stand before
it.''

This same harsh judgment he renders on every phase of Johnson's career. It was
at San Marcos State that Johnson first clearly demonstrated that he was a
''mixture of bootlicker and bully.'' By his ''kowtowing'' he won special
privileges from the faculty, but toward his fellow students he was overbearing
and unscrupulous, exhibiting a ''passion for deception,'' ''viciousness and
cruelty,'' a ''tendency to exaggeration - to untruthfulness, in fact.'' Later in
Congress he was deferential and sycophantic toward older men, like Rayburn and
Roosevelt, from whom he wanted favors. Approvingly Mr.  Caro quotes the verdict
of another Congressional aide: ''With men who had power, men who could help him,
Lyndon Johnson was a professional son.'' Toward his equals in Washington he
could be charming and ingratiating -until he no longer needed their assistance.
Toward his subordinates he was brutally overbearing: If they did not demonstrate
''a slavish obedience'' to him, he humiliated them by forcing them to converse
with him or to take dictation from him while he was defecating. And always
Johnson ''was unencumbered by even the slightest excess weight of ideology, of
philosophy, of principles, of beliefs.''

WITHOUT writing a book almost as long as Mr. Caro's it is hard to evaluate all
these judgments. When extracts from this biography began to appear, prior to
book publication, in The Atlantic, there was sharp criticism, mostly from former
Johnson associates, because Mr.Caro did not document his charges, particularly
the accusation that Johnson as Senator and Vice President had personally
accepted large cash payments from lobbyists. Since ''The Path to Power'' traces
Johnson's career only to 1941, that particular charge remains undocumented and
unverified. It is difficult to fathom why this allegation was printed in advance
of the volume in Mr. Caro's trilogy that will deal with Johnson's later years.
But the nearly 50 closely printed pages of notes appended to this book, giving
specific citations for facts and quotations, make it clear that this biography
is based upon extensive research. Mr. Caro has studied his sources.

It is not always clear, however, that he knows how to evaluate those sources.
Mr. Caro, a former investigative reporter for Newsday, has a tendency to believe
sources that he himself ferreted out rather than those that are a matter of
public record and to stress new and sensational accounts in preference to those
more clearly grounded in fact. For instance, his sharply hostile version of
Johnson's college years minimizes the favorable testimony of classmates,
collected in oral histories at the Johnson Library, and relies mainly on the
belated recollections of two disgruntled San Marcos graduates who had for half a
century been nursing a grievance because Lyndon Johnson took over leadership of
a student movement they had started.

Even more dubious is Mr. Caro's account of an alleged love affair between
Johnson and the beautiful Alice Glass, the mistress and later wife of Charles
Marsh, a wealthy Texas newspaperman. Although Marsh was one of Johnson's
principal patrons, to whom the Congressman paid assiduous court, and although
Johnson was happily married, he and Alice are alleged to have been lovers from
late in 1938 until well into 1941. Supposedly he was so enamored that he
promised to divorce Lady Bird and marry Alice, even though that would have meant
the end of his political life. (In actuality, of course, he did no such thing
but instead beccame a candidate for the Senate.) An episode so completely out of
character for Johnson - an affair that, as Mr. Caro acknowledges, would be ''one
of the few episodes in (his life) and perhaps the only one that ran counter to
his personal ambition'' - surely requires careful verification. But Mr. Caro's
only sources are a sister and a cousin of Alice Marsh and ''another observer,
who has asked not to be quoted by name.'' All three gave him what was,
necessarily, hearsay evidence, 40 years after the event. No Johnson
correspondence confirms this story; years later Alice is supposed to have ''told
friends that she had burned love letters that Johnson had written her.'' Though
on other occasions Johnson exhibited ''no reticence whatever about the most
intimate details of extramarital relationships,'' he was totally silent about
this one. Mr. Caro concludes that silence in this case signifies guilt: For the
only time in his life Johnson was ''as reticent as a young man in love.'' It is
clear that the evidence for the alleged affair is so thin that the verdict, for
a professional historian, should be, at most, ''Not Proved.''

EVEN when Mr. Caro's sources are unimpeachable, he does not always know how to
use them. His research in the Congressional Record showed that Johnson almost
never made a speech in the House of Representatives, that he rarely participated
in discussions on the floor of the House, and that he introduced very few bills
of other than local interest. From these facts Mr. Caro concludes that few of
the 435 members had less to do with the actual work of the House of
Representatives than the member from the Tenth Texas District. But that judgment
fails to take into account the stern injunction that Sam Rayburn, as House
majority leader, gave Johnson not to speak on and not to get involved in broad
national issues. It also shows Mr.  Caro's failure to understand that the real
work of the House is not done in set speeches and debates. And it does not jibe
with his own conclusion that, as Thomas Corcoran said, Johnson ''got more
projects, and more money for his district, than anybody else.''

But the basic problems with ''The Path to Power'' stem not so much from the
sources, or the use of the sources, as from Mr. Caro's conception of the role of
the biographer. He makes only the most casual attempts to probe Johnson's
character or to understand his motivations. In this long book Johnson's inner
life - what he himself felt and thought and believed and said -is curiously
neglected. Even his family life is skimpily treated, for Lady Bird Johnson
receives rather less attention than Sam Rayburn or Herman Brown.

Such an imbalance derives from Mr. Caro's view of the biographer as a judge -
and in this case, a hanging judge. He is not interested in exploring Johnson's
psychology because he is convinced that Johnson had only one motive throughout
his life: personal advancement. From very shaky evidence he concludes that from
the start Lyndon Johnson had a real ''goal toward which a Senate seat, like a
congressional seat, would be only a stepping-stone.'' Without qualification he
accepts the belated judgment of one of Johnson's Washington contemporaries:
''From the day he got here, he wanted to be President.'' When there is little
evidence to support his repeated claim that Johnson always yearned to occupy the
Oval Office (''that bright, sunny room in which he had for so many years longed
to sit''), Mr. Caro uses rhetorical questions to advance his case: ''What,
exactly, was Lyndon Johnson planning? As he sat, hour after hour, staring out at
a road without seeing it, what was the road he was seeing? What was the road he
was paving - paving with such care?What was the road down which he was traveling
-traveling so fast?''

AT the book's beginning Mr. Caro promises to show in Johnson's career the
interweaving of the dark thread of ambition with a bright ''thread of
achievement.'' In the chapters that follow, Johnson's achievements are slighted,
and the book becomes a dark chronicle of consuming personal ambition. For
readers who want to believe that the President Johnson of the Vietnam War years
not merely was, but always had been, an unprincipled monster, ''The Path to
Power'' will be rewarding reading. For those who seek to understand this
remarkably complex, singularly gifted and tragically limited man, Mr. Caro's
book will seem more like a caricature than a portrait.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IMPERIAL ADVENTURE

BYLINE: By Richard E. Welch Jr.; Richard E. Welch Jr. is the Charles A. Dana
Professor of History at Lafayette College. His latest book is ''Response to
Imperialism: The United States and the Philippine-American War.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1104 words


''BENEVOLENT ASSIMILATION'' The American Conquest of the Philippines, 1899-1903.
By Stuart Creighton Miller.  Illustrated. 340 pp. New Haven: Yale University
Press. $25.

VIETNAM was not the first time American soldiers fought a guerrilla war in Asia.
Following the Spanish-American War of 1898, the Administration of William
McKinley determined to force Spain to cede the Philippine Islands, thereby
ignoring the existence of a nationalist movement in the islands that had
recently proclaimed the independence of the Republic of the Philippines.
American troops had no sooner secured the surrender of the Spanish at Manila
than they found themselves ringed by a series of trenches occupied by the ragtag
but determined Filipino soldiers under Emilio Aguinaldo.

The Filipino leader would most probably have accepted an American protectorate,
but President McKinley defined America's duty more rigorously: It required our
annexation of the islands so that we might ''educate the Filipinos, and uplift
and Christianize them.'' We would pursue a policy of ''benevolent assimilation''
and to do so we would brush aside the foolish claims of a bandit chief to be
president of a sovereign nation. On Feb. 4, 1899, shots were exchanged between
American and Filipino patrols on the outskirts of Manila and a war of 4l months'
duration began. Before it was over 126,500 Americans saw service in the
Philippines, and their army suffered battle losses of over 4,200 men killed and
over 2,800 wounded. Their enemies suffered battle losses of 16,000-20,000 men
killed, while famine and disease accounted for the death of as many as 200,000
Filipino civilians.

Despite the length and cost of this war of imperial conquest, it has received
comparatively little attention from American historians. Usually labeled ''the
Philippine Insurrection,'' it is characterized in most textbooks as an
unfortunate epilogue to the Spanish-American War, a minor incident in America's
assumption of world power. The Vietnam tragedy inspired a few studies of the
Philippine war, but they were for the most part marred by a determination to
read history backward in an unwise effort to find parallels between the foreign
policy requirements of Presidents Lyndon Johnson and William McKinley. Stuart
Creighton Miller seeks to explain the nature and consequences of the
Philippine-American War in the context of its own time, and he succeeds
admirably. '' 'Benevolent Assimilation' '' is the most thorough, balanced and
well-written study to date of America's imperial adventure in the western
Pacific and the most persuasive analysis of the varied reactions of the American
people to the military subjugation of the Filipinos.

Mr. Miller offers not only a military history of the war but a social and
intellectual history of American response to that war and of the manner in which
that response provided a mirror for such characteristics of American society as
racism, ethnocentrism, aggressive humanitarianism and a conviction of national
virtue that proved invulnerable to proof of national disgrace. In a splendid
chapter, ''The Triumph of American Innocence,'' Mr. Miller argues convincingly
that a majority of Americans shared the romantic nationalism of such
expansionists as Theodore Roosevelt and Sen. Albert Beveridge and participated
vicariously in their dreams of martial glory and expanding markets.

MOST Americans refused to acknowledge that the subjugation of the Philippines
was comparable to the imperialistic exploits of monarchical European powers.
American expansion was different because our cherished political principles were
different. American expansion, in the words of a Presbyterian minister, was
''enthusiastic, optimistic and beneficial republicanism.'' If it was
imperialism, it was of a special and salutary kind - ''not for domination but
for civilization, not for absolutism but for selfgovernment.'' There was much
self-deception in this conviction but surprisingly little hypocrisy. The
certainty of good intentions enabled many Americans to develop a kind of
immunity when reports reached this country of continued Filipino insurgency,
mounting casualties and military atrocities committed by American soldiers.  Our
aims were just; the blame must fall on Filipino ignorance and obduracy. It was
with little conscious effort that the more sordid episodes of the war were put
out of mind and the ''Insurrection'' itself forgotten, once President Theodore
Roosevelt had proclaimed its conclusion on July 4, 1902 and congratulated the
American army for fighting a ''humane war'' against ''a treacherous foe.''

Mr. Miller's ability to blend military and social history is matched by his
ability to combine narrative and analysis. Vivid descriptions - of the ''water
cure'' torture, of Gen. Frederick Funston's capture of Aguinaldo by the use of
troops masquerading as Filipinos, and of the American concentration camps
established in Batangas Province - are smoothly integrated with analyses of the
ineffectiveness of the patrician leaders of the Anti-Imperialist League in the
United States, the influence of the experience of Indian warfare on the American
high command in Manila and the relationship of insular imperialism in 1898 to
the continental expansion of earlier decades. While avoiding the simplistic
explanations of the neo-Marxists, Mr. Miller gives proper weight to the economic
ambitions of certain expansionists, and his evaluation of the mixed motives of
American policy makers is admirably balanced and temperate. There is no attempt
to provide exculpation for the suppression of a nationalist revolution and no
effort to find an all-encompassing explanation in the sinful operations of
monopoly capitalism. Mr. Miller offers instead the best account to date of one
of the more significant and revealing errors of American foreign policy.

WHAT is more, he writes well. Taking to heart the frequently ignored warning of
the late Samuel Eliot Morison, that ''there is an art of writing history,'' Mr.
Miller offers the results of his patient research in a sparkling prose style.
Fellow students will profit from the 31 pages of notes at the end of the book
and an impressive bibliography of primary and secondary sources, but a majority
of his readers will find sufficient satisfaction in the author's ability to tell
an important story with clarity, wit and a talent for the apt quotation. In
scholarly journals, reviewers will undoubtedly offer the judgment that this
brilliant study should be in all academic libraries. One can hope that it will
be read and admired by a much larger audience.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SETTING A FAST PACE

BYLINE: By Ralph DiGennaro

SECTION: Section 6; Page 126, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2583 words


For more than a century, Manhattan and Van Heusen have been virtually household
names in popularly priced men's shirts. Yet, for the two men who now run each of
these large men's-wear companies, the swing of the fashion pendulum has
necessitated alterations in both the products they produce and the manner in
which they guide their companies.

In some ways, Laurence C. Leeds Jr., chairman and president of Manhattan
Industries Inc., and Lawrence S. Phillips, president of the Phillips-Van Heusen
Corporation, are alike. In others, which have more impact on the way they do
business, they certainly are not.

Each is a fourth-generation head of a family-founded company; each is
responsible for showing impressive profits in 1982 despite a downturned economy;
each shares a passion for tennis; each is aware of the importance of designer
names in successfully marketing higherquality shirts and sportswear.

But here the similarities tend to end, for in business style the two executives
are diametric opposites. Mr. Leeds, who is 53 years old, maintains a highly
visible profile within the fashion community, turning up regularly at fashion
shows, cocktail parties and industry events. By contrast, Mr. Phillips, who is
55, is a behind-the-scenes executive who admittedly avoids most fashion shows
and media events because, he says, they have ''lit-tle to do with running a
business.''

''There are people who look for visibility, and maybe they do it for
ego-gratification reasons,'' Mr. Phillips says. ''But I don't care about making
my presence known. I'll go and say hello to the people I need to, and then get
on with the rest of my life.''

Mr. Leeds is the first to admit that his business style may be unique among
top-level executives, but, he says, his personal image is congruent to the image
he has tried to bring to the company as a whole.

''I've had to evolve a style that works with the way I positioned this
business,'' he says, ''which is based on visibility and intense, rapid decision
making, much of which, I confess, comes on a seat-of-the-pants intuitive basis.

''This is not just a business of numbers, but a business of people,'' Mr. Leeds
adds. ''Major retailers are busy people, and industry events offer the
opportunity to socialize and create personal relationships during the evening
hours. It's part of the job and can be valuable for our business. I think people
like to do business with managements they know and, hopefully, respect.''

One of Mr. Leeds's most valuable assets is his fashion intuition.  He has
steered Manhattan onto a profitable course since taking over in 1974, propelled
by a gust of designer names that reads like a Who's Who in Fashion. The list
includes Perry Ellis, Henry Grethel, Frank Masandrea, Michaele Vollbracht and
Anne Klein & Company. Mr.  Leeds did not find all this talent by perusing
fashion magazines; he found it by spending time with the fashion intelligentsia
and absorbing all he heard. Explains Perry Ellis: ''Larry is a social animal. He
has an extraordinary sense of people and remembering names.''

Jay Meltzer, a vice president of research for Goldman Sachs, a brokerage firm
that keeps a watchful eye on apparel companies, agrees: ''Leeds has a pretty
good track record for spotting trends and the people who can capitalize on those
trends. In this business, it's the most important thing. His arrangement with
Perry Ellis is indicative of his above-average persona in the apparel area.''

The Manhattan arrangement with Perry Ellis includes the marketing of men's
sportswear items such as shirts, sweaters, jackets and pants, as well as women's
higher-priced Perry Ellis-labeled jackets, coats, skirts, pants, shorts,
hand-knitted sweaters and shirts. The firm also licenses the Perry Ellis name
for items such as scarfs, hosiery, furs and shearling coats.

''He has a wonderful vision of ready-to-wear,'' says Mr. Ellis, ''and the only
reason Perry Ellis exists today as a business is because of Larry's vision.
Somehow, he manages to tabulate it all and put it into his decision making.''

Although Mr. Phillips admits that his company started late in reaching for the
stars on Seventh Avenue, the company is now moving quickly, having obtained
Halston, Geoffrey Beene and Cacharel for men's furnishings.

''Initially, we thought the price points commanded by designer names were a
rip-off and the demand would blow over,'' says Mr.  Phillips. ''It didn't, and
we were wrong.''

Yet despite Mr. Phillips's moves to strengthen his company in the designer-name
game, he is clearly not as comfortable with the designers in the house as is Mr.
Leeds. Indeed, if Mr. Leeds were to be seen as the compassionate adoptive
parent, Mr. Phillips would be better cast as the tolerable yet stern guardian.

''I get a little revolted at the concept of designer chocolates,'' Mr. Phillips
says with guarded disdain. ''It's an insult to the intelligence of the American
public.'' He is also decidedly less bullish about the future of designer names.
''Only the strong will survive,'' Mr. Phillips contends. ''There's beginning to
be a weeding out, because there has been a disproportionate amount of inventory
and markdowns with designer goods. This weeding out is now in process, abetted
by the recession.''

Despite the recession throughout most of 1981, both Manhattan and Phillips-Van
Heusen recorded healthy profits with impressive sales gains. And this year, at
least for the first six months, both companies are continuing to do well.

At Phillips-Van Heusen, net income rose from $5,318,000 in 1980 to $7,377,000
last year, with earnings per share of $2.54 compared with $1.78 the previous
year. Net sales in 1981 were a record $431,135,000, compared with $419,357,000
the previous year. Manhattan had an equally impressive 1981 sales figure of
$377,772,000, compared with $314,865,000 for the year before. Net income almost
doubled, jumping from $5,175,000 to $9,715,000.

''But that's not a sustainable rate of increase,'' cautions Mr.  Meltzer of
Goldman Sachs. ''Each had successful figures for different reasons. Manhattan
started from a pretty low base but has proved that it's well on its way to
showing what the company can do. Van Heusen has been able to take advantage of
the swing of the fashion pendulum toward dressier looks, which is the way much
of its merchandise is styled.''

Although Mr. Meltzer gives the two executives high marks, he maintains that both
their companies still require substantial ''house cleaning'' if they are to
continue to make substantial gains.

Indeed, Manhattan has had problems with its women's sportswear and blouse
businesses, operated within the company's M.I. Group division, which has
remained largely unprofitable. But with a new management team in place at Lady
Manhattan and the addition of the Masandrea and Vollbracht sportswear lines, Mr.
Leeds is optimistic that the division will show a profit by the year's end.

Cleaning house at Phillips-Van Heusen has amounted to eliminating its six-unit
Blake's retail operation, with two stores closed, two sold and two absorbed into
the company's Hamburger's/ Kennedy's operations. Eight other unprofitable stores
have been closed, while eight new branches were opened last year, all in mall
locations.

Mr. Leeds and Mr. Phillips are also unalike in that each has a particular
fondness for different segments of his business; Mr. Leeds prefers
manufacturing, especially designer apparel, while Mr.  Phillips remains a
retailing enthusiast, attempting to visit each store the company owns at least
once during the year.

The two men also contrast in the way in which they wield power.  Because he
spends time at fashion events and must also occasionally play ''house
psychologist'' to his designers, Mr. Leeds delegates authority generously and
likens himself more to a team coach than a boss. Mr. Phillips leans toward the
direct approach in his administrating.

But while Mr. Leeds calls the ''emotional involvement'' that he brings to his
business ''debilitating and exhausting,'' Mr. Phillips says his generally
tougher approach is a reaction to his ''uncompromising'' stand on mediocrity.

''Decisions have to be made regularly and continually as to what's mediocre and
what is good, and that applies to stores, factories, inventory and people,'' Mr.
Phillips says, adding that he oversees a ''refining process'' that goes on in
his company 12 months a year.

''It's much easier to procrastinate on decisions concerning mediocrity within
the company,'' he continues, ''because most of those decisions are painful and
difficult. But I do what has to be done to upgrade the caliber of our people.''
Accepting second-rate performance, Mr. Phillips says, is an ''unaffordable
luxury today.''

Competitors in more than business (they occasionally play tennis together), each
professes a mutual regard for the other's accomplishments, both professionally
and personally.

''Larry is extraordinarily honest and quite outspoken,'' says Mr.  Leeds. ''And
everything he's ever told me has been right on the button. We share the common
denominators of our industry, but I also respect him for having social
awareness, even though our political philosophies are quite different.''

Returning the compliments, Mr. Phillips says of Mr. Leeds: ''He moved his
company largely into the better women's-wear business, and applied the talent
and judgment necessary to create an enviable group of companies and designers.
To change the profile of a company so radically and so successfully is
commendable, and the result speaks for itself.''

And despite their distinctively different points of view about mixing business
with pleasure, both executives get generous words from other colleagues in the
retail world. For example, Marvin Traub, chairman and chief executive officer of
Bloomingdale's, says of Mr.  Leeds: ''Leeds is a very dynamic executive who is a
'hands-on' manager. He's been very creative in turning his company around by
getting stronger in the fashion business.'' And Arnold Aronson, former chairman
and chief executive officer of Saks Fifth Avenue, and now president of the Batus
Retail Division, Saks's parent company, has this to say of Mr. Phillips: ''Not
only is he a fine businessman, but he's also an intellectual. But the most
refreshing aspect of his style is his deep commitment to, and real participation
in, widerscoped issues and organizations in fields such as world affairs,
philanthropies and the arts.''

Indeed, Mr. Phillips may be more political in nature than many who know him
realize. Once a director of Business Executives Move for Peace in Vietnam, he
takes pride in being named to former President Richard M. Nixon's so-called
enemies list.

A graduate of Princeton University, Mr. Phillips began his career with
Phillips-Van Heusen - founded by his great-grandfather Moses Phillips in 1859 -
after finishing college in 1948. Two years later, he was named vice president, a
position he held until 1959, when he was promoted to executive vice president.
Ten years after that, he became president, assuming many of the duties of his
father, Seymour Phillips, who continues as chairman in a more limited role.

Mr. Phillips's philanthropic inclinations are illustrated by his establishment
six years ago of the company's annual community service awards. Each year, Mr.
Phillips says, about 10 employees are commended for their community service work
and a contribution of $1,000 is made by Phillips-Van Heusen to the charity of
their choice. ''We hope to convince the 8,000 people who work for the company
that people are our most important asset,'' he says, ''and the better our
people, the better our company.''

Mr. Leeds graduated from Yale University and went on to earn a master's degree
in business administration, specializing in industrial management, at the
University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Business in 1952. After three
years in the United States Naval Reserve, he entered the family business as a
management trainee. Ten years later, he was named executive vice president,
moving up to president one year later. In 1974, he took over the company as
chief executive officer.

Considering that his initial plans were to teach math and history, and to coach
wrestling and golf, Mr. Leeds has charted a course with the family business -
founded by his great-grandfather Louis Levi in 1857 - that is dramatically
different from what he originally planned. Still a consummate athlete, Mr. Leeds
finds parallels between sports and business. ''The training grounds of
competitive athletics,'' he says, glancing at a framed photograph of himself
finishing the 1981 New York City Marathon (his time was three hours and 26
minutes), ''are great preparation for the battlefields of business.''

When he isn't behind his desk in the Time & Life Building, or at fashion shows
and industry functions, Mr. Leeds, like Mr. Phillips, enjoys a certain amount of
politics. A Republican district leader of the 66th Assembly District, he is also
active in the American Apparel Manufacturers Association and is a board member
of Carnegie Hall and the Fashion Institute of Technology. Mr. Phillips,
similarly active, is a director of the Fund for Peace, Planned Parenthood, the
Center for Defense Information and Oxfam-America Inc., among other
organizations.

Where the men are most similar, however, is in their joint awareness that the
rapid changes taking place in men's fashions have also altered the nature of
doing business today. The trusted brand names of yesteryear are giving way to
designer names that may well become - if, for some consumers, they haven't
already - the brand names of tomorrow.

''We recognized that the mood in the United States was shifting toward more
fashion with new concepts,'' Mr. Leeds says. ''People now want something else
besides the moderate brands. That's why we've been expanding from Manhattan to
John Henry to Henry Grethel to Perry Ellis in our shirt lines.''

Mr. Phillips agrees that the nature of competition - indeed, the nature of the
industry itself - has changed ''drastically'' in the last five years.

''We've been in a transition from a company selling staple products to
increasing involvement with fashion. No, make that 'good taste'; it's a better
word,'' he says. ''I don't know that much about fashion, and I don't dress in a
fashion way. But I'm perceptive enough to know that there's been a marked trend
with the consumer who has adopted designer names for a reason. It's been mostly
for status and assumed quality, but there's no denying the trend has been
prevalent in men's wear.''

Adds Mr. Leeds: ''We are at the forefront of the changing nature of our
business.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Laurence C. Leeds photo of Lawrence S. Phillips

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
All Cambodian Rebels Embraced by China

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 170 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Nov. 21


Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang said today that China would equally favor the
Communist and non-Communist factions in the Cambodian rebel coalition fighting
the Vietnamese occupation, the official New China News Agency reported.

The agency said Mr. Zhao made the statement to Son Sann, leader of one of the
two non-Communist groups in the newly formed three-faction alliance.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the coalition president, leads the other non-C@ommunist
faction. Khieu Samphan, the coalition vice president, heads the Communist
faction. Both have been in Peking recently seeking support from Chinese leaders,
who oppose Vietnam's presence in Cambodia.

Mr. Son Sann is called the coalition prime minister. The group considers itself
Cambodia's legal government though it is based in a rebel-held zone. Phnom Penh,
the Cambodian capital, is controlled by the Communist Government installed by
Vietnamese forces that invaded Cambodia in late 1978.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
KISSINGER ON THE MIDEAST

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 907 words


Israel has the undoubted military power now to proceed with the de facto
annexation of the West Bank. That process has already gone very far, and it is
accelerating. Is it conceivable, then, that there can still be negotiation about
the future of the West Bank? That question was put to Henry Kissinger recently.
He answered:

''It is not only conceivable; it is imperative. Annexation of the West Bank -
overt or disguised - will sow the seeds of endless crises, one of which will
inevitably erupt into conflagration. It is not even in the interest of Israel
however narrowly conceived.

''The incorporation of Gaza and the West Bank into Israel will sooner or later
produce an Arab majority that will destroy the essence of the Jewish state. And
if Israel seeks to escape this dilemma by expelling all the Arabs it will lose
the moral support of even its best friends. Over an historical period Israel
would not be able to withstand the crisis that would result.''

Mr. Kissinger talked about prospects for peace in the Middle East in an extended
interview with The Economist of London. The interview is must reading for anyone
concerned about the area. For it conveys with rare clarity the urgency of the
situation for all the immediate parties: Israel, its Arab neighbors, the United
States.

In the wake of the Lebanese war, many people see a new opportunity for a
peaceful settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Mr. Kissinger says ''The
circumstances for progress'' are ''the best I can remember.'' But he warns that
the opportunity is limited, that things may get much worse if the parties let it
slip away. And the danger is that both Israel and the Arabs will be immobilized
by illusions.

The Israeli illusion, Mr. Kissinger suggests, is that ''somehow or other they
can maneuver events to a de facto annexation of the West Bank.'' Thus the Begin
Government intends to go on taking land in the occupied territory, building vast
suburban developments there and agreeing to negotiate only an ''autonomy'' for
the Palestinian inhabitants so narrow that, as Mr. Kissinger says, it ''deprives
the word autonomy of its dictionary meaning.''

The Arabs' illusion, as he sees it, is that American pressure will force Israeli
withdrawal from occupied territory in return for only ''verbal formulae'' - that
is, Arab recognition of Israel without effective protection for its security.
Such a course would mean the demoralization of Israel, Mr. Kissinger warns, and
the Arabs must not think it will be allowed to happen. They must negotiate the
hard questions of security.

He praises President Reagan's peace proposal for the Middle East because it
directly addresses those illusions and offers an alternative path of realism.
Mr. Kissinger defines its essential elements as follows:

''(1) That the negotiating partners on the West Bank should be Jordan and
Israel; (2) that the West Bank authority elected by Palestinians should be
associated with Jordan; (3) that annexation of the West Bank and Gaza by Israel
will not be accepted by the United States or by any other country; (4) that
there be a moratorium on new Israeli settlements on the West Bank during a peace
process; (5) that the negotiation must deal with Israel's security as well as
recognition.''

If the crucial need for Israel is security undertakings, the Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza must have ''a decisive role, a political role, in determining
their political future, within the framework of association with Jordan.'' As
for the P.L.O., Mr.  Kissinger says its role will depend on ''a true turn
towards the political option.'' It is here that the urgency of movement on the
Reagan plan comes in. ''Reagan's initiative must yield some tangible results,''
Mr. Kissinger says, ''while the impact of the P.L.O.'s lost military option is
still fresh in everybody's mind.'' If there are no results in 12 to 18 months,
the region may slip toward radical visions - and instability as far away as the
Persian Gulf.

King Hussein is the key actor now. ''If Hussein steps forward and we stick to
our course,'' Mr. Kissinger says, ''many Israeli fears will be reduced... In a
serious, sustained negotiation with Hussein I do not believe that any Israeli
government could maintain opposition in principle to the return of the
overwhelming majority of the Arab populations to some form of genuine Arab
control.''

A month from now the Reagan plan will come to a critical test.  King Hussein is
to meet the President in Washington Dec. 21. He has spoken favorably of the plan
but has not yet done the essential: said he is ready to negotiate with Israel.
He needs some gesture of hope and assurance -which in Mr. Kissinger's analysis
would be the moratorium on West Bank settlements.

Many of us who criticized Henry Kissinger when he was in office have not changed
our view that on such issues as Vietnam and Chile he used power beyond the
limits of decency. (We can expect to learn more about his role in Chile in a
forthcoming Atlantic Monthly article by Seymour Hersh.) But on the Middle East
he has consistently been both practical and far-sighted. Israelis and Arabs
should listen to him now, and act before it is too late.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 22, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Calendar

BYLINE: By Marjorie Hunter

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 617 words


Monday

This is Thanksgiving Week, usually a slow period in the capital.  Along with
much of the rest of official Washington, President Reagan will have an extended
holiday as he flies tomorrow to his California ranch. Before he leaves he will
deliver a major televised address from the White House at 8 P.M. today in which
he is expected to seek improved relations with the Soviet Union and its new
Communist Party leader, Yuri V. Andropov. Before his speech, the President is
expected to announce his decision on basing the MX missile.

The Reagans will have a Thanksgiving turkey dinner on Thursday in California.
They will return to Washington Sunday or Monday.  In Memoriam: It was 19 years
ago today that President Kennedy was a@s@s@a@s@s@i@n@a@t@e@d in Dallas and a
stunned Lyndon Baines Johnson took the oath of office aboard Air Force One. The
Special Forces Association will be among those remembering, as members of the
Green Berets lay a wreath at the Kennedy grave in Arlington Cemetery at 11 A.M.

The Hungry: The United States Conference of Mayors will hold a news conference
to discuss emergency needs for food and shelter for the unemployed and homeless
this winter. 2 P.M., 1620 I Street N.W.

West Bank: The American University Center for Mediterranean Studies will open a
two-day symposium on the West Bank and Gaza. 9:30 A.M., Kay Spiritual Life
Center, American University.

Herbicides: Representative Thomas A. Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota, and
James Curried, commander of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, will discuss proposed
new legislation to compensate Vietnam veterans exposed to herbicides. 9:30 A.M.,
340 Cannon Building.

Fertility: A National Research Council panel will open a two-day public
conference on fertility research and population policy in developing countries.
9:15 A.M., 2100 C Street N.W.
Tuesday

The Labor Department is expected to have good economic news as it announces the
October Consumer Price Index. Consumer prices rose only a modest two-tenths of 1
percent the month before, and the October index is likely to show inflation
continuing to be brought under control, largely because of declining mortgage
rates and housing prices.

Civil Rights: The United States Commission on Civil Rights will issue a report
on unemployment and underemployment of black, Hispanic and female workers. 10
A.M., National Housing Center.

Lame Ducks: The National Institute on Economics and Law will discuss
special-interest legislation that is likely to be considered when Congress
returns Nov. 29 for a special session. 3 P.M., Capital Hilton Hotel.

Bail-Out: Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, and Senator Warren B. Rudman,
Republican of New Hampshire, will discuss their opposition to pending
legislation to assist three corporations, Georgia Pacific, Weyerhaeuser and
Milliken, accused of price-fixing.  4 P.M., ll07 Dirksen Building.

Caribbean: Ambassador Carlos Despradel of the Dominican Republic will discuss
social and economic development in Central America and the Caribbean. 5:30 P.M.,
Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies.
Wednesday

Paul A. Volcker, chairman of the Federal Reserve, will testify on interest rates
and the outlook for economic recovery. 10 A.M., Room 2128 Rayburn Building.
Friday

The Commerce Department's report on export and import trade in October is almost
certain to show a widening trade deficit for the United States.  Marjorie Hunter

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS ON NUCLEAR STRATEGY TOWARD SOVIET UNION

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3622 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 22


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's speech on arms policy tonight,
as recorded by The New York Times:

The week before last was an especially moving one here in Washington. The
Vietnam veterans finally came home once and for all to America's heart. They
were welcomed with tears, with pride and with a monument to their great
sacrifices. Many of their names, like those of our Republic's greatest citizens,
are now engraved in stone in this city that belongs to all of us. On behalf of
the nation, let me again thank the Vietnam veterans from the bottom of my heart
for their courageous service to America.

Seeing those moving scenes, I know mothers of a new generation must have worried
about their children and about peace. And that's what I'd like to talk to you
about tonight - the future of our children in a world where peace is made uneasy
by the presence of nuclear weapons.

A year ago I said the time was right to move forward on arms control. I outlined
several proposals and said nothing would have a higher priority in this
Administration. Now, a year later, I want to report on those proposals and on
other efforts we're making to insure the safety of our children's future.

The prevention of conflict and the reduction of weapons are the most important
public issues of our time. Yet, on no other issue are there more misconceptions
and misunderstandings. You, the American people, deserve an explanation from
your Government on what our policy is on these issues. Too often the experts
have been content to discuss grandiose strategies among themselves, and cloud
the public debate in technicalities no one can understand. The result is that
many Americans have become frightened and, let me say, fear of the unknown is
entirely understandable. Unfortunately, much of the information emerging in this
debate bears little semblance to the facts.

U.S. After World War II

To begin, let's go back to what the world was like at the end of World War II.
The United States was the only undamaged industrial power in the world. Our
military power was at its peak, and we alone had the atomic weapon. But we
didn't use this wealth and this power to bully, we used it to rebuild. We raised
up the war-ravaged economies, including the economies of those who had fought
against us.

At first, the peace of the world was unthreatened, because we alone were left
with any real power, and we were using it for the good of our fellow man. Any
potential enemy was deterred from aggression because the cost would have far
outweighed the gain.

As the Soviets' power grew, we still managed to maintain the peace. The U.S. had
established a system of alliances with NATO as the centerpiece. In addition, we
grew even more respected as a world leader with a strong economy and deeply held
moral values. With our commitment to help shape a better world, the U.S. also
pursued and always pursued every diplomatic channel for peace. And for at least
30 years after World War II, the United States still continued to possess a
large military advantage over the Soviet Union. Our strength deterred -that is,
prevented - aggression against us.

This nation's military objective has always been to maintain peace by preventing
war. This is neither a Democratic nor a Republican policy. It's supported by our
allies. And most important of all, it's worked for nearly 40 years.

Nuclear Deterrence

What do we mean when we speak of nuclear deterrence? Certainly we don't want
such weapons for their own sake. We do not desire excessive forces, or what some
people have called overkill.  Basically, it's a matter of others' knowing that
starting a conflict would be more costly to them than anything they might hope
to gain.  And, yes, it is sadly ironic that in these modern times it still takes
weapons to prevent war. I wish it did not.

We desire peace, but peace is a goal, not a policy. Lasting peace is what we
hope for at the end of our journey; it doesn't describe the steps we must take,
nor the paths we should follow to reach that goal. I intend to search for peace
along two parallel paths - deterrence and arms reductions. I believe these are
the only paths that offer any real hope for an enduring peace.

And let me say I believe that if we follow prudent policies, the risk of nuclear
conflict will be reduced. Certainly the United States will never use its forces
except in response to attack. Through the years, Soviet leaders have also
expressed a sober view of nuclear war; and if we maintain a strong deterrent,
they are exceedingly unlikely to launch an attack.

Now, while the policy of deterrence has stood the test of time, the things we
must do in order to maintain deterrence have changed.

U.S. and Soviet Arms Spending

You often hear that the United States and the Soviet Union are in an arms race.
Well, the truth is that while the Soviet Union has raced, we have not. As you
can see from this blue U.S. line (See accompanying chart entitled ''Defense
Spending''), in constant dollars our defense spending in the 1960's went up
because of Vietnam and then it went downward through much of the 1970's. Now,
follow the red line, which is Soviet spending. It's gone up and up and up. In
spite of a stagnating Soviet economy, Soviet leaders invest 12 to 14 percent of
their country's gross national product in military spending, two to three times
the level we invest.

I might add that the defense share of our United States Federal budget has gone
way down, too. Watch the blue line again (See accompanying chart, ''Defense
Share of Federal Budget''). In 1962, when John Kennedy was President, 46
percent, almost half of the Federal budget, went to our national defense. In
recent years, about one-quarter of our budget has gone to defense, while the
share for social programs has nearly doubled. And most of our defense budget is
spent on people, not weapons.

The combination of the Soviets' spending more and the U.S. spending
proportionately less changed the military balance and weakened our deterrent.
Today, in virtually every measure of military power the Soviet Union enjoys a
decided advantage.

This chart (accompanying chart, ''Strategic Missiles and Bombers'') shows the
changes in the total number of intercontinental missiles and bombers. You will
see that in 1962 and in 1972, the United States forces remained about the same,
even dropping some by 1982. But take a look now at the Soviet side. In 1962, at
the time of the Cuban missile crisis, the Soviets could not compare with us in
terms of strength. In 1972, when we signed the SALT I Treaty, we were nearly
equal. But in 1982, well, that red Soviet bar stretching above the blue American
bar tells the story.

Comparison of ICBM's

I could show you chart after chart where there's a great deal of red and a much
lesser amount of U.S. blue. For example, the Soviet Union has deployed a third
more land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles than we have. Believe it or
not, we froze our number in 1965 and have deployed no additional missiles since
then.

The Soviet Union put to sea 60 new ballistic missile submarines in the last 15
years. Until last year we hadn't commissioned one in that same period.

The Soviet Union has built over 200 modern Backfire bombers - and is building 30
more a year. For 20 years, the United States has deployed no new strategic
bombers. Many of our B-52 bombers are now older than the pilots who fly them.

The Soviet Union now has 600 of the missiles considered most threatening by both
sides - the intermediate-range missiles based on land. We have none. The United
States withdrew its intermediate-range land-based missiles from Europe almost 20
years ago.

The world has also witnessed unprecedented growth in the area of Soviet
conventional forces; the Soviets far exceed us in the number of tanks, artillery
pieces, aircraft and ships they produce every year. What is more, when I arrived
in this office I learned that in our own forces we had planes that couldn't fly
and ships that couldn't leave port, mainly for lack of spare parts and crew
members.

Soviet Arms Buildup

The Soviet military buildup must not be ignored. We've recognized the problem
and together with our allies we've begun to correct the imbalance. Look at this
chart (accompanying chart, ''Projected Defense Spending'') of projected real
defense spending for the next several years. Here's the Soviet line. Let us
assume the Soviets' rate of spending remains at the level they followed since
the 1960's.

The blue line is the United States. If my defense proposals are passed, it will
still take five years before we come close to the Soviet level. Yet the
modernization of our strategic and conventional forces will assure that
deterrence works and peace prevails.

Our deployed nuclear forces were built before the age of microcircuits. It's not
right to ask our young men and women in uniform to maintain and operate such
antiques. Many have already given their lives in missile explosions and aircraft
accidents caused by the old age of their equipment. We must replace and
modernize our forces, and that's why I've decided to proceed with the production
and deployment of the new ICBM known as the MX.

Three earlier Presidents worked to develop this missile. Based on the best
advice I could get, I concluded that the MX is the right missile at the right
time. On the other hand, when I arrived in office, I felt the proposal on where
and how to base the missile simply cost too much in terms of money, and the
impact on our citizens' lives.

Closely Based Silos

I've concluded, however, it's absolutely essential that we proceed to produce
this missile, and that we base it in a series of closely based silos at Warren
Air Force Base near Cheyenne, Wyo.

This plan requires only half as many missiles as the earlier plan and will fit
in an area of only 20 square miles. It is the product of around-the-clock
research that has been under way since I directed a search for a better, cheaper
way. I urge the members of Congress who must pass this plan to listen and
examine the facts, before they come to their own conclusion.

Some may question what modernizing our military has to do with peace. Well, as I
explained earlier, a secure force keeps others from threatening us and that
keeps the peace. And just as important, it also increases the prospects of
reaching significant arms reductions with the Soviets, and that's what we really
want. The United States wants deep cuts in the world's arsenal of weapons.

But unless we demonstrate the will to rebuild our strength and restore the
military balance, the Soviets, since they're so far ahead, have little incentive
to negotiate with us. Let me repeat that point because it goes to the heart of
our policies: Unless we demonstrate the will to rebuild our strength, the
Soviets have little incentive to negotiate. If we hadn't begun to modernize, the
Soviet negotiators would know we had nothing to bargain with except talk.  They
would know we were bluffing without a good hand because they know what cards we
hold - just as we know what's in their hand.

'One-Sided Arms Control'

You may recall that in 1969 the Soviets didn't want to negotiate a treaty
banning antiballistic missiles. It was only after our Senate narrowly voted to
fund an antiballistic missile program that the Soviets agreed to negotiate. We
then reached an agreement.

We also know that one-sided arms control doesn't work. We've tried time and time
again to set an example by cutting our own forces in the hope that the Soviets
will do likewise. The result has always been that they keep building.

I believe our strategy for peace will succeed. Never before has the United
States proposed such a comprehensive program of nuclear arms control. Never in
our history have we engaged in so many negotiations with the Soviets to reduce
nuclear arms and to find a stable peace. What we are saying to them is this: We
will modernize our military in order to keep the balance for peace, but wouldn't
it be better if we both simply reduced our arsenals to a much lower level?

Let me begin with the negotiations on the intermediate-range nuclear forces that
are currently under way in Geneva. As I said earlier, the most threatening of
these forces are the land-based missiles, which the Soviet Union now has aimed
at Europe, the Middle East and Asia.

Warheads on Soviet Missiles

This chart (accompanying chart, ''Missile Warheads'') shows the number of
warheads on these Soviet missiles. In 1972 there were 600.  The United States
was at zero. In 1977 there were 600. The U.S. was still at zero. Then the
Soviets began deploying powerful new missiles with three warheads and a reach of
thousands of miles - the SS-20.  Since then the bar has gone through the roof -
the Soviets have added a missile with three warheads every week. Still you see
no United States blue on the chart. Although the Soviet leaders earlier this
year declared they'd frozen deployment of this dangerous missile, they have in
fact continued deployment.

Last year, on Nov. 18, I proposed the total, global elimination of all these
missiles. I proposed that the U.S. would deploy no comparable missiles, which
are scheduled for late 1983, if the Soviet Union would dismantle theirs. We
would follow agreement on the landbased missiles with limits on other
intermediate-range systems.

The European governments strongly support our initiative. The Soviet Union has
thus far shown little inclination to take this major step to zero levels. Yet I
believe and I'm hoping that, as the talks proceed and as we approach the
scheduled placement of our new systems in Europe, the Soviet leaders will see
the benefits of such a farreaching agreement.

This summer we also began negotiations on strategic arms reductions, the
proposal we call Start. Here we're talking about intercontinental missiles - the
weapons with a longer range than the intermediate-range ones I was just
discussing. We are negotiating on the basis of deep reductions. I proposed in
May that we cut the number of warheads on these missiles to an equal number,
roughly onethird below current levels. I also proposed that we cut the number of
missiles themselves to an equal number, about half the current U.S. level. Our
proposals would eliminate some 4,700 warheads and some 2,250 missiles. I think
that would be quite a service to mankind.

Ballistic Missiles

This chart (accompanying chart, ''Strategic Ballistic Missiles'') shows the
current level of United States ballistic missiles, both land- and sea-based.
This is the Soviet level. We intend to convince the Soviets it would be in their
own best interest to reduce these missiles. Look at the reduced numbers both
sides would have under our proposal - quite a dramatic change. We also seek to
reduce the total destructive power of these missiles and other elements of
United States and Soviet strategic forces.

In 1977, when the last Administration proposed more limited reductions, the
Soviet Union refused even to discuss them. This time their reaction has been
quite different. Their opening position is a serious one, and even though it
doesn't meet our objective of deep reductions, there's no question we're heading
in the right direction. One reason for this change is clear. The Soviet Union
knows that we are now serious about our own strategic programs and that they
must be prepared to negotiate in earnest.

We also have other important arms control efforts under way. In the talks in
Vienna on mutual and balanced force reductions, we've proposed cuts in military
personnel to a far lower and equal level.  And in the 40-nation Committee on
Disarmament in Geneva, we're working to develop effective limitations on nuclear
testing and chemical weapons. The whole world remains outraged by the Soviets'
and their allies' use of biological and chemical weapons against defenseless
people in Afghanistan, Cambodia and Laos. This experience makes ironclad
verification all the more essential for arms control.

There is, of course, much more that needs to be done. In an age when
intercontinental missiles can span half the globe in less than half an hour,
it's crucial that Soviet and American leaders have a clear understanding of each
other's capabilities and intentions.

Accident and Misunderstanding

Last June in Berlin, and again at the United Nations Special Session on
Disarmament, I vowed that the United States would make every effort to reduce
the risks of accident and misunderstanding and thus to strengthen mutual
confidence between the United States and the Soviet Union. Since then, we've
been actively studying detailed measures to implement this Berlin initiative.

Today, I would like to announce some of the measures which I've proposed in a
special letter just sent to the Soviet leadership and which I've instructed our
ambassadors in Geneva to discuss with their Soviet counterparts. They include
but also go beyond some of the suggestions I made in Berlin.

The first of these measures involves advance notification of all United States
and Soviet test launches of intercontinental ballistic missiles. We will also
seek Soviet agreement on notification of all sea-launched ballistic missiles as
well as intermediate-range landbased ballistic missiles of the type we're
currently negotiating. This would remove surprise and uncertainty at the sudden
appearance of such missiles on the warning screens of the two countries.

In another area of potential misunderstanding, we propose to the Soviets that we
provide each other with advance notification of our major military exercises.
Here again, our objective is to reduce the surprise and uncertainty surrounding
otherwise sudden moves by either side.

Exchange of Data

These sorts of measures are designed to deal with the immediate issues of
miscalcualtion in time of crisis. But there are deeper, longer-term problems as
well. In order to clear away some of the mutual ignorance and suspicion between
our two countries, I will propose that we both engage in a broad-ranging
exchange of basic data about our nuclear forces. I am instructing our
ambassadors at the negotiations on both strategic intermediate forces to seek
Soviet agreement on an expanded exchange of information. The more one side knows
about what the other side is doing, the less room there is for surprise and
miscalculation.

Probably everyone has heard of the so-called hot line, which enables me to
communicate directly with the Soviet leadership in the event of a crisis. The
existing hot line is dependable and rapid - with both ground and satellite
links. But because it's so important, I've also directed that we carefully
examine any possible improvements to the existing hot line system.

Now, although we've begun negotiations on these many proposals, this doesn't
mean we've exhausted all the initiatives that could help to reduce the risk of
accidental conflict. We'll leave no opportunity unexplored, and we'll consult
closely with Senators Nunn, Jackson and Warner, and other members of the
Congress who've made important suggestions in this field.

We are also making strenuous efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to
additional countries. It would be tragic if we succeeded in reducing existing
arsenals only to have new threats emerge in other areas of the world.

'Peace Above All Else'

Earlier I spoke of America's contributions to peace following World War II, of
all we did to promote peace and prosperity for our fellow man. Well, we're still
those same people. We still seek peace above all else.

I want to remind our own citizens and those around the world of this tradition
of American good will because I am concerned about the effects the nuclear fear
is having on our people. The most upsetting letters I receive are from
schoolchildren who write to me as a class assignment. It's evident they've
discussed the most nightmarish aspects of a nuclear holocaust in their
classrooms.  Their letters are often full of terror. Well, this should not be
so.

The philosopher Spinoza said, ''Peace is a virtue, a state of mind, a
disposition for benevolence, confidence, justice.'' Well, those are the
qualities we want our children to inherit, not fear. They must grow up confident
if they're to meet the challenges of tomorrow, as we will meet the challenges of
today.

I began these remarks speaking of our children. I want to close on the same
theme. Our children should not grow up frightened. They should not fear the
future. We are working to make it peaceful and free. I believe their future can
be the brightest, most exciting of any generation. We must reassure them and let
them know that their parents and the leaders of this world are seeking above all
else to keep them safe, and at peace. I consider this to be a sacred trust.

My fellow Americans, on this Thanksgiving, when we have so much to be grateful
for, let us give special thanks for our peace, our freedom and our good people.
I've always believed that this land was set aside in an uncommon way, that a
divine plan placed this great continent between the oceans to be found by a
people from every corner of the earth who had a special love of faith, freedom
and peace. Let us reaffirm America's destiny of goodness and good will.  Let us
work for peace, and, as we do, let us remember the lines of the famous old hymn,
''O God of love, O King of peace, make wars throughout the world to cease.''

Thank you, good night, and God bless you.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of charts President Reagan used in his speech
photo of President Reagan

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN PICKS PENTAGON AIDE AS HEAD OF VETERANS AGENCY

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 360 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 22


President Reagan announced today that he had nominated Harry N. Walters, an
Assistant Secretary of the Army, to be the chief of the Veterans Administration,
succeeding Robert Nimmo.

White House aides indicated recently that Mr. Walters, 46 years old, had been
chosen for the post. But before the nomination was official it ran into a snag
on Capitol Hill, where Veterans Affairs Committee legislators complained that
they had not been consulted.

Mr. Nimmo said in October that he would resign after a turbulent tenure in which
he was accused of being unsympathetic to the needs of Vietnam War veterans.

Mr. Walters, whose nomination must be confirmed by the Senate, was criticized by
Senator Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, when he was appointed to
the Pentagon post for serving only four years in the Army after graduating from
West Point in 1959.

Mr. Walters said he had left the service for a business career to support his
family.

Earlier Criticism

Senator Thurmond and Senator Alan Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, were critical
of the lack of prior consultation before Mr. Reagan made his choice. Mr.
Thurmond now says he will support the nomination.

Senator Simpson, chairman of the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee, is out of
the country, but an aide said that the Senator did not plan to block the
nomination and would keep an open mind pending hearings.

Senator Simpson had lobbied for the appointment of his committee staff director,
Thomas Harvey, angered that Mr. Harvey had not been interviewed at the time the
Walters nomination was first mentioned.  Since then, Mr. Harvey, a Vietnam
veteran, was interviewed for the job.

The American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars welcomed Mr.  Walters's
nomination while urging that he uphold the interests of veterans.

Mylio Kraja, executive director of the American Legion, said: ''Time will only
tell whether he will be good or bad. We would have preferred a war veteran and a
Vietnam veteran would have been most logical since they are the most visible of
our veterans.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 23, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NIXON AND THE RUSSIANS;
'We must get to the causes of our difficulties.'

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


THE subject was Soviet-American relations, a field in which Richard M. Nixon has
more than passing knowledge and no little experience, and the former President,
once a hawk's hawk, the classic Cold Warrior, relished delivering what became an
exuberant lecture, pausing periodically, half amused, to remind his listener
that he was not a dove.

The disclaimer made sense since Mr. Nixon was, after all, a man whose early
career was marked by repeated, some would say vicious, attacks on those he
considered ''soft on Communism.''

''It disturbs me, and I'm a hawk on the Soviet Union,'' he said emphatically in
an interview, ''that the hawks always want an embargo. Our trade with the
Russians amounts to $2 billion; Europe's with the Russians is $40 billion.''

Clearly, Mr. Nixon was talking about the now lifted sanctions on the Siberian
pipeline, sanctions he said hurt the Europeans more than the Russians and of
which he did not wholly approve. And since it was the Reagan Administration that
imposed the sanctions, he was indirectly criticizing the President.

''I'm not among those who say the Russians are repressive, and they are;
expansionary, and they are; that they lie, although they do; and that their
agriculture is in horrible shape, although it is,'' he said. ''Those who do say
these things say we must have nothing to do with the Russians, that if we
isolate them, they'll collapse. These people won't say we must deal with them.
But we must, with a carrot or a stick.''

Mr. Nixon's quarrel was with the extreme right, some of whom have thought him
''soft on Communism,'' yet in the last years, even weeks, ''those who do say
these things'' have included President Reagan.

Mr. Nixon's point was that despite its problems the Soviet Union is here to stay
and that it is in America's best interest to talk with their leaders rather than
ignoring them or denouncing their political system. And if Mr. Nixon had his
way, Mr. Reagan would meet his Russian counterpart, Yuri V. Andropov, negotiate
with him and see that the United States reestablished what he called ''the
pattern of regularly scheduled summits.''

He said the two leaders should work to ''reduce the possibility of
miscalculation, begin some movement on arms control - and some movement is
possible - and explore our economic relations'' because ''Russia needs us, and
we should supply what what they need (economically) at a price.''

Mr. Nixon was distressed that shortly before Leonid I. Brezhnev died, he accused
the Administration of ''threatening to push the world into the flames of a
nuclear war'' and of pursuing policies of ''adventurism, rudeness and
undisguised egoism.''

''Brezhnev,'' he said, ''wouldn't have made that speech if a summit had been
scheduled in May.'' Mr. Nixon negotiated with Mr. Brezhnev, and, he said, his
meetings produced results over the India-Pakistan war, Cienfuegos and ''even
Vietnam. They supported the North Vietnamese when we bombed, but they went to
the summit, and more Russian Jews got out of the Soviet Union. Detente produced
produced arms control.''

Summits convinced him, he said, of the value of one-on-one contact ''even if you
get a bland communique at the end'' because they ''reduce the chance of war by
miscalculation. (The leaders) would know each other. A meeting inhibits
aggressive acts.''

The eased tensions of detente were a 1980 campaign issue. They became something
of an anathema when President Reagan took office, and that disturbed Mr. Nixon
since detente was his legacy to the Ford and Carter Administrations, both of
which pursued it. But he believes the President is pragmatic, and has nothing
but the highest praise for Secretary of State George Shultz.

Mr. Nixon said a Reagan-Andropov summit should be preceded by a
''Europe-American summit, a working one, no press, no spouses, no fancy
dinners,'' during which the Atlantic partners must iron out their differences
and come to an understanding that could prevent further pipeline disasters.

The United States and Europe, he said, ''must develop a common policy for the
future. One, we either move together with Europe or not at all. Two, I'm for
trade but not for aid to the Soviet Union.  Their trade with us should not be
subsidized. Three, there should be restraints on the trade of military
technology, direct or indirect.'' On these points, he and the President appear
to agree.

His case made, the enthusiastic, even outgoing man in the familiar blue suit,
blue shirt and dark blue tie held by a gold and pearl stickpin, smiled broadly,
then, as if to make himself perfectly clear, went on.

''We and the Russians must get to the causes of our difficulties,'' he said.
''I'm not suggesting we should be soft on the Russians. God knows, I've never
been that. But it is vitally important that the leaders know each other not by
hot line but face to face.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 24, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CHANNEL 13, IN FUND SQUEEZE, HALTS SERIES AND WEIGHS CUTS

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 3465 words


Caught in the worst financial crisis in its 20-year history, Channel 13,
WNET-TV, the New York metropolitan area's major public television station, has
abruptly postponed a multimillion dollar series and is likely to lay off staff
and reduce programming.

Channel 13 has a deficit of $6 million, a record liability largely attributed to
operating The Dial, a two-year-old magazine of listings and articles about
public television. The magazine has proven such a drain that some employees at
the station now refer to it as ''Channel 13's Vietnam.''

''The Dial has bled us,'' said Walter Goldstein, vice president of finance and
administration at the station.  ''It was a disaster from the beginning,'' added
James Kobak, a magazine consultant who was brought in to analyze the magazine's
problems late last year.

Lack of Reserve Cash Cited

John Jay Iselin, president of Channel 13, attributes the station's troubles to a
lack of reserve cash that would help tide over productions before payments from
financing agencies are received.  ''For the last 20 years, we have operated
without any substantial working capital, which has caused us to operate with
more of a line of credit than is prudent,'' he said.

Observers at the station and outside it note that the problems began well before
the onset of cutbacks in Federal funds this year.

Specifically, some Channel 13 officials say that in the last 18 months,
expenditures for The Dial have sopped up $3.7 million of the station's general
funds that could have helped cover program production costs and repay debts. Mr.
Iselin said: ''The costs are greater than we thought they would be: $3.7 million
is a lot of money. We long to have it back in hand. This year we were trying to
break even on The Dial. We have been breaking even since September.''

Other significant factors have contributed to the financial worries at the
station, which has an annual budget of almost $50 million.  These include more
than $1.2 million in expenditures over the last two years for a money-losing
tape duplication facility operated by Channel 13 in Ann Arbor, Mich.; a policy
of commitment to specific programs before full financial backing has been
obtained, and a reliance on bank loans that since 1979 have drained $1.7 million
in interest payments, which are not tax deductible.

1975 Crisis Recalled

Officials at the station say that its financial situation is far worse than the
one it experienced in 1975, when a $1.5 million overrun on the $5.2 million
production cost of ''The Adams Chronicles'' forced Channel 13 to drop two local
programs. The severity of WNET's troubles echoes the crisis that this year
caused KCET, the Los Angeles public television station, to sell its studio and
to stop the production of expensive national programs.

Last week, executives at Channel 13 decided to suspend filming of one of the
station's most ambitious undertakings - a 10-hour series called ''Civilization
and the Jews.'' The documentary history, narrated by Abba Eban, former Israeli
chief delegate to the United Nations, has been in production at locations around
the world. Six hours had been filmed at a cost of $6 million when the order came
to suspend filming while a search for an additional $2 million was started.

In addition, according to William Lamb, a senior vice president at the station,
there is likely to be a delay in the production of another much-publicized
project, a 10-part science series called ''The Brain,'' which Channel 13 is
producing in cooperation with French and Japanese television.

Top executives of the station and trustees were holding meetings to decide how
to cope with the deficit, and severe staff cutbacks were likely, according to
Charles Warren, WNET's chief administrative officer. ''We are challenging every
assumption about the way the station does business,'' he said.

Helping Public Stations

Channel 13 produces or buys nearly 20 percent of the programs shown in the
public television system, including ''Dance in America'' and ''Great
Performances.''

Channel 13's predicament coincides with the best and worst of times for the
station. Its prime-time ratings are its highest ever, but efforts to raise money
from foundations and corporations, hard hit by the recession, have been
disappointing. Nevertheless, John S.  Crowley, chairman of Channel 13's finance
committee said: ''We are not teetering on the brink. We have been hurt by a
series of things that have all hit at once. It has put us in a temporary bind,
which we will work our way out of. That I am confident of.''

Mr. Iselin, who has been president of the station since 1973 and is paid
$110,000 a year, has maintained the support of the station's 33 trustees.

While acknowledging that Channel 13 had accumulated a $6 million deficit, Mr.
Iselin said, ''This operation has balanced the books since I have been here.''
He is able to make the statement because underwriting grants and expenses of
programs in production do not show up in the annual budget until the year that
these programs appear on the air. Thus, although the station's budget has been
balanced, the ledger of current assets and liabilities shows a cumulative
''working capital deficit'' of $6 million in cash that the station lacks to
cover day-to-day expenses now and in the coming months.

Executives at other major public television stations said that many of Channel
13's financial practices had been used by their stations.  But in the case of
Channel 13, the practices are reported to have grown considerably in the absence
of strict financial controls.

Matter of Taking Chances

''You take a lot of chances in this business,'' said Ward B.  Chamberlain Jr.,
president of WETA-TV, the public station in Washington. He added: ''Jay Iselin
is a gutsy guy. I don't know that I would take the chances he has taken. They
have been terrific for the system, but now WNET has gotten overextended.''

The biggest chance taken by Mr. Iselin has been The Dial. When he first
advocated its publication three years ago, the idea of a glossy monthly as a
reward for subscribers to public television around the country was financially
attractive for several reasons. By using the affluent, highly educated
subscribers as a lure, Mr. Iselin hoped to generate revenue by selling
advertising in the magazine. The Dial was also regarded as financially promising
because of its nonprofit status, which meant it paid a reduced postal rate.

However, launching a magazine is considered a gamble even in the best of
circumstances. Mr. Iselin acknowledged in an interview that ''there are risks in
launching a magazine, but they are risks a station like ours ought to take.''

His colleagues at public television stations in Washington, Chicago, and Los
Angeles who had formed a cooperative to start The Dial, felt differently.
Shortly before the magazine's first issue in October 1980, they decided against
assuming the financial risk of helping Channel 13 to absorb its production
costs.

As Mr. Chamberlain of the Washington station explained: ''I was not in a
position to go to my board and say, 'We are entering into a wonderful venture,
but there might be some liabilities other than ones I could name,' and get them
to approve it.''

Other Stations Play a Role

Each station did agree, however, to provide its own local program listings and
to split revenues from local advertising equally with Channel 13 after covering
the costs of paper, postage and printing.  Channel 13 would keep all revenues
from national advertising. In addition, the stations would pay The Dial 50 cents
for each of their subscribers who took the magazine.

WNET's financial projections for the magazine made in August 1979 predicted a
profit of $122,000 for its second year. That estimate proved wrong.

''They overspent on The Dial,'' said Mr. Kobak, the magazine consultant. ''They
anticipated getting 45 pages of advertising per issue from the very beginning.
That just doesn't happen. They geared up for a real big operation, and it just
wasn't there.''

As advertising revenues failed to meet expectations, and losses continued to
mount, Channel 13 obtained a $1.5 million loan from Morgan Guaranty to help
defray the expenses of the Dial. To date, the station has paid $337,000 in
interest on that loan, none of which is tax deductible because the station is a
nonprofit corporation.

In addition, the station took out $2.5 million in loans from the John Ben Snow
Foundation, a $20 million fund created by the late Mr.  Snow, a businessman who
invested in small-town newspapers. The loans would be repaid out of The Dial's
revenues only if the magazine prospered; if it failed, the loans would be
regarded as a gift. In June, however, the Snow Foundation declined to advance
the $1 million more that Channel 13 had requested. ''The Snow board had lost
faith in the venture after the fourth or fifth projection proved to be grossly
inaccurate,'' said James Patrick Tannian, a partner in the law firm of Reid &
Priest, counsel to the foundation.

Expecting to Make a Profit

Mr. Iselin, when asked why he clung to The Dial in the face of increasing debt,
said: ''When you are investing, it looks as if you are going deeper into debt. I
can't predict that we will make a big profit. We think this is an inherently
prudent and valuable undertaking. Our hope is that we can operate at break-even
or better so all of our membership money can go into programming. We also hope
The Dial will generate revenues and help offset other costs of the station.''

The Dial is distributed free to more than a million people who contribute money
to help support 15 public television stations. As of this fall, advertising and
circulation revenues are covering production and distribution costs. The Dial's
recent break-even situation has been achieved largely because of substantial
cuts in the advertising and editorial department budgets made in June.

Station officials have said no more of Channel 13's money would be provided if
the magazine cannot hold its own. ''We are reviewing it on a monthly basis,''
said Richard Beattie, a partner in the law firm of Simpson, Thacher & Bartlett
and a member of the Channel 13 board.

Peter Bonnani, the magazine's publisher, said: ''The Dial is working on a very
tough basis in the sense of expense. We are really operating on as low-cost a
basis as we can. Our ability to show a profit is very real and present.''

Subsidiary Is a Factor

Another business venture that has contributed to Channel 13's financial crisis
is a tape duplication subsidiary of the station in Ann Arbor. The operation was
successful until several years ago, when Channel 13's decision not to invest in
new equipment led to a loss of business. Over the last two years, according to
Mr. Goldstein, Channel 13 spent $1.2 million on that facility.

Last month, Channel 13 sold the subsidiary to George Marketos, director of the
station's enterprises division, which had operated the tape facility. ''We had
come up with a fair market price,'' said Mr. Iselin. ''George Marketos was
interested. He knew the risks.'' In addition, Mr. Iselin said, ''I let it be
negotiated at arms length. I never talked to him about it because he was on our
payroll.'' Mr.  Marketos declined to discuss the details of the purchase.

Mr. Marketos paid $100,000 in cash for the company's $2 million in assets and
assumed up to $4 million in liabilities, which could include $2.3 million in
back taxes that Channel 13 had been contesting. Still, Mr. Goldstein said, the
$1.2 million outlay by Channel 13 for the tape facility over the last two years
''was cash advanced that we never collected,'' and consequently contributed to
the cash squeeze now being felt by the station

Another significant cause of Channel 13's financial plight has been the
undertaking of what Mr. Iselin calls ''prudent risks'' to finance production;
that is, starting work on a specific program, often costing several million
dollars, with only the expectation, but no guarantee, that financial backing
will be found. The policy failed this year when the station tried to put
together financing for ''Nature,'' a series of nature and wildlife films from
the British Broadcasting Corporation that cost $1.2 million.

Plan to Obtain Underwriter

Channel 13 officials were sure that they could find a corporate underwriter to
put up $750,000 of the cost. Consequently, they sold the series to the public
television stations for $434,00.

When no underwriter materialized, Channel 13 tried to pull the series out of the
fall schedule, but officials of the Public Broadcasting Service would not permit
it to do so. ''We said they should hold to their commitment,'' said Lawrence K.
Grossman, president of PBS, which distributes programs to stations.

Channel 13 had to take $750,000 from its operating budget to pay for the
program, which has achieved high ratings and critical acclaim. ''In hindsight,''
Mr. Iselin told his trustees two weeks ago, ''we offered it imprudently.''

The station's increased borrowing in recent years has also been instrumental in
adding to the troubles at Channel 13.  Other public television stations such as
WGBH in Boston, WETA in Washington and KCET in Los Angeles have occasionally
relied on loans over the years to carry the costs of programming until
underwriting funds arrived. Recently, however, KCET stopped all borrowing to
alleviate its financial problems. Charles F. Weiss, acting general manager at
KCET, explained, ''In my judgment, if you borrow money to finance programs, it
is an extra expense you have to add on. Although interest rates are dropping,
they are still astronomical.''

Borrowing Began in '79

No public station, however, has borrowed as consistently and extensively as
Channel 13 in recent years. The practice of steady borrowing emerged in 1979 as
the station come out of a period in which it had been flush with cash.

In the mid-70's, Channel 13 solicited and received $13.6 million in
contributions to renovate the Henry Hudson Hotel in midtown Manhattan for its
headquarters. ''It was very easy to get comfortable with that huge cash balance
sitting there,'' said Mr. Warren, the station's chief administrator, adding:
''The cash raised for capital improvements was also used for programs.''

Once construction of the headquarters was started, that cash position began to
deteriorate rapidly, although the station still needed working capital to
continue producing programs.

By 1979, the station began to feel pinched. That October, Mr.  Marketos, then
Channel 13's chief financial officer, warned the station's board of trustees
that cash flow was ''one of the most critical internal problems we have.'' He
explained that contributions for the building had obscured the problem and that
$1 million intended as a working capital fund had been absorbed by cost overruns
in the construction.

Credit From Morgan Guaranty

In June 1979, the station had taken out a $4 million line of credit at Morgan
Guaranty. Asked to explain his decision to assume this debt, Mr. Iselin said:
''By definition when you start quadrupling the budget, you have to quadruple the
number of revenue obligations. You have to keep a line of credit in proportion
to the size of your operation. The question is why we did not negotiate a more
generous line given the nature of the business. We reached a compromise for what
seemed prudent and adequate.''

A spokesman for Morgan said: ''At first, the station used the line
intermittently.'' In the last 18 months, however, he said, ''They have had to
use the line on a constant basis.'' This steady drain coincided with Channel
13's efforts to keep The Dial afloat.  Consequently, interest payments on the $4
million line of credit rose from $110,000 in 1979 to $342,000 in 1980 to
$716,000 last year.  Since this July 1, the station has paid $236,000 in
interest, bringing the total to $1.4 million, none of it tax deductible.

As Channel 13 has had to cope with its mounting financial problems, the
station's board has helped set policies. The group includes several wealthy
individuals, with trustees drawn from the worlds of business, law and politics.
Prominent members in recent years have included Donald C. Platten, chairman of
Chemical Bank; George Plimpton, the author; Brooke Astor, the philanthropist,
and Robert B. Meyner, former Governor of New Jersey.

Some Vocal Individuals

Asked how involved the board members have been in financial decisions, Mr.
Crowley, head of the board's finance committee, said: ''I would certainly not
call it a rubber stamp. As in the case of most boards, it has a few highly vocal
individuals. We have an excellent board with enough people to take issue with
any number of things.''

After a decade of expansion at Channel 13, Mr. Iselin faces some hard choices
about scaling back, and the debate over these choices has begun.

The severe strain created by ''Nature'' and by the need to subsidize such
productions as ''Civilization and the Jews'' and ''The Brain'' have prompted a
new policy at Channel 13. ''Very high-cost productions where we do not have
assured funding are a risk we can no longer afford to take,'' said Mr. Crowley.

Some Possible Ways Out

Nor is it clear exactly how Channel 13 can solve the problem of its
indebtedness. ''We are neither insolvent nor bankrupt,'' said Mr. Goldstein, the
chief financial officer at Channel 13. ''We could always take some of our fixed
assets and sell or mortgage them to cover our costs.''

Since June, Mr. Iselin has taken steps to help ease the financial problems. He
laid off 40 employees and froze management salaries. But the station still has
525 permanent employees. Even if the national programming staff of 125 were
subtracted, WNET still surpasses WCBS-TV, which has 310 people and a budget of
$55 million.

In addition to selling the Ann Arbor facility, Channel 13 last month leased its
idle studio on West 55th Street to Reeves Communicaitons, a commercial
production company, for more than $250,000 a year plus an agreement by Reeves to
renovate and maintain the facility at no cost to WNET.

Last Sunday night, the station ran its first commercial, a 10-second spot for
Piper Heidsieck champagne, for which Channel 13 received $1,000. The station
decided last week to try running fullfledged commercials after its effort at
''enhanced underwriting'' - soft-sell messages by corporate sponsors of programs
- produced only one taker, the NL Industries Foundation, since the experiment
began in September.

Looking to Broadway

Another venture that Mr. Iselin hopes will provide income for the station is
Channel 13's role as backer of ''Alice in Wonderland,'' which will open next
month on Broadway. Using contributions from a group of investors, Channel 13 has
put up one-quarter of the show's $2 million cost, which will enable the station
to televise the production next fall.

All these measures may prove helpful. Nevertheless, the fundamental issue of how
the station operates is unresolved. Providing major productions of distinction
to the nationwide public television system - almost invariably a costly
proposition - has been central to the station's purpose. And, as Channel 13
looks beyond the present financial crisis, its executives are raising serious
questions about the extent to which the station can continue to produce such
programs. Local programming, which has been a primary target of many cutbacks
over the years, is less important to the station and thus more vulnerable to
further budget reductions.

''We recognize we have to do a lot of things, and quickly,'' Mr.  Warren said.
''With a combination of revenues and expense cuts, we have to make up for that
$6 million.'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Jay Iselin photo of The Dial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 25, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA, NOTING TALK BY ANDROPOV, URGES MOSCOW CONCESSIONS

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 334 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Thursday, Nov. 25


China today responded to conciliatory remarks by Yuri Andropov, the new Soviet
party leader, by again calling on Moscow to make new efforts to eliminate
obstacles hindering the normalization of relations.

Mr. Andropov told a Communist Party Central Committee meeting on Monday that the
Kremlin would continue efforts to improve relations with China, declaring that
it was time to overcome ''the inertia of prejudices'' between the two Communist
powers.

''We have noted the statement by Yuri Andropov on Sino-Soviet relations,'' the
Chinese Foreign Ministry said in a two-sentence response to questions by foreign
correspondents.

''We hope to see the new Soviet leadership make new efforts in eliminating the
obstacles hindering the normalization of relations between the two countries,''
it said.

In his first major policy statement since taking office on Nov. 12 after the
death of Leonid I. Brezhnev, Mr. Andropov also said: ''We pay great attention to
every positive response to this from the Chinese side.''

Gestures Made by Both Sides

Western diplomats said the Chinese were also watching carefully for any signals
from Moscow.  Conciliatory gestures have been made by both Moscow and Peking in
the last few months expressing the desire to improve relations after more than
two decades of antagonism.

Huang Hua, who was then the Foreign Minister, went to Moscow earlier this month
to represent China at Mr. Brezhnev's funeral and said he was optimistic that
relations between the two countries could improve through negotiations.

But the Chinese Prime Minister, Zhao Ziyang, said last Friday that there were
still three obstacles to normalization of ties: the Soviet troops deployed along
their common border and in Mongolia, Moscow's intervention in Afghanistan and
its support for Vietnam's military involvement in Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA SAYS IT AWAITS CONCESSIONS FROM THE NEW SOVIET LEADERSHIP

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Nov. 25


Having extended condolences to the Soviet Union on the death of Leonid I.
Brezhnev, China is making clear that it expects his successors to come up with
the concessions that will open the way to more normal relations.

Mr. Brezhnev's death left Peking, like Washington, confronting the uncertainties
of a new Soviet leadership. But the Chinese have the advantage of ongoing
consultations with Moscow that could offer a logical channel for any moves
toward reconciliation.

In his final months, in speeches at Tashkent and Baku, Mr. Brezhnev made two
public overtures to Peking. On Monday, Yuri V. Andropov extended yet another.
The new Soviet party chief said in Moscow that the Kremlin wanted to ''improve
relations with all Socialist nations,'' extending even to ''spheres where for
various reasons we lack the necessary trust and understanding.'' Mr. Andropov
made clear that ''this is also true of our great neighbor, the People's Republic
of China.''

Today, the Chinese Foreign Ministry replied through its information department,
saying: ''We have noted the statement by Yuri Andropov on Sino-Soviet relations.
We hope to see the new Soviet leadership make a new effort in eliminating the
obstacles hindering the normalization of relations between the two countries.''

This seemed only slightly more upbeat than Peking's earlier statements about
attaching importance to Moscow's deeds and not its words.

'We Pay Great Attention'

Mr. Andropov's overture was published inside the People's Daily newspaper.
According to its New China News Agency dispatch from Moscow, Mr. Andropov
mentioned ideas proposed by Mr. Brezhnev in Tashkent and Baku and said that ''we
pay great attention to every positive response from the Chinese side.''

So far, the Chinese press has avoided commenting on the new Soviet leadership,
though there has been an easing of anti-Soviet language, and even Chinese
officials sound more cautious than usual. Some Western diplomats here believe
the Chinese are waiting to see what happens at the next round of consultations
in Moscow this winter.

Before Mr. Brezhnev's death, China had agreed to consultations with the Soviet
Union on their relationship, which has been chilled for more than two decades.
The initial round of meetings took place in Peking last month, and the Chinese
agreed to continue to Moscow for the second round.

The Soviet 'Threat'

But China's official position was summed up by Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang on
Nov. 19 in a meeting with the Thai Prime Minister, Gen.  Prem Tinsulanonda. Mr.
Zhao asserted that any improvement in Chinese-Soviet relations depended upon
whether Moscow would act to remove its ''threat'' against China.

Mr. Zhao defined this as the buildup of Soviet forces along China's border with
the Soviet Union and Mongolia, Moscow's military intervention in Afghanistan and
its support of Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia. The three issues all constitute a
threat against China, Mr. Zhao said.

The same complaints were raised before by other Chinese officials, including
Deputy Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, who represents China in the new
consultations. The message to Moscow is that Peking is not softening its
conditions for better ties.

A more conciliatory note was sounded by Foreign Minister Huang Hua before he led
a Chinese delegation to Mr. Brezhnev's funeral. ''The Chinese people sincerely
wish there will be a genuine improvement in the relations between the two
countries,'' he said, ''and that these relations will return to normal step by
step.''

Lavish Praise of Brezhnev

Mr. Huang's allusion to a step-by-step approach, which would have been cleared
with the leadership beforehand, indicated that Peking did not expect to get all
the problems solved at once. But he also said he hoped that ''General Secretary
Yuri Andropov and the Soviet party and Government make new efforts to promote
the improvement of Sino-Soviet relations.''

His praise of Mr. Brezhnev as ''an outstanding statesman'' was the most lavish
from Peking in years and was in sharp contrast to the vilification that once
filled the Chinese press.

The cordial welcome given Mr. Huang as the first senior Chinese official to
visit Moscow in 18 years made clear that the new Soviet leadership was using the
opportunity to press its case for reconciliation. Mr. Huang chatted nearly four
minutes with Mr.  Andropov in a Kremlin reception line and later met for an hour
and a half with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko.

On his return last Thursday, Mr. Huang told reporters that he was ''optimistic''
about the next round of consultations.  When Mr. Huang was retired the next day,
some Eastern European diplomats here saw it as a rebuke of his upbeat comments,
though his retirement had long been expected because of ill health. But Chinese
officials insisted that Mr. Huang's retirement had in fact been postponed to
allow him to make his trip to Moscow. Mr. Huang remains active as a state
councillor, and he would have logically briefed his successor, Wu Xueqian, and
others in the leadership about his Moscow trip.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 26, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CENTRAL AMERICAN FOLLY

BYLINE: By John B. Oakes

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 864 words


''Pay no attention to the rhetoric; just pay attention to the deeds,'' pleaded a
State Department official defending the Administration's Central American policy
the other day. The remark was exquisitely if unintentionally ironic. In Central
America, more than anywhere else, this Administration's confrontational actions
are totally consistent with its militant rhetoric.

The policy did not, of course, begin with President Reagan. Its roots go back a
half-century or more, when United States Marines fought the Nicaraguan
nationalist hero Augusto Cesar Sandino and paved the way for the Somoza regime.
But President Reagan and his former Secretary of State, Alexander M. Haig Jr.,
raised it to new heights of doctrinal folly. There is reason to hope that
Secretary George P. Shultz will modify both words and deeds when he gets around
to it - but by then it may be too late.

The dangerous bankruptcy of Mr. Reagan's rhetoric and action in Central America
is becoming clearer every day: 1. In El Salvador - a ''no win'' situation
reminiscent of Vietnam -Washington is committed to a military-controlled
Government attempting to suppress an indigenous revolution growing out of
social, political and economic chaos.

2. In Nicaragua, the United States is endeavoring to subvert a radical
Government with which we refuse to negotiate except on our terms. In the best
Soviet style, we are now encouraging a potential armed invasion from Florida and
Honduras in order to overthrow it.

3. In Guatemala, we are edging toward support of another right-wing military
dictator, who is unable or unwilling to stop the endemic massacres of Indian
peasants.

4. In Honduras, the United States is building a military machine as our
surrogate in the effort to overthrow the left-wing Sandinists of neighboring
Nicaragua. We thereby run the risk of embroiling these and other countries (if
not ourselves) in an unwanted, unnecessary and unconscionable war.

In stubborn adherence to his Central American policy of sterile anti-Communism,
Mr. Reagan spares no effort to hoodwink Congress and the public.

The recent rhetorical flap over El Salvador's system of ''justice'' is a case in
point. It was good theater when Ambassador Deane R.  Hinton suddenly denounced
in public - for the first time -the rightwing death squads and the ''rotten''
judicial system under which they have been operating with impunity. It was good
theater when the White House immediately threw a damper over his harsh words
without repudiating them.

It was good theater when five national guardsmen, arrested several months ago
for the vicious murder of four churchwomen from the United States, were
instantaneously dredged up for a speedy trial and, doubtless, a speedier
conviction.

It will be even better theater when Mr. Reagan and Mr. Hinton are able to point
to this trial in the nick of time to certify (in January) that the human rights
record of the Salvadoran Government really is improving enough to qualify it for
continued military aid.

Yet there is still no evidence that Salvadoran courts dare proceed against the
political and military higher-ups allegedly involved in daily murders in the
streets and alleys. How could they when, as one State Department official has
noted, ''the night before a decision, someone tells a judge that we know your
children and they're dead at noon if you act against a defendant.'' Will a
carefully timed show trial of five low-ranking national guardsmen in January,
with no effort to follow leads to higher authority, demonstrate respect for
human rights?

''There is currently no serious investigation of the possible involvement of
Salvadoran officers in ordering the killings or covering them up,'' says the New
York-based Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights in a letter sent
this month to the State Department. The committee, which has meticulously
followed the case of the four murdered churchwomen from its beginning in
December 1980, recently uncovered new evidence suggesting that ''superiors''
ordered the killing.

''We are unable to discover any lawyer in El Salvador willing to pursue a
vigorous investigation of all leads in this case. This is, in part, because
lawyers there do not believe that the United States Embassy is willing to
support such an investigation,'' writes the committee. No answer as yet - not
even a rhetorical one - from Washington.

Meanwhile, things go on much as before - though at a slower tempo (2,427
murdered so far this year compared to 5,331 in all of 1981).  Late last month,
it was reported that 15 more leaders of the political opposition had disappeared
from Salvadoran steets. Eight have turned up in the hands of the military,
charged with terrorism.  The other seven - if there were seven - are unaccounted
for.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
John B. Oakes is the former Senior Editor of The New York Times.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 27, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 645 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.  Answers appear on
page 45.  1. In London there may have been fewer drops to drink because the
parachutist pictured at right dropped into the drink. Explain.  2. Serge Ivanov
Antonov was arrested in Rome and charged with complicity in the attempt on the
life of Pope John Paul II last year. Mr. Antonov is a citizen of
(Bulgaria/Rumania/the Soviet Union).

3. Thousands of Mexican women made short visits across the United States border
in recent months with one objective in mind. What was it?

4. For an annual pilgrimage, they were folded in like origami birds to trundle
unscraped through the Lincoln Tunnel into Manhattan from the old Tootsie Roll
factory in Hoboken, N.J. What were they?

5. Steve Sax of Los Angeles was chosen as the National League Rookie of the
Year, the fourth consecutive Dodger to win the award.  Who were the three
others?

6. The Islamic Government led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini appears to be more
firmly in control in Iran now than at any time since the revolution that
overthrew Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi almost four years ago. True or false?

7. President Reagan renamed the MX missile the
(Peacefinder/Peacekeeper/Peacemaker) and gave it a home state,
(Colorado/Nevada/Wyoming).

8. Two lawyers were among the token prisoners taken after a stakeout in
mid-Manhattan. What were the circumstances?  9. One day next month, Imagic Inc.
will score a first on Wall Street. Identify it and explain.  10. As the National
Football League resumed its season, the Jets set two club records in their
defeat of the Baltimore Colts. What were the records?

11. ''The Dial has bled us,'' said an official of public television channel WNET
in the New York area, about what some station officials refer to as ''Channel
13's Vietnam.'' What are the circumstances?

12. The Justice Department gave a commercial break to most television stations
around the country. What did it announce?  13. Space age signals have detected
Stone Age settlements and other subterranean features in a region that is now
one of the most barren on earth. What were the signals and what was the region?

14. A New York commission urged Governor-elect Mario M. Cuomo to reorganize a
state system that it says costs $3 billion a year and ''is not led, is not
managed and, as presently constituted, is not manageable.'' What system is it?

15. At Dartmouth College, a disagreement between David T.  Mc-Laughlin, class of
'54, and Dennis A. Dinan, class of '61, led to an action highly unusual on an
Ivy League campus. Explain.

16. A nation backed down from its plan to install a government in a disputed
territory because the leader of the governing coalition refused to be dislodged.
Identify the nation and the territory.

17. A ruling by the governing authority of grand prix sailing has stirred a
controversy. What is at issue?  18. ''Goofy,'' is how the Governor of Texas
describes William Wayne Justice, but many others consider him the most powerful
man in the eastern part of the state. Identify him and explain.

19. A ''glue'' discovered by scientists at Rockefeller University was in the
news. What kind of adhesive is it?  20. Without waiting for President Reagan's
decision, Congressional leaders from both parties agreed to press for a tax
increase to finance a Federal program. What is the tax, what is the program, and
what was Mr. Reagan's response the next day? Linda Amster

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of skydiver

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FEWER BLACKS ENTER UNIVERSITIES; RECESSION AND AID CUTS ARE CITED

BYLINE: By EDWARD B. FISKE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2073 words


Many colleges and universities around the country are reporting a substantial
drop in the number of minority freshmen, especially blacks, who enrolled this
fall.

The decline is affecting a wide variety of institutions, from Ivy League
universities to state colleges. And according to Christopher F. Edley, executive
director of the United Negro College Fund, firstyear enrollment at the 42
historically black colleges under its umbrella dropped 12 percent this fall,
with overall enrollment down 3.7 percent.

Some educators attribute the drop to the recession and cuts in Federal aid
programs under the Reagan Administration. Others say it is a result of long-term
problems: the growing cost of subsidizing needy students; difficulties in
recruiting among discouraged, poorly educated inner-city blacks, and a lessened
commitment to the affirmative action programs that, in the early 1970's, brought
swiftly rising numbers of minority students to the nation's campuses.

According to the Census Bureau, the proportion of nonwhite students in American
colleges and universities increased substantially from 1960 to 1977, rising from
6.4 percent to 13.8 percent of all students.

Over the last five years, however, census and other statistics show that
minority students' access to higher education has flattened out. From 1977-78 to
1981-82, the most recent figures available, overall minority enrollment held
steady at about 13 percent, and black enrollment at about 10 percent, of all
students.

''Things moved incredibly fast over the last 15 years,'' said Elias Blake Jr.,
president of Clark College in Atlanta, who is head of the National Advisory
Committee on Black Higher Education and Black Colleges. ''There were tremendous
gains in a short period of time, and most people tended to assume that, once
they got started, they would be continuous. But this didn't happen. The progress
got stalled, and no one I know is talking about continuing the climb.  Most of
our energy is going into trying to avoid regression.''

The drop in minority enrollment this fall is sharply evident among freshmen at
Ivy League and other expensive private colleges. At Harvard University, for
example, the number of first-year minority students dropped by 7 percent, to 431
from 463. Among black men, more than half those who were offered admission, 43
out of 83, did not accept.

Drop at Cornell This Fall

Cornell University reported a 10 percent drop in minority enrollment in its
freshman class this fall. The decrease included the number of blacks in the
freshmen class, which dropped to 156 from 195; the number of Hispanic Americans
fell to 121 from 138, and there were four native Americans in the class as
against 10 the previous fall.

The trend toward decreased minority enrollment was apparent at a wide variety of
other institutions. At the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville, minority
representation in the freshman class dropped 10 percent this fall, the first
decline ever reported, while at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, a
predominantly black public university, there was a falloff of 6 percent in total
enrollment.

At Pace University in New York, George Mims, director of a special program for
disadvantaged urban young people, set out to recruit 65 minority students but
said he could come up with only 55. ''This is the first year since I came in
1968 that I've seen such a decline,'' he said. ''It was very dramatic and
sudden.''

The declines this fall follow a period in which minority access to higher
education was relatively stable.

'Few Gains Since Mid-1970's'

Earlier this year the Commission on the Higher Education of Minorities issued a
report concluding that after ''dramatic increases in minority representation at
all levels of the educational pipeline and in virtually all fields... few gains
have been made since the mid-1970's.''

There have been some exceptions to the pattern, mainly among undergraduate
institutions that have increased recruiting efforts. At Barnard College,
minority enrollment in the freshman class rose to 26 percent this year, from 17
percent in 1978. Richard Steele, the dean of admissions at Carleton College in
Minnesota, said the proportion of minority students rose to 12.5 percent this
year from 10 percent, after a vigorous recruiting drive in Minneapolis and
Chicago schools.

In some cases the patterns of enrollment vary widely among different minority
groups. At Cornell and Harvard, enrollment was down this year for blacks and
Hispanic Americans, but the number of Asian American freshmen rose.

Increase at Smith College

At Smith College, where the number of black freshmen is down, overall minority
enrollment increased this year to 11.3 percent, from 9.4 percent, because of
increases in the number of freshmen of Hispanic and Asian descent. ''It's hard
to describe,'' said Norma Blake, the director of admissions at Smith, ''but
Asian Americans, even those recently arrived from Korea or Vietnam, seem to be
selfstarters.''

College officials cited numerous reasons for this fall's decline in minority
enrollments at many schools and for the long-term leveling off in the growth of
minority enrollment.

Most officials, in one way or another, cited economics as a crucial factor in
the declines in minority enrollment this fall. ''We wanted to see minority
enrollment increase here, but it hasn't,'' said Larry Matthews, the admissions
director for undergraduates at the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville. ''I
think all of our efforts have been blunted by the financial situation. The
cutbacks in financial aid and the economy have really hurt our state, where the
income level is already depressed.''

''What we are seeing is a falling off of people at the margins for whom the
economic factors are much more important than usual,'' said Marguerite Ross
Barnet, a professor at the Teachers College of Columbia University and director
of the Institute for Urban and Minority Education.

Some May Be Opting for Jobs

Steve Syverson, director of admissions at Pomona College in California, said the
drop reflected a broader trend among disadvantaged students of all ethnic
backgrounds. He said, ''There is a widespread feeling: Why should I go on to a
big liberal arts college, which will cost a lot of money, when I can go do
something that will make a lot of money right away?''

The National Institute of Independent Colleges and Universities recently
released a study showing that from the 1979-80 academic year to 1981-82, private
colleges and universities reported a 39 percent drop in students whose family
income was $6,000 to $24,000.

Many officials also said the cutbacks in Federal grants and loans to college
students that went into effect in October 1981 were a major factor, not so much
because they eliminated substantial support for needy students but because
students feared that they would.

''There was a psychological fallout,'' said Prezell R. Robinson, president of
St. Augustine College in Raleigh, N.C., a historically black college where
enrollment this fall dropped to 1,573 students from 1,609. ''Washington
frightened the heck out of first-time students.''

Admissions directors at the most expensive and selective private colleges tended
to assume that the minority students they were losing were selecting public
universities or other less costly alternatives. However, some suggested that at
least some of those youths, who are among the most academically talented young
people from minority groups, were simply not going to college.

''We are not losing them to other schools - they are being lost to education,''
said Miss Blake, the director of admissions at Smith College, where the number
of black freshmen dropped to 24 this fall from 38 last year. ''The safety net is
still in place as regards scholarship funds for college, but there is no point
in having that if the father is losing his job and the bottom is falling out of
the family.''

Other Factors Behind Trend

While most college officials cite economics as the principal reason for the
decline in minority enrollment this fall, they see a broad range of factors
playing a part in the peaking of minority enrollment in the mid-1970's.

These include the growing cost of subsidizing needy students, especially in
medical and other professional schools where tuition alone can exceed $15,000 a
year, and concern about what some college officials view as an unduly high
dropout rate for minority students who have enrolled at their colleges.

Many colleges also report finding it increasingly difficult to recruit
academically talented minority students. In part, this results from greater
competition among the top colleges for a limited number of exceptionally able
students, but some officials say that declining quality in public high schools
in inner cities has also contributed to the problem.

''The quality of secondary education is just awful,'' said Robert L. Albright,
vice chancellor for student affairs at the University of North Carolina at
Charlotte. ''Unless that trend is reversed, I think frankly we're just going to
see a continued decline in enrollment of minorities.''

Reservations About Abilities

Karl M. Furstenberg, director of admissions at Wesleyan University in
Connecticut, agreed. ''We used to be quite successful in dealing with schools in
places like Hartford and Boston,'' he said. ''But now, even when we are dealing
with those who have achieved top rank, those at the very top of classes of 700
or 800, there are reservations about their ability to do the work. That didn't
used to be the case.''

Closely related, according to several admissions officers, is a widespread
perception by minority students and their teachers that a good college education
is not as realistic a possibility as it once was. This, in turn, affects the
reception that recruiters from selective institutions receive when they visit
inner city high schools.

''We used to be very welcome 10 years ago,'' Miss Blake said.''The counselors
were enthusiastic, and whole classes of students would turn out. Now you walk in
and no one knows you are coming. The counselors are working their tails off,
mainly with all the noncollegebound matters they have to look after, and there's
no one to see you.''

Some educators believe college officials were given a reason to relax their
affirmative action efforts by a United States Supreme Court decision in 1978. In
that ruling, the Court barred quota systems in college admissions but affirmed
the right of colleges to use race as one of many factors in selecting an
entering class.

Shift in Ideology Is Seen

Rik Warch, the president of Lawrence University in Appleton, Wis., where
minority enrollment has been steady at about 5 percent in recent years, took the
view that ''the ideological energy of the 1960's is not there anymore.'' He
added, ''Colleges are not as abashed by the elitism charge as they were 15 years
ago.''

Mr. Blake, the president of Clark, suggested that a certain amount of fatigue on
the part of both black and white leadership had contributed to the leveling off
of minority access to higher education.

''Dealing with the issues of blacks in America is tough,'' he said. ''It's not
just that society wants to go on to other things, but that society and blacks
get tired and have to recharge their batteries.  It takes a lot in terms of
leadership and organization to make progress.

''The civil rights movement was built on national leadership,'' he continued,
''and it was fairly easy to get society to respond to the big targets, like
desegregating public facilities and voting rights.  But even when that was done,
we still found ourselves staring at inequality. Right now we are trying to
figure out how to put together a new type of national leadership.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Prezell R. Robinson and Melanee Saunders (page
32) photo of Christopher F. Edley

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Susan McClanahan Wed To Donald Paul French

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 78, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 122 words


Susan Diffenderfer McClanahan, daughter of Mrs. David R.  Diffenderfer of
Lincoln, Neb., and the late Mr. Diffenderfer, was married in New York yesterday
to Donald Paul French, son of Mrs.  Cecil French of Camden, Del., and the late
Mr. French. State Supreme Court Justice James J. Leff performed the ceremony at
Mr. and Mrs.  Frederick Brown's loft in SoHo.

The bride, a graduate of the University of Nebraska, is part owner and founder
of Keller/McClanahan Inc., an educational development company in New York. Her
previous marriage ended in divorce. Mr.  French, who served with the Army
Airborne Division in Vietnam, owns Van Gogh Movers, which he established in
1972.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE POET AT THE CENTER

BYLINE: By Richard Ellman; Richard Ellmann is the author of ''James Joyce,''
which has just appeared in a revised edition, and editor of ''The New Oxford
Book of American Verse.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2044 words


ROBERT LOWELL A Biography.  By Ian Hamilton.  Illustrated. 527 pp. New York:
Random House. $19.95.

THOUGH there were rival claimants, Robert Lowell throned it over American poetry
for 20 years. He was determined to be at the center of his age, as he thought
Hart Crane had been at the center of the 20's. He dexterously maintained his
position during the seedy affluence following World War II, the rebelliousness
of the Vietnam generation and the slackness that came after. In the form as well
as the subject matter of his poems he registered dissent. His early poems, we
now learn, were in free verse. Later, under the influence of new critical
theories, he revolted toward strict forms; at this point William Carlos Williams
called him ''a tiger behind bars.'' He uncaged himself in ''Life Studies'' and
subsequent volumes. In response to internal as well as external challenges, he
adopted various strategies. His aim was to make himself a representative man,
whose reactions to war, politics, love, family and friends would add up to
archetypal completeness. For a man so unlike other men, it was a singular
ambition. That he largely achieved it was a triumph.

In ''Little Gidding'' Lowell's friend T.S. Eliot declared, ''The whole world is
our hospital.'' Ian Hamilton's powerful and affecting portrait of Lowell in this
biography confirms such a view. Lowell lived almost two-thirds of his 60-year
span in and out of mental hospitals, pill-ridden, electrically shocked, in
constant danger of going off again. His friends' plights were, many of them,
cognate. At the end of Mr. Hamilton's book, as at the end of a Shakespearean
tragedy, the landscape is littered with the dead. Delmore Schwartz, Randall
Jarrell, Theodore Roethke and John Berryman, all intimate with Lowell, were cut
off before him. Mr. Hamilton, a notable poet and critic, seems almost
overwhelmed himself by the repeated anguishes of Lowell's ups and downs over 40
years. In the last sections of the book he allows quotations from letters and
interviews with friends of Lowell's to speak for themselves as if his personal
intervention was scarcely required.

AND yet what is immediately impressive about the book is not the sense of doom
which hangs over it from the time that Lowell, still in preparatory school,
raised doubts in his parents' minds about his mental stability. It is rather the
vitality of the people and their extraordinary cultivation. Anglo-American
civilization reaches here a high point of ripeness. At a time when
letter-writing is supposed to be out of fashion, these people write copiously
and brilliantly to each other. They recriminate, they apologize, they
sympathize, they ruminate in extremely subtle ways, they worry over delicacies
of thought and emotion that would do credit to any culture. Expressed so well,
even anguish loses some of its sting.

As Mr. Hamilton makes clear, Lowell embarked upon a career of poetry with full
deliberation. At 18 he came under the tutelage of Richard Eberhart at St. Mark's
School and proclaimed himself to be a poet. Other young men have done as much
but with less awareness that the decision must entail great changes in their
lives. After two years at Harvard, of which his cousin Lawrence was president,
Lowell decided he needed instruction of a more specifically literary kind.  Ford
Madox Ford played Virgil and brought him to meet Allen Tate and John Crowe
Ransom in Tennessee. When Ransom transferred from Vanderbilt University to
Kenyon College in Ohio, Lowell followed him and enrolled there. Ransom as mentor
got him to read the classics and philosophy, a regimen that gave him an edge
over most of his contemporaries.

After graduating first of his class at Kenyon, Lowell went to Louisiana State
University on a fellowship to study with Robert Penn Warren and Cleanth Brooks.
The metaphysical-symbolist poem, intended to be the perfect artifact, was then
the lodestar. Lowell wrote in this mode, though at first with a clotted imagery
which augured that it would never altogether suit him. His intimacy with Allen
Tate encouraged him to join the Catholic Church, as Tate had done, and it was
from the vantage point of a believer that Lowell composed the denunciation of
his time which is the subject matter of his first two books. Then he left the
church with the ungallant remark that it had ''served its purpose.'' As he said
also, the morality of his later verse was much the same. But he continued his
education on his own, either with the help of other poets such as William Carlos
Williams or Elizabeth Bishop or his sometime pupil W. D. Snodgrass. Mr.
Hamilton tells how Lowell had a phase of boning up on Dutch history and
literature, and living in Holland, because he felt that Italy was played out as
an influence on Anglo-American poets. Yet he never confused pedantry with
poetry. As his taste for metaphysical verse flagged, he strove to present
feelings that would be ''raw'' rather than ''cooked,'' to use the now famous
distinction. At the same time he worked very hard at his poems, as if aware that
even steak tartare requires the utmost finesse in preparation.

LOWELL'S childhood had been a period of mounting aggression and rebelliousness.
His parents quickly became a target. He and his mother loved to argue; his
father, a naval officer, did not. Mr.  Hamilton wittily describes the father as
a ''combination of weak character and strong lineage,'' which was very much the
mother's and son's view of him. The poor man seems to have been browbeaten by
his wife, and then castigated for being so. This is a point on which Mr.
Hamilton might have taken a more independent line, for he recounts at least one
incident that allows the ''commander'' a mind and wit of his own. Another
schoolboy had said tauntingly to Robert Lowell that if God speaks only to
Lowells, as the familiar rhyme said, then God must speak to them in Yiddish.
Lowell asked his father about this slur and received this reply: ''Of course God
speaks Yiddish. God has promised the Zionists that he will brush up on his
Hebrew. He finds it hard work talking the King's English and Beacon Hill British
to Bishop Lawrence. You Bostonians want everyone, even God and Calvin Coolidge,
to be cold fish and close as clams.'' But Lowell continued to despise his
father, for weakness, for whimsy, for conventional morality, and once knocked
him down. The next day he apologized, and he continued to apologize and to
despise for the rest of his life.

As his father's remark implied, the Lowell heritage was not altogether a
benefit. While it allowed him to take his significance for granted, it was also
something to struggle against. Lowell liked to boast that he was at least partly
Jewish, because he had a greatgreat-grandfather named Mordecai Myers. He took
pleasure in attacking Boston, as Mr. Hamilton says, with a Boston voice. Even
the matter of his first name involved him in forswearing Bobby in favor of Cal.
This was a nickname given him by his schoolmates, partly for Caliban, partly for
Caligula. He was Caliban because he lurched through experience, an awkward
customer prone to beating up other boys. He was Caligula because of something
imperious, or as Randall Jarrell termed it, ''Bismarckian.'' On the other hand,
he was neither Caliban nor Caligula, but just Cal, aware of his limitations,
ready with sympathy, gentle and lovable.

His emotions found their outlet tortuously. In 1940, barely out of Kenyon
College, he married the novelist Jean Stafford against his parents' will. It was
a tempestuous marriage; Lowell was tongued with flame, and she had, as she said
when it was over, a tongue like an adder. Once he broke her nose - the very nose
that had already been broken when he crashed their car against a stone wall.
There were times when Lowell was the prey of chemical charges that he could not
control. One might suppose that such a husband would be quickly discarded, but
Jean Stafford gave him up most unwillingly. In 1949 he married the novelist and
critic Elizabeth Hardwick, by whom he had a daughter, Harriet. Hardwick knew
beforehand of his manic-depressive cycles and did her best to cope with them.
Unfortunately coping, even for someone of her intelligence and tact, was not
always possible.  This marriage nevertheless lasted until 1972. Then Lowell
married another fiction writer, Caroline Blackwood of England's Guinness family.
The strain of his illness was more than she could bear, though she tried hard to
put up with it. Lowell was on his way back to Elizabeth Hardwick and their
daughter when, on Sept. 12, 1977, he died in a taxi coming from Kennedy Airport.

LOWELL'S career also had its public side, usually noble, sometimes foolhardy. As
a boy the pugnacious Lowell wrote an essay, ''War: A Justification.'' When World
War II broke out, his first impulse was to secure a commission and enlist. He
was not accepted. The next one was to declare himself a conscientious objector,
and in 1943 he served four months of a year's prison sentence before being
paroled.  In June 1965 he formally refused an invitation to the White House from
President Johnson so as to make clear his opposition to the Vietnam War. Three
years later, animated by the same impulse, he accompanied Senator Eugene
McCarthy during the latter's unsuccessful bid for the Presidency. He was a
liberal, but in 1949 he denounced the director of Yaddo as a Communist, which
she was not, and was only restored to liberalism by another hospital stay.

Lowell made no pretense of being unblemished or infallible. In ''Last Things,
Black Pines at 4 a.m.,'' a late poem that he set great store on, he summed up
his sense of himself and his art:

Imperfect enough once for all at thirty, in his last days Van Gogh painted as if
he were hurling everything he had: clothes, bed and furniture against the door
to keep out a robber ...  for imperfection is the language of art.  Even the
best writer in his best lines is incurably imperfect, crying of truth,
knowledge, honesty, inspiration he cannot have ...

Yet even if imperfection was inevitable, Lowell revised indefatigably. Many
awkwardnesses remained, in spite of his efforts, but the gnarled look now seems
essential to him.

MR. HAMILTON'S book naturally revolves around Lowell's cycles of illness and
health, with sometimes the one and sometimes the other dominant. In 1939, when
he was 22, his mother consulted the psychiatrist and poet Merrill Moore about
him, and through Moore consulted Carl Jung, who, according to Lowell, told his
mother that if her son was as she described him, he was an incurable
schizophrenic. Scarcely a year passed thereafter without one, two, three or four
stays in hospitals. The treatment by electric shocks, Thorazine, lithium and
other means was horrific enough. Since these were the dramatic moments of his
life, they naturally claim the limelight. But there were other less dramatic
things, not only his poetry but his teaching and conversation. He suffered a
good deal, but suffering is not the mainspring of his art. Though he liked, as
he said in the preface to ''Imitations,'' ''the dark against the grain,'' he
could also be funny, funnier than the biographer has leisure to show. The
testimony of old friends, on whom Mr. Hamilton naturally relies, is a little
misleading, because they had so much time to rehearse their responses to
Lowell's behavior. Penetrating as they are, one longs for more casual,
unpremeditated glimpses from people who knew him less well and could admire,
without solicitude, his wit and his heft with language. ''I am not a cripple,''
he telegraphed to his last wife, and his refusal to be or be considered one is
admirable.

Ian Hamilton's comments on individual poems and volumes are sharp and acute. He
commands an ironic wit and is not afraid to see shortcomings when they are
there. Avoiding hero worship, he offers a steady understanding. It would be
useful to have his judgment of Lowell's place in American poetry and modern
literature, but he clearly believes that this is the moment for close inspection
rather than large perspectives. If he does not do everything, it is chiefly
because the tale he has to tell, and tells so well, is as complicated as it is
compelling.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UNTHINKABLE CHITCHAT

BYLINE: By Joe Klein; Joe Klein, author of ''Woody Guthrie: A Life,'' is at work
on a book about Vietnam veterans.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1050 words


WITH ENOUGH SHOVELS Reagan, Bush and Nuclear War.  By Robert Scheer.  Assisted
by Narda Zacchino and Constance Matthiessen.  285 pp. New York: Random House.
$14.95.

AT the heart of Robert Scheer's investigation into the Reagan Administration's
nuclear war policies is an interview with a man named T.K. Jones, a Defense
Department bureaucrat with an official title nearly as long as a position paper.
Mr. Jones is in charge of civil defense planning. The interview was conducted
one evening at Mr. Jones's home. The host served shrimp, white wine, cookies and
an after-dinner drink of brandy, Kahlua and whipped cream. Thus fortified, Mr.
Jones told his guest that nuclear war was ''not nearly as devastating as we had
been led to believe. He said, 'If there are enough shovels to go around,
everybody's going to make it.' The shovels were for digging holes in the ground,
which would be covered somehow or other with a couple of doors and with three
feet of dirt thrown on top. ... 'It's the dirt that does it,' he said.''

Over the years Robert Scheer, the excellent national correspondent for The Los
Angeles Times, has consistently been able to get politicians and other public
figures to say what they really think, despite their best intentions. His
Playboy interview with an unexpectedly lustful Jimmy Carter in 1976 became a
major campaign issue, as did the 1980 campaign interview, included here, in
which George Bush said that he believed a nuclear war might be won. The latter
has led Mr. Scheer to investigate ''how our leaders during the time of Ronald
Reagan have come to plan for waging and winning a nuclear war with the Soviet
Union, and how they are obsessed with a strategy of confrontation - including
nuclear brinkmanship - which aims to force the Soviets to shrink their empire
and fundamentally alter their society.''

The Reagan strategic planners - and the President himself - are inviting
targets, and Mr. Scheer neatly skewers their rhetorical excesses. Such conceits
as the ''window of vulnerability'' and Mr.  Reagan's strategic arms reduction
proposals (START) are dispatched as easily as Mr. Jones's bizarre civil defense
plans - a bit too easily, perhaps. This is a slim volume on a very complex
subject, in essence, a reworking of Mr. Scheer's newspaper pieces bolstered by
voluminous footnotes and interview transcripts. It is solid journalism, but
limited and temporal, as journalism sometimes is. Mr. Scheer insists that many
of the key policy makers - people like Eugene V. Rostow, Richard N. Perle and
Richard E. Pipes - are ''complex'' individuals.  But he offers little more than
thumbnail biographical data, and these men are made to seem -usually on the
strength of their own utterances - caricatured warmongers.

There is also the question of whether their belief that a nuclear exchange could
be limited, fought strategically and ''won'' over a period of weeks and months -
however ridiculous that may sound -represents any change from the policies of
past Administrations. As Thomas Powers points out in the November issue of The
Atlantic, this sort of thinking has proliferated with the increased flexibility
and accuracy of nuclear weaponry and, indeed, became the official policy of the
Carter Administration with the issuance of Presidential Directive 59 in 1980.

IN an interview with Cyrus R. Vance, Jimmy Carter's Secretary of State,
conducted two years after Mr. Reagan's election, Mr. Scheer asks about this
directive. Mr. Vance replies, ''What PD 59 was talking about was providing a
range of options to the President so he had some element of choice and making
sure that the only response (in a nuclear confrontation) need not be a total
spasmodic launching of everything we've got.'' Here Mr. Scheer suffers an
uncharacteristic lapse and lets Mr. Vance off the hook without asking whether
''some element of choice'' implies, in softer, more diplomatic tones, the very
sorts of limited options the Reagan people seem to relish.

The point is that Reagan nuclear war policy may differ only in nuance and
rhetoric from what has gone before. Mr. Scheer is right, however, to be alarmed
by nuances that in so perilous a game may mean the difference between survival
and destruction. To admit that the capability to fight a limited nuclear war
exists and must be planned for, as the Carter Administration did, is a far
different proposition from believing that the threat of such a war might be used
as a policy weapon, as the Reagan theorists apparently do. Herbert York, the
director of Defense Research and Engineering under President Kennedy, tells Mr.
Scheer: ''What's going on right now is that the crazier analysts have risen to
higher positions than is normally the case. They are able to carry their ideas
further and higher because the people at the top are simply less well-informed
than is normally the case.''

This may be something of an understatement. Mr. Reagan emerges from his
interviews -which were fleeting, conducted in transit on his campaign plane - as
a man of terrifying naivete, prone to exaggeration and outright invention,
liable to confuse the current Soviet leadership with the Hollywood Communists of
the 1940's. Mr.  Reagan, for example, asserts that the Russians ''have practiced
evacuation. ... We learned that in one summer alone, they took over 20 million
young people out of the cities into the country to give them training in just
living off the countryside.'' Mr. Scheer continues, ''It is unknown where Reagan
learned this; the C.I.A. says there is no evidence the Russians have ever
practiced evacuating the cities.''

It may well be that Mr. Reagan learned about the alleged Russian evacuation
program from T.K. Jones, his civil defense specialist, who remained in his job
even after his remarkable interview with Mr.  Scheer was published in The Los
Angeles Times. The idea that substantial numbers of people could be protected
from a nuclear attack is, Mr. Scheer writes, ''the talisman of those who believe
that nuclear war is survivable.'' Mr. Jones, with his shovels and dirt, is in
charge of those plans. If Mr. Scheer is guilty at times of oversimplifying the
complexities of strategic planning, it is a minor flaw when compared with the
potentially lethal foolishness he has revealed here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PUTTING JURIES ON THE COUCH

BYLINE: By Morton Hunt

SECTION: Section 6; Page 70, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5903 words


In a United States District Court in Chicago two years ago, a 12-member jury
listened for 15 weeks to dozens of witnesses and mountains of evidence in an
antitrust suit brought by M.C.I.  Communications Corporation against the
American Telephone and Telegraph Company. The jurors then retired, deliberated
for three days, and emerged to announce that they believed M.C.I. had been
damaged; that they found A.T.&T.'s monopolistic practices to blame, and that
they were awarding M.C.I. $600 million. Since antitrust awards are automatically
tripled for punitive purposes, the net due was $1.8 billion - the largest
antitrust judgment in history. The attorneys at Jenner & Block, M.C.I.'s Chicago
law firm, were delighted - but perhaps not entirely surprised. With the help of
a new breed of specialists known as ''jury researchers,'' they had already tried
the case three times in varied forms before carefully constructed mock juries
and had gleaned experimental evidence as to how things would go in court.

Jury research is a fast-growing application of the psychosocial sciences. Its
practitioners - a few dozen sociologists, psychologists, market researchers and
others - use public-opinion surveys, in-depth interviews, computer analyses
correlating jurors' backgrounds and attitudes and laboratory simulations of
impending trials to help lawyers select jurors likely to favor their side,
exclude those likely to be hostile to it and present their cases in ways
psychologically designed to benefit from the unconscious needs and motives of
the jurors.

The implications of this new use of behavioral research are significant: Jurors
are not viewed as free moral agents, able to assess impartially where the truth
lies, but as organisms whose emotional and mental processes are determined by
''predictor variables,'' such as social status, education, age, sex, personality
traits, ethnic origins and religion. Lawyers, of course, have always tried to
guess how these factors would influence jurors, but if the behavioral-science
approach is valid, it raises questions about our most cherished beliefs
concerning the freedom of choice, the nature of reasoning and the quality of
justice dispensed by jury trials.

In the M.C.I. trial, Jenner & Block had hired Leo J. Shapiro and Associates, a
sizable Chicago market-research firm. Shapiro, a graying, leonine sociologist,
had members of his staff conduct a survey in the Chicago areas from which
prospective jurors would be drawn. Through both telephone and face-to-face
interviews, the researchers learned which predictor variables correlated with a
tendency to side with the underdog M.C.I. and which variables coincided with a
slant toward A.T.&T.

Shapiro's team then recruited three mock juries of eight, each group being a
measured mix of persons likely to favor one litigant or the other. The
pseudojuries met, one per evening, in Shapiro's headquarters to hear a Jenner &
Block lawyer present a 45-minute version of M.C.I.'s case. Next, an-

other Jenner & Block lawyer offered A.T.&T.'s side, making as strong a case as
he could. Then the jurors, each of whom was paid $20 for the evening's work,
deliberated while the lawyers and Shapiro staffers observed them (with their
knowledge) through a one-way mirror.

M.C.I.'s lawyers were surprised to find that the first mock jury had great
trouble accepting the statement that A.T.&T. was required by law to share its
long lines with competitors; they found this grossly unfair, since A.T.&T. owned
the lines. Robert Hanley, M.C.I.'s chief counsel, thereupon changed his
strategy: The next night, he stressed the jury's absolute obligation to decide
the case according to the law, whether or not they considered it fair. That mock
jury had little difficulty with the ownership issue.

Moreover, though the first mock jury eventually did decide to recompense M.C.I.,
it set the figure at $100 million - the exact amount of lost profit cited by
M.C.I.'s lawyer. Thanks to its eavesdropping, M.C.I.'s legal team saw that
mentioning this figure had been a tactical blunder; that, given A.T.&T.'s
wealth, it would be better to let the jury's imagination run free. During the
next two nights, the M.C.I. lawyers gave the juries no numbers by which to
judge. The result was electrifying: The award rose to $900 million.  In one
sense, the real jurors arrived at their $600 million award freely; in another
sense, that decision had been the predictable result of known forces.

Jury research assumes that certain juror characteristics are likely to yield
certain kinds of juror behavior. If a survey shows that 92 percent of
middle-class whites in a given town believe that the police rarely do wrong,
while 89 percent of lower-class blacks believe the opposite, there is a 92
percent chance that any middleclass white juror will be pro-police and an 89
percent chance that any lower-class black juror will not. But that is only one
parameter; within each such group, age, sex, parenthood, size of household,
political sympathies, occupation and many other factors affect the probability
that the juror will respond in a given fashion. In a recent damage suit filed on
behalf of a teen-age girl who became paraplegic as a result of an automobile
accident, Shapiro's staff used a computer to determine the interactions of 15
such factors for each prospective juror.

To be sure, jury researchers do not claim that they can predict any individual
juror's or jury's behavior with certainty; the human being and the interacting
small group are far too complex - and social science far too ''soft'' -for that.
Their predictions of juror behavior are probabilistic - the exceptions are part
of the reckoning. Hence, while the scientific predictions of juror behavior does
not yield certainties, it is a powerful intellectual assault upon the concept of
trial by jury - an assault the F.B.I. has already joined in the form of
providing information on prospective jurors to the prosecution in important
Federal trials. And while only a small percentage of all cases are actually
tried before juries - 10 percent of felonies, 1 percent or 2 percent of civil
suits - these few trials set the standards by which the vast majority are
settled.  No one knows exactly how widely jury research, still only a decade
old, is currently being used. It seems clear, though, that so far it is involved
in only a very small percentage of cases. For one thing, not many qualified
persons or firms have entered the field; in most parts of the country, lawyers
have no ready access to it. For another, it is expensive. Donald E. Vinson left
his job as chairman of the marketing department at the University of Southern
California in Los Angeles in 1979 to found Litigation Sciences, a firm
exclusively devoted to jury research. His firm's fees run from $20,000 to
$250,000. Roger Seasonwein of a New Rochelle market-research firm that bears his
name and offers jury research among its other services, tells lawyers, ''If it
isn't worth spending $50,000 for jury research for your case, forget it. And a
full-scale workup can run as much as $500,000.'' The wide range of costs
reflects the availability of an extensive array of services. More predictor
variables - and thus more reliable predictions -cost more money.

Accordingly, many of the buyers of jury research have been law firms
representing such giants as I.B.M., A.T.&T., Ford Motor Company and various oil
producers, power companies and conglomerates - or feisty smaller companies or
individuals who feel they have a good case against one of the big companies and
are willing to gamble on it. Such clients purchase jury research chiefly in
civil cases, such as huge damage suits -for injuries or deaths said to have been
caused by defective products - and even greater antitrust suits.

To a lesser extent, jury research is being used in criminal cases, such as those
of corporation officers charged with pollution-law violations, and in certain
murder cases. Jay Schulman, a New York sociologist and a pioneer in jury
research, has worked up material on behalf of the defense in the trial of
Katherine Boudin, who was indicted in the Brinks robbery-murder case. The
prosecutor in that case, Kenneth Gribetz, is considering using it, especially if
the trial is moved from Rockland County to an area in which he is less familiar
with jurors' attitudes. Jury research has even played a part in at least one
major obscenity trial: Herald Price Fahringer, an eminent New York criminal
lawyer, used it several years ago in his defense of Larry C. Flynt, the
publisher of Hustler magazine, and three co-defendants in Cincinnati. Fahringer
was so impressed by how jury research helped him size up jurors in a part of the
country where values and customs were unknown to him that he now uses it in four
out of five of his cases. When asked if he drew on jury research in the
celebrated Newport, R.I., trial in which Claus von Bulow was convicted of
attempting to murder his wife, Martha, he would not comment.
2nd jump

The largest single category of beneficiaries of jury research is very unlike its
major corporate users: It consists of radical protesters, civil-rights activists
and the indigent, among others.  They are, for the most part, clients of the
National Jury Project, a nonprofit organization with a representative in New
York and branches in Atlanta, Minneapolis and Oakland, Calif. The National Jury
Project is staffed by a handful of modestly paid employees as well as a score or
more of part-time volunteers - liberal and leftwing social scientists and
lawyers. Such people, both before and after formally founding the National Jury
Project, have done jury research for hundreds of clients, including the antiwar
activist Philip F. Berrigan, the Indian militants of Wounded Knee, S.D., the
Attica Prison rioters, Angela Davis and the radical feminist Susan Saxe. Unlike
commercial jury researchers, the National Jury Project used to charge its
clients nothing, meeting its expenses by fund raising and a trickle of
foundation grants. Lately, however, when its services have been requested by
court-appointed counsel, they have been paid for by state governments or the
Federal Government; its fees generally run to only a few thousand dollars.  The
first major effort to use social-science knowledge to affect a jury trial was
made on behalf of Berrigan and the other members of the Harrisburg Seven in the
winter of 1971-72. Jay Schulman had recently left his teaching job at City
College of New York. When he heard that the trial was set to take place in
Harrisburg, Pa., a staunchly conservative area, Schulman, who had been active in
the anti-Vietnam movement, was deeply concerned. He was sure that the jury would
be strongly proconviction even before the trial began.  Schulman, a
barrel-chested man with a large, white Amish-cut beard, recalls how jury
research was born. ''I kept thinking,'' he says, '' 'There must be something I,
as a social scientist, can do to help my friends. But what?' The answer - I
could use my skills to get a fair jury.

''I went to Richard Christie, an old friend and a social psychologist at
Columbia, and talked it over with him and a colleague, Phil Shaver. The three of
us, with the help of about 10 graduate students, designed a major survey of the
Harrisburg Federal district from which jurors would be drawn. We got volunteers
to do telephone interviews with 840 people, plus follow-up in-depth interviews,
face to face, with 252 of them; then we wangled computer time to process our
data. The defense lawyers - Ramsey Clark, Paul O'Dwyer and Leonard Boudin, among
others -weren't interested at first, but we had some useful surprises for them.

''For instance, we discovered that Catholics would be O.K. on the issue of
social protest,'' Schulman continues. ''This was Harrisburg, not New York, and
it was in this area that the Molly Maguires were hanged a century ago. Also,
contrary to what our lawyers expected, college-educated people were not likely
to be liberal in Harrisburg.  Liberal college graduates, it seems, leave
Harrisburg for other places, and those who stay support conservative norms.''

With access to such findings, the lawyers were able to ask probing questions
about attitudes toward government, tolerance of deviation, prejudice toward
Catholic priests and nuns and so on. ''They got dozens of jurors excused for
cause - demonstrated inability to serve impartially and according to law,'' says
Schulman, ''and when they couldn't get a juror to admit bias, but our ratings
showed that the juror almost had to be biased, they used one of their peremptory
challenges, where no cause is required. Also, Paul Hare, a social psychologist
on our team, studied jurors' body language in order to advise our lawyers how
subgroupings would probably form in the jury and which jurors they should play
to.''

After winning the Harrisburg case, Schulman and his co-workers were convinced
that they had come up with something important and went on to offer their help
to a variety of other political defendants. In 1975, they founded the National
Jury Project as a formal organization.

Word of the new techniques got around, and by the end of the 1970's, a number of
market researchers, sociologists and psychologists were doing jury research
simply because the phone would ring and some lawyer - generally representing a
major corporation - who had heard about it was ready to pay well for it.  Jury
selection is one of the most important functions a trial lawyer can perform;
some lawyers assert that by the time the jury has been chosen, the case has been
decided. During the voir dire, the lawyers or the judge or both question
prospective jurors; if a juror openly admits to a racial, religious, political
or other bias that would influence his decision, the lawyers whose client would
be harmed can ask the judge to excuse the juror for cause.

But as every lawyer knows, and as many studies have shown, when people are
questioned before an authority figure (the judge) and a number of strangers,
they tend to give socially acceptable answers and to conceal or deny their
prejudices about litigants. At least two national polls, cited in the National
Jury Project's textbook, ''Jurywork: Systematic Techniques,'' have shown, for
instance, that a third or more of Americans consider a criminal defendant
probably guilty (''He wouldn't be on trial if there wasn't something to it''),
but few admit this in the courtroom.

Lawyers customarily deal with this situation by making their own private
judgments about how jurors are likely to be biased, and by using their
peremptory challenges to eliminate those who most worry them. They rely on a
mixture of gut reactions to the juror's looks and manner, odds and ends of
advice passed down by other lawyers and assorted scraps of common sense and
prejudice of their own. Many lawyers assume, for example, that Catholics will
favor a Catholic litigant and Jews a Jewish one; that union members will be
anticorporation; that women, especially mothers of daughters, will be quicker
than men to convict an alleged rapist. Some lawyers try to avoid any juror
wearing a loud sport jacket or white socks or a hairpiece, and some, when
defending a client in a damage suit, get rid of any fat person, on the ground
that fat persons tend to dish out overly generous portions.

''When you try a lot of jury cases, you get experience picking jurors that is
far more valuable than you can gain through jury research,'' says Ronald S.
Rolfe, a partner at Cravath, Swaine & Moore, a firm that represents I.B.M.,
which has, in fact, used jury research in at least two antitrust suits. Says F.
Lee Bailey, the prominent defense attorney, ''Demographic data provided by jury
research may tell you useful generalities, but it doesn't give you the details
of individuals. The best jury picker of all would be like the Ancient Mariner -
he'd fix them with his glittering eye and capture them. If I had my druthers,
I'd pick a jury not by means of social-science research, but by living with them
for 30 days.''

But Alan Dershowitz, a professor of law at Harvard University Law School, says:
''Lawyers' instincts are often the least trustworthy basis on which to pick
jurors. All those neat rules of thumb, but no feedback. Ten years of accumulated
experiences may be 10 years of being wrong. I myself, even when I trust my
instincts, like to have them scientifically confirmed.''

In any case, lawyers' intuition makes the same basic assumption about humankind
as does jury research: namely, that human behavior is patterned and predictable,
and that particular traits are likely to be associated with specific forms of
behavior. But in place of lawyers' idiosyncratic, personal guesses about human
behavior, jury research offers empirical and statistically valid data about the
connections between demographic and personality factors and juror biases.

Sometimes survey data are used to penetrate the jurors' public facade en masse
by showing a judge that so many of the persons in the jury pool are hopelessly
biased against their client that a change of venue is called for. Failing that,
such survey data can be used to influence the judge in another way: In some
states and in Federal courts, the judge conducts the voir dire and can
occasionally be persuaded to ask potential jurors questions that are
sociologically more sophisticated than usual.

In a rape trial in Boston in which the accused was a black man, National Jury
Project researchers gave the judge compelling evidence that intense antiblack
feeling was not only widespread in the jury pool but that it could be better
revealed by questions about the juror's neighborhood and how he or she felt
about it than by direct questions about racial prejudice. Convinced, the judge
spent five days examining jurors (as against the more typical day or two) and
excused a large number of them. The jury that was finally seated acquitted the
defendant.

But when subtle questions fail to smoke out the truth, jury research can provide
it in the form of statistical probabilities. And the correlation between the
juror's background and attitudes can sometimes directly contradict common-sense
expectations and lawyers' rules of thumb. In the trial of a battered wife who
killed her alcoholic husband, defense lawyers assumed that people who had
experience with drinking problems would sympathize with the wife because they
would know how badly drinkers can behave. But National Jury Project researchers
discovered that the prospective jurors in this instance strongly blamed the wife
for contributing to the husband's drinking problem (by drinking with him and by
refusing to leave him) and were among the most punitive-minded toward her of any
group in the survey. Leo Shapiro cites as one of his more surprising and useful
findings the fact that people who have failed to finish college assign far
higher value to logical argument than those who did finish college. He has no
ready explanation of this, he says, ''but it's enough to know the correlations -
which yield predictions.''

In addition to survey-derived correlations, jury researchers use a number of
psychological techniques to see through the juror's public persona to the real
person within. Donald Vinson of Litigation Sciences takes into account the
jurors' tone of voice, body language and mannerisms in his effort to identify
people who make decisions for emotional reasons as opposed to those whose
decisions are based on logical reasoning and the facts.

Seasonwein sends a team of three specialists to the voir dire to look for
similar clues - first, when the juror is answering neutral questions about his
or her name, address and occupation, and then when he or she is answering more
threatening ones about attitudes, values and prejudices.

Other jury researchers keep score of how often a juror being questioned by a
lawyer looks to the judge (frequent glances could indicate an inordinate
deference to authority), or how often, in a criminal trial, the juror looks at
the accused (either avoidance or staring might signify a bias against the
defendant).  Some jury researchers feel that even more important than jury
selection is the scientific pretesting of one's case on a mock jury (as in the
M.C.I.-A.T.&T. case), particularly one matched as closely as possible to the
real jury that the researchers feel is likely to be impaneled. Using such a
sample either in a ''focus group'' to discuss issues and express views or in a
simulated trial, the researchers are, in effect, conducting a social experiment.
With its results, says Seasonwein, ''we're able to go to court with the
arguments most likely to convince the jurors we're most likely to get.''
4th jump

Fairly often, the strategy thus chosen is rather different from the one derived
from traditional legal thinking and courtroom practice.  Last year, a young man,
injured in a car accident, brought an astronomical liability suit against the
maker of one of the components of the automobile, claiming that the component
had failed and caused the accident. The company's lawyers realized that in the
small Southern town where the trial would be held, the jury would be
unsympathetic to their client, a large Northern corporation -but they thought it
would be even less sympathetic to the young man if it was made plain that he
drank, partied late at night and was generally boisterous and wild. Donald
Vinson of Litigation Sciences ran several focus groups one weekend and found
that while panelists disapproved of the young man's ways, they strongly resented
having the company make a big issue of them. After all, the boy was one of
theirs.

Vinson told the lawyers that deprecating the young man's character would almost
surely backfire, and they abandoned that strategy.  Vinson then ran a mock trial
with actors playing witnesses and the lawyers making a straightforward
presentation of the technical evidence. The mock jury found the company
guiltless - as did the real jury subsequently. The head defense lawyer comments:
''We found which issues were most likely to be understood by the jurors and to
fit in with their psychological needs.''

Choosing arguments that fit in with jurors' psychological needs is one of the
more striking, and troubling, suggestions made by jury researchers. In a recent
article in the journal Litigation, Vinson urges lawyers not to try to change
jurors' opinions with an unshakeable edifice of fact and logical argument but,
rather, to ''anticipate which of the jurors' basic beliefs are consistent with,
and which conflict with, various views of the case. The lawyer should adopt a
view ... linked to the jurors' attitudes ... consistent with what the jurors
already believe.''

Like the tailoring of the case to the jurors' psychological needs, a number of
other techniques of jury research are applications of time-tested principles of
social psychology. Some deal with smallgroup behavior: It is not enough to pick
jurors who are individually acceptable from the client's standpoint; it is
necessary also to try to assemble a jury in which the patterns of authority,
deference and clique formation will yield a favorable result.

Other advice derived from experimental psychology includes recommendations to
lawyers to maintain eye contact with witnesses or jurors, to change the level of
their vocal volume often (in order to stimulate juror attention), to move around
- but at significant moments rather than randomly - and to position their most
important arguments and evidence in accordance with how memory operates. ''We
tell them'' says Seasonwein, ''that their strong stuff should go first and last,
and if they have garbage, it should go in the middle.''

Jury researchers sometimes even advise a client to use specific forms of
distraction when the other side is presenting its best material; paper-rustling,
the addition of a new and unexplained face at counsel's table and the loading of
the courtroom with previously unseen spectators are a few of the available
devices. But since smoking in court is now prohibited, one of the best ploys is
no longer available: When the other side was presenting its key points, the
famous turn-of-the-century attorney William Jennings Bryan would let his cigar
ash grow ever longer until the jury could pay attention to nothing else, waiting
for the magic moment when it would cascade over his ample belly.

Looking for the kind of information that is available only in a less forbidding
setting than a courtroom, some jury researchers use ''scouts'' to talk to
neighbors, friends and acquaintances of prospective jurors to learn what they
can about their real opinions and habits. One or two jury-research teams have
even crossed the border into outright jury tampering by contacting the jurors
themselves - calling them on the phone and representing themselves as opinion
pollsters and asking questions pertaining to the coming trial.

Such unethical (and illegal) jury research seems to be rare. But even wholly
proper methods of scientific jury selection pose an ethical question, since they
use science to aid in obtaining a jury biased in the client's favor. Of course,
that is not what jury researchers say they are doing. Shapiro, for instance,
says, ''Scientific jury selection doesn't load the jury for you, it only helps
unload it of people biased against you. It implements the American system of
justice by getting rid of people who will not open-mindedly listen to the
facts.''

But when they are being candid, lawyers will even admit that their goal is not
fairness but the selection of biases that benefit them.  Les J. Weinstein, a Los
Angeles lawyer who started Donald Vinson on the jury-research trail, says:
''Lawyers have always tried not only to exclude jurors who were hopelessly
biased against their side but to find jurors who were hopelessly biased in their
favor. There's no question that jury research helps them take a giant stride in
that direction.'' Fahringer is equally frank: ''There isn't a trial lawyer in
this country who wouldn't tell you - if he were being honest - 'I don't want an
impartial jury. I want one that's going to find in my client's favor.' ''

And Seasonwein says bluntly: ''Anybody who tells you that jury research is
designed to pick a fair jury is out of his bird. Lawyers want to pick a jury
that favors their side -they'd be foolish if they didn't - and jury research
gives them a rational way of going about it.'' How jury research will affect the
American system of justice depends, first, on whether it is actually effective.
If it is not, its impact will be like that of hair-growing lotions and bust
developers, enriching the seller without changing the life of the buyer. Some
experts assert that jury research has at most a minor influence on courtroom
events. ''Jurors may approach facts with a mind set, but that won't override
either powerful or very weak evidence,'' says Prof. Richard Lempert, a lawyer
and sociologist at the University of Michigan Law School. ''Virtually all the
research we have shows that, however the jury is composed, the facts dominate.''

5th Jump

An example of the kind of research he is referring to was conducted a few years
ago by Bruce Sales, a psychologist at the University of Arizona. Sales tested
mock jurors for certain attitudes and then gave them written accounts of
hypothetical cases to decide. Some groups of jurors got accounts with more and
better evidence than others, and he found that the quantity and quality of
evidence was far more powerful as a determinant of the decisions than the
jurors' attitudes. But the hypothetical cases were presented very briefly, and
the attitude test was narrow in scope; it would take far more extensive and
realistic experimentation to prove that jury research has very limited power to
affect what happens in court.

It is hard, in fact, to see how that could be the case. Without question, the
methodology of current opinion polling and psychological testing enables social
scientists to predict - within limits -how various categories of people will
vote, respond to insults or aggression, spend their money and so on. That being
so, it seems almost certain that the same research skills should be equally
capable of predicting juror behavior - particularly when the evidence is
contradictory or ambiguous, as it is in the majority of cases.

The people who should know best are not speculating publicly about the potential
effects of jury research: The American Bar Association has made no official
pronouncement on the matter, and neither has the Judicial Conference of the
United States or the National Center for State Courts. Few judges have commented
on it openly, although many, according to G. Thomas Munsterman, director of the
Center for Jury Studies of the National Center for State Courts, say privately
that they are strongly opposed to it - not on legal grounds (it is quite legal),
but because somehow it feels to them like ''tampering'' of a sort.

Most lawyers, however, when they say anything on the subject, seem to regard the
influence of jury research as all to the good. Ronald L. Olson, a trial lawyer
with the Los Angeles firm of Munger, Tolles & Rickershauser and the past
chairman of the A.B.A.'s litigation section, says that the use of mock juries
''helps the lawyer focus his presentation before the real jury, clear up false
issues and clarify the real ones. It thus leads to more intelligent jury
decisions.'' Others emphasize that jury research increases the fairness of the
system by reducing the prevailing bias against large corporations, criminal
defendants and unpopular dissidents.

Besides reducing unwanted bias, however, can it not produce bias in a wanted
direction? Some of its defenders say no. Joel S. Aurnou, who defended Jean
Harris (unsuccessfully) in the Herman Tarnower murder case in Scarsdale, N.Y.,
says flatly, ''It's not generally possible to use jury research to tilt a jury
in your client's favor.  You can only minimize pre-existing prejudices against
your type of defendant.'' Professor Lempert takes a similar stand. ''If the side
using it is initially disadvantaged,'' he says, ''it can help increase fairness.
But the effort to pick jurors biased in your favor fails, because the other side
spots them and gets rid of them.''

But several lawyers who have used jury research to advantage (and who prefer not
to be named) say that it did indeed help them get juries inclined to favor their
clients. And to judge by the money that law firms are now willing to spend for
it, the word has gone round - not that it helps achieve fairness, but that it
helps win cases.

Since ours is an adversarial system of justice in which each side is supposed to
do its best to win, perhaps that is all right. But perhaps not. Jury research is
expensive and not always easily available. Aside from the relatively few
indigent defendants for whom jury-research costs are paid by the states or the
Federal Government, the method is bound to favor rich defendants in criminal
cases, and the richer side in civil suits.

Most lawyers and experts in the law, however, feel that this is unavoidable and
part of our system. As Ronald Olson sees it, ''In our system of justice there
are advantages that the one with greater resources is going to have - more
lawyers, better lawyers, a larger staff. Jury research is just one more such
advantage.'' Unlike many others who offer this apologia, Olson feels that we
ought not passively allow such an increase in inequality but should seek a way,
as a society, to make jury research available to both sides, even as we make
counsel available to criminal defendants with no money. But a Gideon-type
decision for subsidized jury research that would equalize the struggle in
criminal suits would not do so in civil suits. And, of course, such a decision
is highly unlikely in the present governmental climate. If the power of jury
research is not extended to both sides in civil as well as criminal cases, this
new weapon of litigation seems bound to affect the balance of power in the
courtroom as radically as new weapons of combat have affected the balance of
power between warring nations.

Yet even if we did develop machinery to make jury research available to both
sides, a still greater difficulty may be its potential effect on the moral
values upon which our system of justice is built. If we come to perceive jurors
not as independent moral agents but as creatures whose behavior, determined by
social and psychological forces, is more or less predictable, we undercut the
fundamental belief in rationality and responsibility that justifies the process
of trial by jury.

This is not a problem to which lawyers or judges, so far as one can see, have
yet addressed themselves. How do we reconcile the concepts of human freedom and
dignity with the evidence of the social and behavioral sciences that we are all
captives of our own histories?  Philosophers, jurists and social scientists are
currently trying to harmonize our belief in a scientific account of human
behavior with our need to see ourselves as free moral agents, capable of making
worthy choices. We can only hope that they soon find a way to do so.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Roger Seasonwein photo of Donald Vinson

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER;
'5TH OF JULY': AIR OF ADEQUACY

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 20, Column 4; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 684 words


MADISON LANFORD WILSON'S ''5th of July,'' which takes place in 1977, is about
resilience and survival. Feelings are sorted out, relationships are resolved and
the characters get on with their lives ''now that the days of power to the
people are over.''

In Mr. Wilson's plays, one does not look for plot or action but, rather, for
feeling, for resonance, for language. No American playwright's word shapes have
graced our stage so lyrically since the prime plays of Tennessee Williams.

The realization of Mr. Wilson's rhythms and cadences requires a director who can
be an orchestrator in equal measure and a cast that is tuned into the harmony of
ensemble playing.

Paul Barry's New Jersey Shakespeare Festival production of ''5th of July,''
which will be at Drew University's Bowne Theater through Dec. 12, seems to be
about eight characters sitting around talking, but with no organic sense of why
they're there.

At best, the staging has an air of adequacy and the performances are all too
often excessive or inert, with a few noteworthy exceptions.

Mr. Wilson's gallery of lost souls, as well as their finders and keepers, are
gathered at an old farmhouse in Missouri for the holiday weekend. Whether or not
the house will be sold, and to whom, is one of the play's issues, and the
post-Independence Day date of the play is significant indeed.

The house (the Talley Place) belongs to Kenneth Talley Jr., a Vietnam veteran
whose legs were blown off and who is coming out of a self-destructive, isolated
phase. He can say ''I'm not involved'' in 45 different languages, someone
observes facetiously.

Kenneth's male lover, Jed, is his physical and emotional support.  Mr. Wilson
made a significant theatrical breakthrough here: A homosexual relationship is
woven into the fabric of life with honesty, naturalness and openness.

Kenneth's guests include his sister, June, once an activist, who now wistfully
talks about ''what we almost achieved,'' and her eccentric, illegitimate
teen-age daughter, Shirley, the last of the Talleys, who is waiting to ''burst
forth'' and astonish the world in her chosen artistic career (''whatever it
is''), but settles for being a nuisance in the meantime.

To finish the family part, there's Kenneth's widowed aunt, Sally, the young
newlywed of Mr. Wilson's ''Talley's Folly,'' now 64 and clutching a candy box
filled with her husband's ashes, which she often misplaces (in the refrigerator
or the doctor's office).

The burial of the ashes - the site, the river or the rose garden, is also
significant - is supposed to take place over this weekend.  (''Fifth of July''
is one of a triology in a projected cycle of plays about the Talley family. It
is filled with cross references to ''Talley's Folly,'' but, of course, it has
its own life.)

For friends, we have two from Kenneth's high-school days: Gwen, a spaced out
(hysterical) 33-year-old heiress who wants to be a pop singer; her husband,
John, and, finally, Weston, a spaced-out (mellow) songwriter and guitar player.

Gwen's is the flashiest part, and Nita Novy plays her for believability, not
flamboyance - a valid approach that still needs to be worked out.

Lynn Cohen (June) has a world-weary quality, communicating a sense of loss and
humor about a decade that suddenly seems a sad joke. John O'Hurley's Jed
provides just the solid support his lover relies on, Virginia Mattis's Sally
remains at a routine level and Robert Colston (Weston) and Jorin Burr (Shirley)
reduce two lively roles to lifelessness.

Peter Burnall's Kenneth gives a vivid, but mannered, case study of a paraplegic,
showing an over-concentration on the handicap at the expense of the character.

Throughout and ultimately, ''5th of July'' suffers from such uneven playing. A
newcomer to Mr. Wilson's work might find it hard to believe how loving, how
funny, how life-enhancing it really is.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RABE'S 'STREAMERS' SEETHES WITH RAGE

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 23, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 584 words


LINDENHURST AWORLD WAR I British musical recording, ''I Didn't Raise My Boy to
Be a Soldier,'' is played before the Studio Theater's staging of David Rabe's
''Streamers'' starts - and we know, straightaway, that we're in for more than a
bit of universal, timeless irony.

When the lights come up, there they are: those spare, drab Army accouterments -
footlockers and lockers standing tall, bunks, mops and sickly green walls.

The play is set in a barracks in Virginia, early in the Vietnam ''conflict'' -
another irony there, for the word turns out to have a double-edged meaning. Save
for one sergeant, the characters haven't seen combat. Mr. Rabe was dealing with
their personal, interpersonal and unresolved combats and conflicts: the ones
they create, the inbred violence (the American way?), the perpetuated prejudices
that fester and, finally, erupt. Call it a prewar play.

''Streamers'' seethes with rage and ends in a bloodbath. Roy Siegel's direction
neither flinches from nor exploits the ugliness and the gore, and it carefully
balances those crescendos with sensitive passages that are shaded and muted,
almost as a hush.

The cast of 10, pared down from the original 11, is well chosen to the last M.P.
The first act focuses on the smaller stresses among Billy (Philip Thron), the
middle-America, intellectual type who thinks he has it all figured out; Roger
(Ron Stroman), a seemingly token, well-adjusted black, and Richie (Barry
Benson), a self-declared, hedonistic homosexual who is taunted and tempted. The
others accept him as a friend but won't allow themselves to acknowledge him as a
''gay.''

The interplay among the three actors is most impressive for its high intensity
and its very real feeling - and the characters come off as people, not as types
at all.

Enter Carlyle, ''an animal and, on top of that, a rotten person.'' He's the
antithesis of the well-adjusted black, and his hostility contaminates everyone.
Curtis Davenport, a senior theater arts major at Hofstra University who is here
making his Studio Theater debut, is a sinister and seductive Carlyle. Note to
Studio Theater's management: hold on to Mr. Davenport.

As two gung-ho drunken sergeants, Joe McCabe and Robert Rosin are scary in their
own fashion, and Ron Gordon is effective as Martin, the soldier who slashes his
wrists in the first scene because he can't stand being in the Army anymore. (The
others can.)

Mr. Rabe envisioned ''Streamers'' as the third in a cycle of plays about aspects
and effects of the Vietnam era. (The other plays are ''The Basic Training of
Pavlo Hummel'' and ''Sticks and Bones.'') ''Streamers'' was more unsettling when
it was first seen in 1976.  Strangely, its imagery (a streamer is a parachute
that fails to open), sheer relentlessness, long, long speeches and mixed
metaphors seem more gratuitous than the graphic details. The play runs on for
almost three hours.

For all that, it has its harrowing moments, a cumulative impact and
well-realized characters. One does care about what is happening, or is going to
happen, to them. Mr. Siegel's production, which ends Saturday, gets it all, and
makes it all too clear that ''Streamers'' isn't just another play about soldiers
playing war games.

THEATER IN REVIEW

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Philip Thron and Curtis Davenport

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA SAYS VIETNAM IS TRYING TO SEIZE PARTS OF TONKIN GULF

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 338 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Nov. 28


China accused Vietnam today of trying to encroach on its territory by claiming
vast areas of the Tonkin Gulf and two disputed island groups.

''The Vietnamese authorities must bear full responsibility for all the serious
consequences that may arise therefrom,'' a Foreign Ministry spokesman said.
''The so-called boundary line in the Beibu Gulf as asserted by the Vietnamese
Government is illegal and null and void.'' The Chinese call Tonkin the Beibu
Gulf.

He also said the Paracel and Spratly Islands, claimed by both Vietnam and China,
''are an inalienable part of China's sacred territory.''

The Paracels, which China calls the Xisha islands, are about 135 miles southeast
of China's Hainan Island and 215 miles east of Vietnam. The Spratly group, which
China calls the Nansha islands, is about 215 miles southeast of Vietnam and 560
miles southeast of Hainan.

The spokesman charged that on Nov. 12, ''The Vietnamese Government groundlessly
declared that the boundary delimitation convention signed between China and
France in 1887 'had defined' the maritime boundary line in the Beibu Gulf, and
even described China's Xisha and Nansha Islands as Vietnam's islands, announcing
that base lines would be drawn for their territorial sea.''

But the spokesman contended the 1887 agreement did not delimit the maritime area
in the gulf. He claimed Vietnam had acknowledged this in the past.

The spokesman charged that Vietnam's Nov. 12 statement ''has fully revealed the
expansionist designs of the Vietnamese authorities. It is also a deliberate new
step to further aggravate Sino-Vietnamese relations.''

China and North Vietnam were allies against United States and South Vietnamese
forces during the Indochina War. After the Communist north took over all of
Vietnam in 1975, relations cooled in disputes over Chinese aid to Vietnam and
Vietnamese treatment of Chinese living in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ANTIWAR LEADER OF THE 60's NOW HELPS WORKERS AS A LAWYER

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: YOUNGSTOWN, Ohio


When a plant is going out of business in this manufacturing area of the Middle
West, or when workers feel wronged by their unions or employers, or when workers
seek legal help for any number of job problems, the man they are likely to call
is Staughton Lynd.

A decade ago, most workers and Mr. Lynd were at odds. Mr. Lynd, who was then an
assistant professor of American history at Yale University, was a antiwar
activist in the forefront of leaders of what was called the new left. He was
chairman of the 1965 march in Washington to protest the Vietnam War. At
Christmas 1965 he made a ''fact-finding'' trip to Hanoi, the capital of North
Vietnam. In contrast, workers were widely regarded as the backbone of support
for the American war effort in Vietnam.

Today Mr. Lynd, 52 years old, is a labor lawyer in this blue-collar town. He
practices with a legal services firm, helping workers in struggles with
corporations and union leaders. His philosophy and his confrontational tactics
have not changed. Neither has the resentment he arouses, now among some
community leaders, the steelworkers union and the steel industry.

He opposes contract concessions by the steel union unless companies make major
concessions in turn. He applauded local leaders of the United Steelworkers of
America this month when, opposing their top leaders, they rejected a tentative
agreement containing major concessions in wages and benefits.

Fights Plant Closings

Mr. Lynd entered labor law because, he said, ''the people who knew much about
labor law were often working for the companies or the unions.''

He has served as general counsel to a coalition of workers and other residents
who opposed the closing of the Youngstown Sheet and Tube Company's steel plant
in Campbell, Ohio. He represented union members opposed to the closing of LTV
Corporation's Brier Hill Works, and he was an attorney for six locals that tried
to keep United States Steel from closing its Youngstown works. He has
represented union activists at Homestead, Pa., in efforts to force the United
States Steel Company to make investments in the area. And he has published a
handbook, ''Labor Law for the Rank and Filer,'' that has sold 10,000 copies.

Leaders of both the steel industry and the union regard Mr. Lynd with immense
suspicion and distrust, saying he is a leftist meddler who has no real
understanding of the industry or free enterprise.  Union leaders say his goal is
to promote insurgents and undermine the union, not to assist workers and
distressed communities.

He is currently publishing a book, ''The Fight Against Shutdowns: Youngstown's
Steel Mill Closings,'' that documents from his perspective the closing of three
steel facilities: Campbell, Brier Hill and Youngtown Works. The closings
eliminated 10,000 jobs in the Youngstown area, which has an unemployment rate of
20.9 percent, highest among metropolitan centers.

Criticizes Steel Companies

Mr. Lynd contends that reasonable profits can be made in the steel industry but
that many companies want to stop making steel and invest in other endeavors for
the sake of larger profits. He opposes what he calls an ''investment-making
philosophy based on profits and nothing else.''

The son of Robert S. Lynd and Helen M. Lyndon, the sociologists who wrote the
''Middletown'' sociological studies of Muncie, Ind., Mr.  Lynd grew up in New
York and was graduated from Harvard College in 1951.

In the early 1950's he was given an undesirable discharge from the Army. The
Government said that he had belonged to the leftist John Reed Society in college
and that his mother was a ''hypermodern educator.'' The Supreme Court later
directed that Mr. Lynd and others ordered from the service for similar reasons
be given honorable discharges.

Mr. Lynd earned a Ph.D. from Columbia University in 1961 and in the early 1960's
taught at Spelman College, a school for black women in Atlanta, before joining
the Yale faculty.

Earned Law Degree at Age 46

He received his law degree from the University of Chicago in 1976, when he was
46. He says he came to Youngtown because he had developed friendships with two
rank-and-file leaders, Ed Mann and the late John Barbero.

Mr. Lynd lost his first law job in Youngstown, he says, because of publication
of his handbook on labor law, which encouraged workers to use the law to oppose
their unions if this seemed proper. He then joined the legal services firm.

He says that the country needs strong laws to counter plant closings and that he
favors employee ownership plans if workers acquire real power in return for
their investments. He argues that the nation must adopt industrial policies that
force companies that make savings on such things as stretch-outs of
environmental laws to invest those savings in their basic industries.

He favors creation of a Government-sponsored steel company, along the lines of
the Tennessee Valley Authority, that would engage in highly modern steel
manufacturing.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Staughton Lynd

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TRAILER TRUCKS ARE RATTLING A SMALL TOWN'S TRANQUILLITY

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. GEIST

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1229 words


Marjorie Hoey has had 19 tractor-trailer trucks overturn in her front yard
during the last 10 years, usually in the early morning, when she is awakened by
a thunderous crash and the sound of heads of lettuce, sides of beef or frozen
turkeys thrown against the front of her house.

She has peeked out the curtains to see hundreds of dazed chickens standing
around, three feet of baby-food jar lids covering most of the lawn, and a United
States Air Force experimental plane that flew rather well off a truck rounding
the bend in the road in front of her home in Milford, Pa., just across the
Delaware River from New Jersey and across the state line from New York.

''The plane was interesting,'' said the 67-year-old Mrs. Hoey, pushing up her
glasses.  About 3,000 tractor-trailers a day pass Mrs. Hoey's home on the way
through Milford, an otherwise picturesque community of 1,100 people, rattling
teacups and nerves, cracking windows, plaster and the rural tranquillity.

They rumble through on a stretch of U.S. Route 209 known to truckers across the
country as the Ho Chi Minh Trail, a narrow, winding, dangerous road that
provides a link between Interstates 80 and 84, a short cut to New England that
saves them miles, mountains and money.

Townspeople finally won a ban from the Federal Government on trucks using the
road, which was to have taken effect yesterday. But word of the impending ban
seemed to have spread through every hill and dale in the foothills of the
Poconos, so the neighboring towns in New Jersey and New York -fearful that
Milford's one million trucks a year would begin rumbling through their
communities - obtained a postponement and re-evaluation of the Route 209 ban.

Meetings have been hastily called, petitions have been signed and members of
Congress from the area have been besieged with pleas to press for the
re-evaluation from the Federal Department of the Interior.

The Interior Department has jurisdiction over the road because it passes through
a National Recreation Area near Milford.  The 40-ton 18-wheel trailer trucks,
carrying everything from medicine to cheese chips, exit Route 80 and make their
way up Route 209 through Marshalls Creek, past the Pocono Snake Farm and the
Pocono Indian Museum and Ski Shop, past Henny Youngman, when he is on stage at
the Fernwood resort, and through Egypts Mills and Dingmans Ferry.

They roar by the thousands past the Environmental Education Center and through
the Delaware Water Gap Recreational Area and into Milford, a remarkably
well-preserved town chock full of Georgian, Federal and Victorian homes.

New Parking Rules

But they cannot stop at the Milford Diner anymore, a practice that filled the
town with trucks prior to some new parking restrictions.  Some say that the
idling trucks have killed trees, and most say that exhaust from the trucks is
ruining the paint on the exteriors of the houses, cracking the walls of the
First Presbyterian Church, shaking the stucco off a historic building and the
ornamental wood trim off the Pike County Courthouse - the county having just
spent $5,000 to put it back up.

Warner Depuy, the Pike County Commissioner who has led a relentless and often
frustrating battle for more than 10 years to ban the tractor-trailers from
Milford, said he had his home remodeled so that the bedroom is in the back,
farther away from the road and the trucks.

Mr. DePuy said the Hotel Fauchere, which opened in 1842, closed two years ago
because of noise from the trucks that passed just a few feet from its front
door.

And Martin Greenwald, the owner of the Milford Drug Store, said many residents
have moved out of town.  Cynthia Van Lierde keeps a scrapbook of news clippings
about the trucks, filled with stories and photographs of them knocking down
signs and telephone lines, of Mrs. Hoey and her neighbors standing in their
bathrobes looking at piles of carpeting and at stunned chickens.

Although the scrapbook has some comical contents, for the most part it is a
macabre album of death, chronicling dozens of fatal automobile accidents on
Route 209, most of which local residents believe are attributable to the heavy
truck traffic.

The County Commissioner, Mr. Depuy, says that 112 deaths have occurred on this
stretch of Route 209 in the last seven years. But the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation argues that the figure is only about half that, just as others
have argued that perhaps only 2,500 trucks a day go through Milford.

Mr. Depuy has proven a strong opponent to the trucking lobby and to various
state and Federal agencies. At times during the frustrating battle, he has had
to convince Milford residents not to block the road with baby carriages, piles
of shale or a barrage of gunfire.

Some Canny Methods

Some of his methods have been canny, such as the most recent move deeding the
road to the National Park Service so that it could ban the trucks. So close was
he to final victory - and a planned victory celebration - that road signs
announcing the ban were erected by the State Transportation Department, only to
be covered over with the postponement announcement.

Mr. Depuy contends that banning trucks on Route 209 would require most of them
to drive just 11 extra miles. ''Tonight, tomorrow or a week from now,'' he said
''someone is going to die on that road. I hate to write a letter to someone
saying there is blood on their hands, but I will.''

Most truckers disagree with his mileage estimate, saying that for them the
rerouting would mean between 20 and 50 additional miles - and, moreover, slow
and often dangerous hauls through the mountains.

Nelson Cooney, general counsel to the American Trucking Association, said that
if the Interior Department did not reverse its decision to implement the ban on
Route 209, the association would go to court.

Roadway Express Inc. operates the largest of its 500 terminals on Route 80 near
the Route 209 short cut, and company officials have threatened to move the
terminal and its 823 full-time jobs if the ban is put into effect.

Route Change Called Costly

A spokesman for the company, Timothy Lynch, said that traveling the Interstate
routes would add an estimated one hour to the New England trip and cost the
company about $1 million more a year.

Many truckers and spokesmen for trucking companies say privately, however, that
they would not use the hilly, narrow Route 94 in New Jersey, as has been
threatened, with the threats sending shock waves up and down the road from
Newton, N.J., to Warwick, N.Y.

At the Pocono Queen Diner on Route 209, truck drivers were generally peeved
about the ban. Herbert Hillegas, an independent trucker from Pittsburgh who
makes runs to New England, said, ''A ban is going to cost truckers a lot of
money at a time when companies are going out of business right and left.''

''These people,'' he said, ''want a private little paradise up here and they
want us to pay for it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of tractor-trailers (page B11) map of N.J.-Penn.
border (page B11)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE ROLL-CALL ON AFGHANISTAN

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2074 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Nov. 29


Following is the roll-call vote by which the General Assembly approved a
resolution today demanding that the Soviet Union withdraw its troops from
Afghanistan:

In Favor - 114
Albania Antigua & Barbuda Argentina Australia Austria Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh
Barbados Belgium Botswana Brazil Britain Burma Burundi
Cambodia Cameroon Canada Central Af.  Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros
Costa Rica Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El
Salvador Fiji France Gabon Gambia Germany, West Ghana Greece Guatemala Guinea
Guyana
Haiti Honduras Iceland Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast
Jamaica Japan Jordan Kenya Kuwait Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Luxem- bourg Malawi
Malaysia Maldives Malta Mauritania Mexico Morocco Nepal Nether- lands New
Zealand
Niger Nigeria Norway Oman
Pakistan Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Portugal Qatar Rwanda
St. Lucia St. Vincent & Gren.  Samoa Saudi Arabia Senegal Sierra Leone Singapore
Solomon Islands Somalia Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Swaziland Sweden
Tanzania Thailand Togo Trinidad & Tobago Tunisia Turkey U. Arab Emirates United
States Upper Volta Uruguay Venezuela Yugoslavia Zaire Zambia Zimbabwe

Against - 21
Afghanistan Angola Bulgaria Byelorussia Cuba Czechoslo- vakia Ethiopia Germany,
East Grenada Hungary Laos Libya Madagas- car Mongolia Mozam- bique Poland
Soviet Union Syria Ukraine Vietnam Yemen, Southern

Abstentions - 13
Algeria Benin Cape Verde Congo Cyprus Equatorial Guinea Finland Guinea- Bissau
India Mali Nicaragua Uganda Yemen

Absent or Not Voting - 9
Belize Bhutan Bolivia Mauritius Rumania Sao Tome & Principe Seychelles South
Africa Vanuatu

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 30, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 899 words


International
The use of chemical weapons by the Soviet Union and its allies is continuing in
Laos, Cambodia and Afghanistan, according to a detailed report submitted to
Congress and the United Nations by Secretary of State George P. Shultz. He
accused Moscow of displaying a ''cynical disregard for international law.''
(Page A1, Column 2.)
A demand for Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan was issued again by the United
Nations General Assembly. The resolution was approved by a 114-to-21 vote.
(A6:1-3.)
A U.S. arms sale to Pakistan may be in jeopardy, according to Pentagon
officials. They said that Pakistan had refused to accept delivery of the first
six F-16 fighter-bombers it had ordered because the jets lacked the most
advanced American electronic warfare system. But later an official said that
negotiators in Islamabad were making progress toward resolving the dispute.
(A1:1.)
President Reagan leaves today for a five-day visit to Latin America to mend
relations strained by the Falkland war, strengthen economic ties and rally
support for Washington's policy in the Caribbean.  (A3:1-3.)
A reclusive family in deepest Siberia whose home was spotted from the air in
1978 has attracted a succession of visitors, including a Soviet journalist who
has written an account of their life. The family's forebears fled into the
Siberian wilderness three centuries ago to elude ecclesiastical changes and the
modernization program of Peter the Great. (A1:2-4.)
National
Democratic leaders began drafting jobs legislation in the House that could cost
up to $5 billion and put thousands of people to work renovating public
facilities. But Senate Republican leaders warned there would probably not be
enough time to consider the measure during the postelection session that began
yesterday. (A1:6.)
President Reagan defended his economic program before the nation's mayors. He
denounced the ''Federal choke-hold on the American economy,'' which he said is
slighting the cities and building ''structural deficit'' into the Federal
budget. (A1:5.)
The growth of rural areas has become so pervasive across the nation that neither
sharp cuts in Federal funds nor the economic slump is likely to halt such
development in the 1980's, according to experts.  (A1:3-4.)
Senator Howard W. Cannon denied on the witness stand that he had ever been
offered a bribe by a teamsters' union official. Senator Cannon, a Nevada
Democrat, replied ''absolutely not'' when asked by defense attorneys whether he
had agreed to take a bribe in return for scuttling a truck deregulation bill.
(A16:1-3.)
Fifty studies involving Agent Orange are being conducted or sponsored by the
Federal Government. The studies of the herbicide, which was sprayed over perhaps
20 percent of South Vietnam to defoliate trees and kill crops, range from
detailed health examinations of thousands of veterans to small tests of how the
chemicals affect laboratory animals. (C1:5.)
A review of the exclusionary rule on evidence was set by the Supreme Court. Over
the vigorous dissent of three Justices, the Court annnounced it would consider
later this term whether to restrict the application of the 68-year-old rule,
which requires the exclusion of illegally seized evidence from a criminal trial.
(B9:1.)
Former covert agents were upheld by a Federal administrative law judge, who
ruled that a group of such agents who worked under contract for the Navy were
entitled to Civil Service benefits. Under the decision, more than 150 people who
worked for a secret Navy unit in the 1960's and 70's qualify for Federal
retirement and other benefits. (A17:1.)
Metropolitan
An impasse on judicial appointments was reported by Governor Carey.  He said
that the appointment of 19 new Court of Claims judges, most of them scheduled to
hear criminal cases in New York City, had been blocked by a dispute with the
State Senate Republican leadershp over the appointment process. (A1:1.)
A problem for the transit system came to light as the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority disclosed that the Federal Government had ruled the
agency ineligible to buy low-cost hydroelectric power to operate subway and
commuter lines because it did not meet the Federal definition of an eligible
municipal entity. M.T.A. officials said the decision could cost the
deficit-ridden agency $5 million in increased energy costs this year and far
more in the future. (B3:5-6.)
Reimposing a stock-transfer tax is favored by Mayor Koch as a way of helping New
York City and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority close their budget
deficits. The Mayor offered no specifics on how big he thought the tax should
be. (B4:1-2.)
A state judge has been censured by the State Commission on Judicial Conduct for
presiding over a case in which he had close political, business and personal
relations with several of the defendants. The panel found that, while he was the
Republican leader of Oyster Bay, L.I., the judge, State Supreme Court Justice
Angelo D. Roncallo, had ''personal knowledge of and participated in'' an
insurance commission-sharing scheme under legal challenge in his court. (B5:1.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT ORANGE: DESPITE SPATE OF STUDIES, SLIM HOPE FOR ANSWERS

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2023 words


WASHINGTON SCIENTISTS are moving far faster than is widely recogized to
investigate the riddle of Agent Orange, a herbicide that was sprayed over
perhaps 20 percent of South Vietnam to defoliate trees and kill crops, and is
now blamed by many veterans for a host of health problems.

At latest count, the Federal Government was conducting or sponsoring more than
50 studies related to Agent Orange, ranging from very large health examinations
of thousands of veterans to small tests of how the chemicals affect laboratory
animals, at a cost that will exceed $100 million. Several important studies are
due to announce initial findings by the end of 1983.

But whether any of these studies will resolve the acrimonious and emotional
debate over Agent Orange is problematic. Few scientists expect the studies to
produce unequivocal results or provide a clear guide to public policy. It is
gradually becoming clear that there is a vast gulf between the expectations of
veterans who believe they were harmed by the herbicide and the informed
judgments of many scientists charged with investigating their complaints.

Hardly a week goes by without another poignant story of a veteran suffering
health problems: cancers, deformed children, miscarriages, stillbirths, liver
and kidney disorders, fatigue, tingling and numbness in the hands and feet,
nerve damage, abdominal pain, depression, loss of sexual drive, sterility, skin
rashes, headaches, dizziness, and more.

But at this point it is not clear whether Vietnam veterans as a whole are
suffering more illness than a comparable group of other veterans or civilians
and, if so, whether Agent Orange was the cause.

Few scientists doubt that Agent Orange - a mixture of two commonly used
herbicides, 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D, plus dangerous contaminants known as dioxins -
can be toxic. And few doubt that at least some military personnel, notably those
who sprayed or worked with Agent Orange, were virtually swimming in the
chemicals.

But nobody knows whether the average soldier on a one-year tour of duty got
enough of a dose from the Agent Orange sprayed around him to produce an adverse
health effect. And scientists warn that, even if there is an effect, it may not
make a notable blip in epidemiological studies. The link between smoking and
lung cancer took decades to establish, and that research involved vast numbers
of people who were inhaling large quantities of the toxic substance every day of
their lives.

''In most environmental studies, the people who urge the study are very unhappy
when the results become available,'' warns Lewis Kuller, an epidemiologist at
the University of Pittsburgh, who has served as an Agent Orange consultant for
the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment. ''The effects are very
difficult to measure and are often relatively small compared to whatever else
happens in the world.  There's a good possibility that we'll come up with a big
goose egg and the veterans will be extraordinarily unhappy.''

The first step in the search for an answer was to review everything already
known about the effects of @2,4-D, 2,4,5-T and dioxin from animal experiments
and from human exposures in industry, forestry, agriculture, and accidents. JRB
Associates, of McLean, Va., a management and environmental consulting firm,
reviewed some 1,200 scientific articles under a contract with the Veterans
Administration, and a panel appointed by the American Medical Association
conducted its own independent review.

The JRB report, completed a year ago, found ''no evidence'' that the chemicals
pose ''a potent carcinogenic risk'' to humans, but it cited some studies
suggesting that exposure to 2,4,5-T or dioxin may greatly increase the
probability of a rare form of cancer known as soft-tissue sarcoma, and possibly
lymphomas as well. It also found no evidence that dioxin had caused reproductive
or teratogenic effects in humans or that the chemicals had harmed the offspring
of men exposed before conception.

The A.M.A. report, summarized in the Oct. 15 issue of the Journal of the
American Medical Association, said ''there is still little substantive evidence
for the many claims that have been made against these compounds.''

It cited chloracne, a skin disease, as the most pronounced biological effect in
humans caused by the most dangerous dioxin, known as TCDD. ''If there is no
history of chloracne,'' the A.M.A.  said, ''then the likelihood of a significant
exposure to, or adverse health effects from, TCDD is remote.''

More Symptoms May Be Found

Thus far, according to the Veterans Administration, there have been very few
cases of chloracne found among veterans seeking medical attention, although more
may be found in the more thorough physical examinations now under way.

The A.M.A. group also noted that the most extensive human exposure to dioxin yet
studied - an industrial explosion at Seveso, Italy, that potentially exposed
more than 37,000 persons in 1976 - has thus far found no significant health
impairments beyond mild chloracne or other transient effects.

Although the chemicals in Agent Orange have proved toxic to virtually every
major organ system in one or another experimental animal, the A.M.A. group said
the data are ''not necessarily applicable to man.'' And although humans exposed
to dioxin have developed such symptoms as impaired liver function, stomach
irritation, depression and nerve effects, an A.M.A. technical report said that
the symptoms ''have always cleared with time.''

But virtually all scientists acknowledge great gaps in existing knowledge. The
human studies generally involve relatively small numbers of people or relatively
brief periods of observation, and many were flawed in design or execution.

Some Limits on Studies

The current studies have been reviewed by platoons of experts to insure the
highest possible quality. But knowledgeable scientists cite several problems
that may limit their ability to unravel the causes of the veterans' ailments.

The most important is that an overemphasis on Agent Orange may actually divert
attention from other toxic materials that may have harmed the veterans. The
decision to study Agent Orange was not made on medical or scientific grounds; it
was a political decision in response to pressure from worried veterans and news
organizations.  The Defense Department estimates that most troops probably got
heavier exposures to insecticides, antimalarial drugs, fuel vapors, diseases,
parasites, narcotics, alcohol and many other toxic substances than they did to
Agent Orange.

''The focus on Agent Orange has always bothered me,'' says John Moore, deputy
director of the National Toxicology Program and former head of the interagency
scientific panel for Agent Orange studies.  ''It would be a shallow response to
the veterans if we did an excellent Agent Orange study that turns out negative
because their problems are associated with something else.''

Broader Studies Are Urged

Such concerns have led some lawmakers and veterans' groups to push for a broader
study of the health effects of the entire Vietnam experience. A few studies
already have that broader focus but the largest epidemiological investigations
do not.

Another difficulty is that, except for chloracne and possibly soft tissue
sarcomas, there is no cluster of diseases that can be peculiarly identified with
the chemicals in Agent Orange. Virtually all the veterans' health complaints are
widespread in the general population and have many different causes. Cancer is
the cause of roughly 20 percent of all American deaths, and some 9 percent of
all children born have at least minor defects, so one would expect to find many
of these illnesses among the veterans and their offspring anyway.

The studies now under way are trying to determine whether any illnesses are more
prevalent among those exposed to Agent Orange than among comparable people not
exposed. But all have limitations on their detection power. The major efforts
include these:

- An Air Force study is comparing the health of some 1,200 servicemen who
sprayed the chemicals from planes with that of a control group of Air Force
personnel who did not. Initial findings are due next year, and the subjects will
be followed for 20 years to detect late cancers. Some scientists expect this
study to be the most revealing because the sprayers received far more exposure
than other servicemen, but the small size of the group limits the statistical
power to detect less-than-major effects. So far there has been no difference in
mortality between the sprayers and the other Air Force personnel. Both groups
have shown lower mortality than civilians, as might be expected, since they were
healthier to begin with.

- A birth-defects study by the Centers for Disease Control will compare some
7,500 babies born with serious birth defects in the Atlanta area with a control
group of normal children and try to determine whether the defective children are
more likely to have a parent who served in Vietnam. The investigators say the
study has ''pretty high power'' to detect as little as a 20 percent increase in
the overall risk of birth defects among Vietnam veterans, but could probably
only detect a tripling in any specific common defect. Billed as the largest
case-control study of birth defects ever conducted, the study should produce
initial findings late next year. An attempt will be made to determine whether
the veterans involved were exposed to Agent Orange, but success is uncertain.

- A registry of industrial workers exposed to dioxin since the late 1940's is
being compiled by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health. It
will be used to compare mortality among the exposed workers with national
mortality rates, but the statistical power of the study to detect effects is
relatively low. Attempts are being made to increase the power by adding foreign
workers and additional American workers in future years. The study has already
given support to the notion that dioxin can cause soft-tissue sarcomas. A
further preliminary analysis is due late next year.

- A Veterans Administration study will compare mortality rates and causes among
Vietnam veterans with those among veterans who served elsewhere during the same
period. And a parallel V.A. study will analyze 500 to 700 pairs of identical
twins of whom only one served in Vietnam in an effort to detect subtle
psychological and health differences between them. Both studies will measure the
whole Vietnam experience and are not designed to isolate the effects of Agent
Orange. Initial results are expected in 1984.

- The biggest and potentially most important of all is a very large
epidemiological study that will compare the health of 6,000 or more ground
troops who had a high risk of exposure to Agent Orange with a comparable number
whose exposure risk was low. Eighteen months ago most knowledgeable scientists
considered this study all but impossible, largely because of difficulties in
determining which troops were exposed to what. But Army records experts have
since made enormous strides toward teasing out those distinctions, and today the
consensus is that a study may well be possible. Still, a panel of experts
appointed by the National Academy of Sciences recently warned that the whole
effort so far rests on an ''insecure scientific base.'' Results will not be in
before 1987 at the earliest.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SCIENCE WATCH;
'EXTINCT' OXEN ARE SEEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 326 words


DURING the last decade the kouprey, one of the world's largest wild oxen, has
not been seen close enough for positive identification anywhere in its war-torn
habitat of Laos, Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam. Many wildlife scientists
assumed it had become extinct. But a Thai mammalogist has now reported recently
sighting five of the six-foot-tall animals near the Cambodian border.

Dr. Boonsong Lekagul, an expert on the behavior and biology of Asia's wild oxen,
reported that one adult male, two adult females and two calves were sighted in
Sisaket Province in northeast Thailand, adjoining Cambodia. The discovery, made
by a scientific search party supported by the World Wildlife Fund, indicated
that at least a few were breeding successfully and that more may be living in
the forests.

There are no koupreys in captivity and scientists hope to capture some of the
rare mammals, called the ''wild cow of the forest,'' and breed them at a wild
animal ranch near Bangkok. They say the chances of the animal to survive in the
wild are slight because of fighting and turmoil in the area.

The kouprey is the most primitive of living cattle, with features typical of
some Pleistocene forms. Its most distinguishable field characteristic is the
shape of the horns, which indicate both species and sex. The horn of the bull
kouprey is the longest and widest of all living wild cattle except some
buffaloes, and bears a fringe of horn sheath at the ends that gives the
appearance of a pompon. The females have lyre-shaped horns which corkscrew
upwards.

The kouprey's prevalence in ancient times is evidenced by many prehistoric cave
paintings in the area. It was also a favorite animal of the ancient Khmers, who
carved kouprey statues and featured it in the bas-reliefs of many temples,
including the monuments of Angkor Wat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-PRESIDENTS: PUBLIC ASSETS?

BYLINE: By CHARLOTTE CURTIS

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 849 words


RICHARD M. NIXON has become something of an authority on the relationship
between former Presidents and the occupants of the Oval Office, having dealt
with predecessors (from Herbert Hoover) and successors (to Ronald Reagan). And,
he says, his relations with President Reagan are ''good.''

''I talk to him on the phone,'' Mr. Nixon explained in an interview in his New
York office. ''He gives me a call. I criticize him privately and praise him
publicly.''

Mr. Nixon said he backs up the phone conversations with notes to Mr. Reagan,
particularly after news conferences or speeches; on the big issues, such as
China and the Middle East, he said, ''I discipline myself to write.''

''I'm supportive,'' he continued. ''We don't have bull sessions.  Reagan doesn't
work that way.'' The question of what role, if any, former Presidents should
have has not been resolved, though William Howard Taft once suggested chloroform
and ceremonial cremation ''to fix his place in history and enable the public to
pass on to new men and new measures.''

But until recently, there weren't many former Presidents around, rarely three at
the same time. Yet as the historian John Whiteclay Chambers 2d wrote in American
Heritage magazine several years ago, the most significant development in the
last three decades has been ''the rapid emergence of the ex-Presidency as a form
of public office.''

Mr. Nixon makes no such claim, of course. Nor did he comment on what is widely
perceived as his effort to re-establish himself as a statesman. He said only
that ''former Presidents should be available to a President.'' But talking
specifically about former President Jimmy Carter's expertise on the Middle East,
he did say, ''Carter is like any former President, potentially a public asset.''
Which conforms with Mr. Nixon's thinking as President and his dealings with his
predecessors, especially President Lyndon B. Johnson.

''I found Johnson valuable,'' he said flatly. ''He backed me on Vietnam. My
relations with Johnson were excellent. He came to the White House to see me, and
Pat and I went to California with them to dedicate a grove named for Lady
Bird.''

Vietnam was not the only reason Mr. Nixon and Mr. Johnson got on so well.
Despite their sharp political differences, they had known each other since they
were Congressmen. It was Mr. Nixon, the Republican Presidential candidate, who
in 1960 advised Mr. Johnson, the Democratic Vice Presidential candidate, never
to campaign without an extra shirt, and Mr. Johnson never did.

Then too, as Mr. Nixon put it, ''Johnson and I never ran against each other.
People always forget that. I ran against Hubert Humphrey, and we were friends.''

''After two men run against each other, it's harder,'' he added.  ''Carter ran
against Ford and Carter ran against Reagan.'' By both Gerald R. Ford's and Mr.
Carter's accounts, the two have settled their differences. Each plans to attend
public-issues seminars sponsored by the other, and they recently collaborated on
an article on trade relations.

''Former Presidents could address the Senate,'' Mr. Nixon suggested, ''or they
could meet together with the President. But that won't work, because each former
President has a different expertise. Carter's is the Middle East and Ford is an
expert on domestic affairs.''

Since the national security adviser already briefs the former Presidents, Mr.
Nixon said, the adviser is the person who could consult with them on behalf of
the Administration. Then he could take foreign policy and defense information to
the President. ''If not the security adviser,'' Mr. Nixon said, ''then the
Secretary of State. It should be no one lower.''

Thus, a President would automatically receive advice and input without having to
seek it or wait for it to arrive, and, if he found it useless, he could simply
discard it.

Mr. Nixon's experience with former Presidents officially began when he was
Dwight D. Eisenhower's Vice President and got to know Herbert Hoover, who, he
said, ''was never in the White House while Roosevelt was President.''

Americans, he said, associate Hoover with domestic policy because of the
Depression. Yet ''he was an expert in foreign policy. He was a confidant of
Wilson's. It wasn't until Truman invited him to the White House that he was used
for foreign policy.''

He said Eisenhower was ''good to Hoover but not close to him.'' That's
understandable. After all, Hoover supported Senator Robert A.  Taft instead of
Eisenhower for the Presidency.

Even so, Mr. Nixon said, Hoover convinced Eisenhower to admit the Hungarian
refugees in 1956.  ''Roosevelt would have gained by talking with Hoover,'' he
said, suggesting, by inference, that Mr. Reagan would gain by talking with Mr.
Carter and Mr. Ford. And Mr. Nixon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'SAIGON ROSE'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


ALTHOUGH David Edgar has written some 40 other plays, chances are that he'll
always be most remembered as the man who adapted ''The Life and Adventures of
Nicholas Nickleby'' for the Royal Shakespeare Company. If you want to learn why,
you'll find at least a partial answer in ''Saigon Rose,'' an earlier Edgar
effort that is receiving its New York premiere under the auspices of a young
troupe called the Actors' Producing Company.

In this play, which is to be found Off Off Broadway at the Westside Mainstage,
Mr. Edgar is writing in his more usual mode - as a second-rung British political
playwright whose most successful pre''Nickleby'' work was also an adaptation,
''The Jail Diary of Albie Sachs.'' Left entirely to his own devices in ''Saigon
Rose,'' Mr. Edgar quickly writes himself into a jam.

His title refers to ''a particularly virulent strain of gonorrhea mutated during
the American involvement in Vietnam.'' His theme is the ''Saigonization'' of the
British Empire. ''Saigon Rose'' is set in Scotland in the mid-70's, as American
oil companies exploit the resources of the North Sea. Along with their
ecology-transforming technology and petrodollars, the Americans also bring to
tranquil Scotland their corrupting cultural and social values - which are
symbolically heralded by a local outbreak of the poisonous Saigon Rose.

Mr. Edgar tries to make his strident ideological points indirectly, by
containing them within the story of four drifting and disillusioned young people
whose romantic entanglements are farcically altered by their unfortunate
physical ailment. But the story hasn't been worked out, and most of the
characters are agitprop types. Whenever the author wishes to get down to his
serious business -whether to attack what he sees as industrial imperialism or to
wax poetic about the lost revolutionary ideals of the Vietnam 60's - he brings
the action to a halt and cranks up the appropriate soliloquies. For humor, there
are burlesque gynecological examinations that take us back to the juvenile sex
gags of England's latterday ''Carry On'' movies.

Ted Davis, the director, fails to impose a unity on the script's scattershot
components or to lick the oblique Brechtian gimmick - the use of
television-studio cues for scene transitions - that adds to the confusion. While
his cast of eight is generally more earnest than accomplished, there's one
strong exception: Linda Cook, as a provincial waitress who abandons her
fundamentalist upbringing to become a girlie-magazine pinup and a leftist
journalist's plaything before being dumped back into proletarian anonymity.
Poutishly sexy and full of robust Scots humor early on, Miss Cook gradually
becomes a dull-eyed sack of defeated flesh. She's the play's one truly credible
and affecting victim of both venereal disease and capitalist exploitation.

This actress aside, the evening's only other intriguing element is the extent to
which Mr. Edgar's failings in ''Saigon Rose'' recall those that accounted for
the sluggish passages in ''Nickleby.'' These include frequent repetitions, the
marching on and off of extraneous characters and an inability to organize
farflung events into a tight dramatic shape. Lacking either Dickens or the Royal
Shakespeare Company to bolster his slack dramaturgy this time, Mr. Edgar ends up
with a play that makes two hours pass like roughly eight and a half.

Corrupting Scotland
SAIGON ROSE, by David Edgar; directed by Ted Davis; scene design by Reagan Cook;
lighting by Jeffrey McRoberts; costumes by Deborah O'- Brien; stage manager,
Ellen Sontag. Presented by Joan Montgomery and Joanne Zippel. At the Westside
Mainstage, 424 West 49th Street.  Vickie
......................................Celia Lee Claymore
..............................Allan Wasserman Heather
.................................Jayne Bentzen Clive
.......................................Don Silva McClusky
...................................Carl Trone Mo
.........................................Linda Cook Doctor
....................................Dan Desmond Man on Beach
........................Michael Bofshever

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 30, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WAYS TO LOOK AT DEFICIT VARY

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FUERBRINGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 880 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


President Reagan contends that neither his tax cuts nor his large increase in
military spending is the cause of the rising Federal budget deficit.

''A propaganda campaign would have you believe these deficits are caused by our
so-called massive tax cut and defense buildup,'' the President said earlier this
month in New Orleans. ''Well, that's a real dipsy-doodle.''

The President's argument attributes the deficit to the rise in domestic
spending, especially Social Security and other entitlement programs.

Impact of Policy Changes

Maybe so, but this is not the only way to look at the budget, as is shown by the
two accompanying charts. Another way of looking at things, used by many of the
President's Democratic opponents in Congress, is to examine the impact of the
policy changes the President has made in the budget since he took office in
1981.

In this light, Mr. Reagan's increases in military spending and his tax cuts are
the direct cause of the expected increase in the Federal deficit between 1981
and 1984.

Martin S. Feldstein, the economist who formulated the President's argument,
acknowledged in a recent interview that conclusions about the causes of the
deficit depend on how the numbers are looked at.  ''If you take a static view of
the budget, you can blame the deficit on anything,'' said Mr. Feldstein, who is
the chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers. But, he added,
''if you ask how we got here'' - referring to the current deficit - the culprit
is nonmilitary spending.

What this means is that the numbers are neither right or wrong.  Instead, the
view of the budget - either the President's historical view or the Democrats'
forward look - is a reflection of goals. Mr.  Reagan's view reflects his push to
cut taxes and raise military spending. And the Democratic view, which is shared
by many Republicans, says that the tax cuts and military spending increases have
gone too far.

The analysis that some Democrats in Congress invoke is based on what is known as
a ''high employment'' budget. In effect, this method shows what the deficit
would look like if the economy were growing at a moderate rate and the
unemployment rate were about 6 percent. The effect is to remove the influence of
the recession, which economists in and outside the Reagan Administration
acknowledge has driven up the deficit. The purpose is to provide a clearer
picture of how Reagan budget policies have affected the deficit.

Without this technique, a revenue loss can loom larger than it is and the cuts
in spending can look smaller. Mr. Feldstein uses a high employment budget
analysis to help support one of his arguments.

According to the preliminary estimates by the staff of the House Budget
Committee - using the model of a high employment budget - the deficit will more
than double as a percentage of the gross national product, from eight-tenths of
1 percent of the G.N.P. in the 1981 fiscal year, the last budget by President
Carter, to 1.7 percent in the 1984 fiscal year, the budget year beginning next
Oct. 1.

These estimates assume that all the spending cuts proposed in the fiscal year
1983 budget will be enacted, and that there will be neither further spending
cuts nor tax increases in 1984.

By this reckoning, military spending will rise eight-tenths of a percentage
point as a portion of the gross national product, while tax revenues decline by
1.7 percentage points, which adds to the deficit by cutting revenue.

This combined change of 2.5 percentage points pushing the deficit higher is only
partially offset by a drop of 2.2 percentage points in the share of the gross
national product devoted to entitlement programs and other domestic spending.

As President Reagan sees things, by contrast, the Administration is simply
moving military spending and taxes back toward the share of the gross national
product that they had in the 1960's. (This historical perspective does not use
the high employment analysis, so the figures for the percentages of G.N.P. are
higher than the ones cited above.)

Peak of 9.5 Percent in 1968

As a percentage of gross national product, the level of military spending
averaged about 9.1 percent in the 1960's, hitting a peak of 9.5 percent during
the Vietnam War in 1968 and then falling to 8.1 percent in 1970. These levels
are far higher than the 6.2 percent level for the 1982 fiscal year and still
above the Administration's projected level of 6.7 percent in the 1984 fiscal
year.

On taxes, the revenue share of the gross national product was 18.7 percent in
the 1960's, 19.3 percent in the 1970's and 20.3 percent in 1982. In a projection
by the House Budget Committee, revenues are expected to fall to 18.9 percent of
the G.N.P. in 1987.

The culprit, therefore, is domestic spending, the President argues. The chart
shows that domestic spending as a percentage of the G.N.P.  has risen from 9.5
percent in 1960 to 12.1 percent in 1970. The next 12 years saw a further
increase, to an estimated 17.4 percent in 1982.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Tables of different views of the federal deficit

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 318 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 1, 1982 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A SELF-PORTRAIT OF SARTRE

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 633 words


''SARTRE PAR LUI-MEME (Sartre by Himself),'' which opens today at the Film
Forum, is a 3-hour, 10-minute film usually described as a ''talking heads''
movie. That's exactly what ''Sartre par Lui-Meme'' is, and when the talking
heads belong to Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir and a small circle of
friends, you can't do much better. However, because the talk in the film is
entirely in French, ''Sartre par Lui-Meme'' also is an exercise in the reading
of subtitles.

The film was photographed mostly in 1972, but it was not completed until 1976,
by which time Sartre had already changed his mind on a number of the subjects
covered by this extraordinary documentary. Yet the film, like Sartre, who died
two years ago at the age of 74, is even more important for its demonstration of
the way one remarkable man looked at life and perceived the world than for the
beliefs expressed at any particular time.

The setting is Sartre's book-littered study in his Montparnasse apartment,
where, accompanied by Miss de Beauvoir and several friends, he sits by a table,
chain-smoking and answering the questions of the film makers, Alexandre Astruc
and Michel Contat. He's witty, sometimes mercilessly articulate and responds
enthusiastically to the film's rigorously simple format.

Gently prodded by the film makers, Sartre produces what is, in effect, a
chronological, aural autobiography beginning with his boyhood in Paris and La
Rochelle and traveling on through his schooling in Paris, what he describes as
his traumatic introduction to adulthood, and his early writings in fiction and
philosophy. He talks easily but never glibly, as if he himself were never quite
sure what new truths or understandings he might come across.

He acknowledges contradictions within himself never satisfactorily resolved,
especially the contradiction of being an intellectual as well as an activist. He
speaks with special eloquence about the time of the German occupation of France,
his frequently bitter, off-again, on-again relations with the Communist Party,
and his increasing identification with France's New Left movement after May
1968.

The film is full of memorable quotes. Of his looks: ''It was the brutality of
fate that I was born ugly, but I wasn't obsessed by it.'' Of fiction:
''Literature yields no secrets. It is just a record.'' Of his international fame
after World War II as the father of Existentialism, ''Simone and I write to be
read, to communicate. Not to reveal hidden truths.''

He occasionally brings Miss de Beauvoir into the discussion, and sometimes she
jumps in on her own, as when Sartre rather casually reports that she once
described all of his books as being ''full of lies.'' ''Tricks,'' she corrects
him. ''Full of tricks.'' There is a sharp but brief disagreement about the exact
year in which they both stopped writing in cafes. Miss de Beauvoir, asked what
had drawn her to Sartre when they both were students, says simply, ''He never
stopped thinking, and that interested me.''

At one point he makes a slip of the tongue, ''I am, therefore I think,'' which
briefly amuses him but hardly seems worth analyzing. Though the movie is long,
it seems effortless, as good talk always is. The film makers occasionally vary
the images by cutting to stock newsreel clips of great historical events - World
Wars I and II, the Spanish Civil War, Vietnam, etc., but such visual diversions
are unnecessary. The thoughts and the words that express them are infinitely
rich.

Talking Heads

SARTRE PAR LUI-MEME, (French with English subtitles) by Alexandre Astruc and
Michel Contat; director of photography, Renato Berta; produced by Pierre-Andre
Boutang and Guy Seligmann. At the Film Forum, 57 Watts Street. Running time: 190
minutes. This film is not rated.

WITH: Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 318 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 3, 1982 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'IT'S ONLY THUNDER'

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Weekend Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 673 words


THERE'S a very good, overlooked Vietnam movie at the Thalia this weekend, Peter
Werner's ''Don't Cry, It's Only Thunder,'' which takes an unexpectedly homespun
approach to its subject. The setting is a Saigon military hospital, the year is
1967 and the hero is Brian Anderson (Dennis Christopher), a disaffected medic
who's very nearly at his wits' end. While capturing an unusually keen sense of
day-to-day life in Saigon, the movie also traces Brian's transformation from
weary, frightened, cynical soldier to someone whose sense of purpose transcends
the wretchedness of his situation.

The change in Brian begins with a little girl, Anh (Mai Thi Lien). A dying buddy
has asked him to look out for the child. The dying friend had also been aiding
two nuns and a group of orphans. Soon Brian has grudgingly taken them under his
wing, bartering on the black market to keep them in Campbell's soup and other
vital supplies, and watching as the nuns find more and more abandoned children.
The film, which an opening credit describes as ''suggested by a true story,''
follows the growth of this tiny operation into a full-scale rescue program for
the children.

There's an element of sentimentality here, but it isn't overstated, and it's
easily offset by the abundance of gallows humor. ''Where do you find the morgue
on an Army base?'' is one of the G.I.s' jokes, and the answer is ''dead
center.'' A good part of the action takes place at the hospital, and when Brian
is assigned to the morgue we see the mad casualness with which living soldiers
lounge among the dead ones, perhaps sneaking a beer in the corpse locker or
clowning as they wheel the bodies to and fro. Mr. Werner doesn't carry this to a
''M*A*S*H''-like comic extreme, but he does go far enough to illustrate how
hardened the soldiers' nerves have become.

''Don't Cry, It's Only Thunder'' manages to become genuinely heartwarming even
without the romantic element that is tacked on in Paul Hensler's screenplay.
There is a pretty doctor, Katherine Cross (Susan Saint James), who is finally
won over to helping Brian and with whom he begins a not very convincing love
affair. Miss Saint James is such a comfortable, down-to-earth actress that she
makes a strange match for Mr. Christopher, who is often as faintly hysterical
here as the situation might warrant, and who's light-years away from his
good-natured ''Breaking Away'' role.

''Don't Cry, It's Only Thunder,'' which was released in Los Angeles earlier this
year, is scheduled for only a very brief run at the Thalia, but it's as worthy
as plenty of other new movies enjoying longer engagements around town. Its
inspirational qualities don't deprive it of backbone, and they don't set it on
an utterly predictable course. As wartime dramas go, this one isn't a whitewash
or a fairy tale. It's just an effort to tell the story on a very small, very
human scale.

''Don't Cry, It's Only Thunder,'' which has been rated PG (''Parental Guidance
Suggested''), contains gory hospital footage.

War in the Small

DON'T CRY, IT'S ONLY THUNDER, directed by Peter Werner; written by Paul Hensler;
director of photography, Don McAlpine; film editors, Jack Woods and Barbara
Pokras; music by Maurice Jarre; produced by Walt deFaria; re- leased by Sanrio
Communiciations Inc. At the Thalia, West 95th Street and Broadway. Running time:
108 minutes. This film is rated PG.

Brian Anderson . . . . . Dennis Christopher
Katherine Cross . . . . . Susan Saint James
Moses Drapper . . . . . Roger Aaron
Brown Tripper . . . . . Robert Englund
Major Flaherty . . . . . James Whitmore Jr.
Sister Marie . . . . . Lisa Lu
Sister Hoa . . . . . Thu Thuy
Allen Atkins . . . . . Travis Swords
Anh . . . . . Mai Thi Lien
Duc . . . . . Truong Minh Hai
Captain Morris . . . . . Ken Metcalfe
Peggy . . . . . Marie Ashton
Bugsy Bodell . . . . . Robert Howland
Dr. Goldman . . . . . Paul Hensler
Immigration Woman . . . . . Wynne Dieppe
Old Man . . . . . Paquito Salcedo
Troy Banks . . . . . Ronald Sully
Supply Sergeant . . . . . Tom Joyner
Michael Washington . . . . . Ronald Orso

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
Dramatis Personae;
The Bloc

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 172 words


The annual U.N. vote urging an immediate Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan may
be an empty exercise, but it has the value of truly defining the Soviet bloc of
wholly dominated, dependent or mesmerized nations. The vote in favor this week
was 114. Among the purposeful 13 abstentions were countries like Algeria,
Finland, India and Nicaragua; among the nine who didn't vote at all were
Bolivia, Rumania and South Africa.

The diehards, who would not even evade approving a flagrant invasion of a fellow
member, numbered 19: Afghanistan and the Soviet Union (not counting the separate
votes of Byelorussia and the Ukraine), and Angola,

Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ethiopia, East Germany, Grenada, Hungary, Laos,
Libya, Madagascar, Mongolia, Mozambique, Poland, Syria, Vietnam and Southern
Yemen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1156 words


Guinea is slowly breaking out of its tight cocoon A2
NATO backs U.S. military operations in areas such as Mideast A3
Gonzalez installed as Prime Minister of Spain A3
Sri Lanka is seeking the recall of a U.S. diplomat A3
Zimbabwe seizes Ian Smith's passport A4
Around the World A5
Pakistan seeking new nuclear reactor from West A6
Chinese legislature to approve new constitution A14

Government/Politics
Mayor Byrne adopts new look in re-election bid A16
Senate Republicans oust Bob Packwood from key position A19
Debate over MX may focus on need for the missile itself A20
Kean vetoes bill on period of silence in schools B2
Suffolk offers plan for dealing with nuclear power accidents B2
Cuomo fills three more posts B3
Legislative leaders to meet with members on M.T.A. deficit B3

Washington Talk
Briefing A26
Aides ponder the meaning of a new phrase penned by Reagan A26
White House report issues warning on ''gender gap'' A26
Shooting rekindles questions on diplomatic immunity A26

General
Around the Nation A16
Horseburgers move briskly on Lexington Avenue B3

Health/Science
Psychological health a key attribute for heart patient A24

Industry/Labor
U.A.W. offers new deal on Chrysler accord A16

Weekend
Weekender Guide C1
Big Apple Circus at Lincoln Center C1
Theater: Broadway C2

Joseph Papp's ''Hamlet'' opens starring Diane Venora C3
Dance: Dance, dance all over town C16
Screen: At the Movies C10

''Leap Into the Void'' with Anouk Aimee C4

''Don't Cry, It's Only Thunder,'' on a medic in Saigon C12
Music: A tour of city's jazz landmarks C6
Teresa Brewer sings jazz C6
Greek music beyond the bouzouki C26
Burl Ives back after 20 years C3
''Fidelio'' to be performed the way Beethoven first wrote it C32
Art: Met celebrates the houses Wright built C1

Mondrian and Brancusi in show at Janis Gallery C20

Auctions C24

Art People C22

Louise Bourgeois closes her own dossier C21
Books: Publishing C29

Jacobo Timerman book on Israel and Lebanon reviewed C27
Restaurants C18
TV Weekend C30

Style
The Evening Hours B4
Tokyo embraces ''best five'' designers B4
A host who shall have music wherever he goes B4

Education/Welfare
Threat of accreditation loss re- moved from Goddard College A22

Obituaries
John S. Bugas, retired vice president of Ford A28

Sports Pages
Cavanaugh's job as head football coach in jeopardy at Army B7
U.C.L.A. defeats DePaul, 73-70 B7
St. Peter's and Rutgers win at Meadowlands B7
Black Hawks credit camaraderie for best record so far B7
Carpenter and Woolfolk work together in Giants' lineup B8
Forty-Niners down Rams, 30-24 B9
George Vecsey on the Heisman winners from the line B11
Nelson Bryant on waterfowl hunting B12

Features/Notes
Man in the News: Dr. Robert Jarvik, designer of artificial heart A24
Man in the News: Dr. William C.  DeVries, who implanted heart A24
New York Day by Day B3

News Analysis
Warren Hoge on Reagan's reception in Brazil A10

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A30

Defeated Poland More chemical smoke in Asia The immigration clock Topics:
Dramatis personae Letters A30
Tom Wicker: A race without Kennedy A31
Flora Lewis: International trade and security A31
George Crile: Toppling Mana- gua's regime A31
Rose Nader: Candidly speaking, on some subjects A31
Jeffrey Record: Keeping troops in Europe A31

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

INMATES SEEK MINISTRY BEHIND PRISON'S WALLS

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1049 words

DATELINE: OSSINING, N.Y.


James Douglas began serving his sentence on a murder conviction in 1970, and
eight years ago he underwent what he calls ''a deep personal conversion.'' He is
now studying for the ministry here at the state prison, in a graduate seminary
program believed to be the only one of its kind in the nation.

''I've dedicated my life to this,'' said Mr. Douglas, a 40-year-old man who
wears a gold cross on a chain around his neck and is serving a sentence of 20
years to life. ''It is a vocation and a way of life.''

Mr. Douglas, 10 other Christians and three Muslims are the first class in a
master's program sponsored at no cost to the prison system or the prisoners by
the New York Theological Seminary. They were recruited from the college
graduates within the New York correction system and were transferred to Ossining
to begin the program two months ago.

'A Blessing From God'

It is one of only a handful of master's programs in the state's prisons.  ''I
feel like this is a blessing from God,'' said Thurmon Williams Jr., who
described himself as a ''four-time loser'' until he decided to devote himself to
the ministry. ''It's been a real miracle.''

For the seminary, founded in 1900 as a Protestant school for missionaries and
now at 5 West 29th Street, the project is the latest in a series of innovations
aimed at extending conventional theological training to black and Hispanic
pastors.

Some inmates may eventually work in churches on the outside, but for now the
goal is to prepare them to be lay ministers to their fellow prisoners.

Ministry 'Within the Walls'

''We designed it for long-term prisoners,'' said the Rev. Karel Boersma, the
coordinator of the program for the seminary. ''We wanted those men who wanted to
do their ministry within the walls.'' The seminary sets admission and academic
standards, and they are similar to those at most theological schools.

Classes are held in a spacious, yellow room in the prison's educational
building, where the calm is broken every so often by trains roaring along
underneath the building on the Hudson line. At the rear of the room, a modest
library of religious resource books fills two tall file cabinets.

''Ten of the men have clear religious convictions,'' said Dr.  George W. Webber,
the seminary presi-dent. ''The rest are genuinely searching. That's about the
situation you'd find at any theological school.''

Joseph Kirkland said he was still rebuilding his faith after it had been
shattered by a series of events, including combat duty with the Army in Vietnam,
trouble with the law and eventual conviction for robbery.

''I was a little pessimistic about the program at first,'' he said, ''but since,
I've found it very enlightening.'' Many of the students knew one another from
other prisons, but their common interest has drawn them into a distinct unit
that is becoming known throughout the prison. Eleven of the 14 live in the same
cell block.

Sharing a Typewriter

Five mornings a week, the inmates bring books and materials to class, and hear
lectures on church history, theology and biblical studies and on practical
subjects such as counseling. They return to their cells daily for four to five
hours of study, keeping up with assignments and writing term papers on the one
available typewriter.

Inmates also take part in supervised field work, a regular feature of most
seminaries. Some work in the prison's crisis center, while others teach basic
educational skills, aid in delinquency prevention programs or conduct pastoral
counseling. ''It's a heavy load,'' said Henry Johnson, an inmate whose
undergraduate degree is in sociology, ''but as hard as it is, it's good.''

Salaadim Muhammed, who is affiliated with the American Muslim Mission, was one
of three Muslims to enroll in the Christian curriculum. He has been an imam, or
Muslim religious leader, for other inmates since 1975, but said he wanted to
know more about Christianity. ''I have some skills already,'' Mr. Muhammed said,
''but I wanted to get more.''

Welcome From the Top

Wilson E.J. Walters, the prison superintendent, has welcomed the program. ''This
could provide 24-hour, on-site access to someone an inmate can talk to,'' said
Mr. Walters, seated at his office overlooking the Hudson River. ''It's a great
privilege to have somebody pray with you and for you.''

The five faculty members include Mr. Boersma, in professional skills; the Rev.
Sam Solivan from Harlem, a Hispanic pastor and seminary professor, in theology;
the Rev. Marvin McMickle a Baptist minister from Montclair, N.J., in biblical
studies; the Rev. Robert Rivera of the Second Spanish Baptist Church in Harlem,
in counseling, and the Rev. John Kaserow, a Roman Catholic priest from the
nearby center of the Maryknoll order, in church history. They say the inmates
show uncommon drive and ability.

''It's been fantastic teaching them,'' said Father Kaserow, who has taught many
graduate students. ''They show perhaps more enthusiasm than any students I've
ever had.''

Father Kaserow said the inmates, many of whom had little previous study in
religion, raised challenging issues. ''I get the kind of questions that you have
to face as a missionary overseas,'' Father Kaserow said.

Problems in Ancient History

During a recent session, Father Kaserow, dressed casually in a blue shirt, gray
vest and black slacks, led the students through a complex period of ancient
Christian history when the basic Christian creeds were being formed.

Taking notes and referring to their readings, the students asked about the
contending factions in the ancient church, and wondered whether the motives were
mostly religious or political.

Father Kaserow said that both were factors in early Christian history and that
the process of developing doctrine has continued to the present. ''You and I, as
ministers,'' he said, ''now have a part to play.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Rev. Karel Boersma of the New York Seminary
Photo of an inmate in his cell Photo of the prison

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 4, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 'THE FORGOTTEN HELL,' DOCUMENTARY ON BATAAN

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 665 words


Why make a documentary now on the American defeat in the Philippines 40 years
ago? If that's your question, be assured that ''Bataan, the Forgotten Hell'' is
its own justification.

The hourlong ''NBC Report,'' which can be seen on NBC-TV at 7 P.M.  tomorrow,
carries us back to the Japanese offensive soon after Pearl Harbor that pushed
80,000 American and Filipino defenders onto the peninsula of Bataan and the
islands of Corregidor. There they were left with outdated arms, little food or
medicine and no prospect of escape or relief, facing a powerful Japanese army
and surrounded by a malarial jungle.

Their fate is forcefully evoked by newsreel clips from Japanese as well as
American sources; horrific drawings of the prison camps; shots of the narrator,
Lloyd Dobyns, an NBC correspondent, surveying the ruins of fortifications, so
quiet now; and, at the moving heart of it all, the recollections of several
survivors. These men, in their 60's, look back a lifetime to experiences that
must still be the stuff of their nightmares.

In April 1942, 76,000 weak, wounded, diseased men surrendered, the largest
single capitulation in American history, and began their 90-mile ''death march''
to Japanese prisons; 11,000 of them died on the way. Six weeks later, the
remnant of our troops on Corregidor gave up. For the next three years, these men
were, in the words of one survivor, ''treated as animals, worked as slaves.''
Half of them died.

The writing is spare and tough: ''We buried our dead,'' Mr. Dobyns concludes,
''passed out some medals, a little money, and moved on.'' In places, the
us-against-them tone is a bit John Wayneish, perhaps in an effort to capture the
nation's spirit before Vietnam raised troubling questions about America's role
in Asia. The enemy then was unambiguous -the Japanese - and for these prisoners,
the dropping of the atomic bomb came as salvation. But this is a story of human
suffering and endurance, not of geopolitics. It is a piece of history that our
nation can hardly enjoy remembering - which may be a good enough answer to the
question: Why now?

No such question presents itself about ''Land of Fear, Land of Courage,''
another NBC hourlong documentary that can be seen at 5 P.M. tomorrow. The land
is South Africa, and the subject is, of course, apartheid. Unfortunately, the
program does not match the power inherent in that subject. Produced in
cooperation with the National Council of Churches, it focuses on two
anti-apartheid clergymen, Bishop Desmond Tutu, who is black, and the Rev. Peter
Storey, who is white. Because they are leaders of the South African Council of
Churches, this is an instance of a producer having a vested, if virtuous,
interest that assures reverent treatment of the subject. Both are men of proved
courage, and Bishop Tutu has a fine sparkle to him - yet neither has much to say
that others have not been saying for many years: ''You cannot be a Christian and
not oppose apartheid.''

Edwin Newman lends his usual low-pressure intelligence to his offcamera
narration, but his script is a once-over-lightly treatment of a much-treated
subject. Except for a few affecting moments, such as scenes of black women
trying to till the hard dusty earth of the ''homeland'' to which they have been
consigned, the film itself drifts somewhat randomly over the landscape. It is a
slack work, spiritless despite its religious auspices.

''Land of Fear, Land of Courage'' depends for its impact on the emotions that
the word ''apartheid'' can be counted on to stir among viewers. At its best, it
shows the cruel usages of that word in practice. ''Bataan, the Forgotten Hell''
employs the arts of television to put a new generation in touch with a crucial
experience of an older generation. That is a task made for television.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. INQUIRY FINDS SUGGESTIVE EVIDENCE OF SOVIET TOXIC WAR

BYLINE: By BERNARD D. NOSSITER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 4


A United Nations inquiry has given heavily qualified support to accusations that
the Soviet Union and its allies have been waging chemical warfare against
insurgents in Afghanistan and Southeast Asia.

A report to be published Monday says the inquiry found ''circumstantial
evidence'' of poisonous chemical attacks but concludes that the accusations
cannot be proven.

The 81-page document is stronger than a report issued last year by the United
Nations specialists. The team said then that it had been ''unable to reach a
final conclusion.'' This time, the four experts, whose inquiry was initiated by
the General Assembly at the urging of the United States, assert:

''While the group could not state that these allegations had been proven,
nevertheless it could not disregard the circumstantial evidence suggestive of
the possible use of some sort of toxic chemical substances in some instances.''

The study cited several examples of what it called suggestive evidence. The
experts visited two Thai villages near the Cambodian border in October where
yellow powder was found on roofs, walls and foliage after an unidentified plane
had flown overhead. The purported victims suffered ''a marked increase'' in
''skin complaints,'' and 2 of 22 samples collected had yielded a poisonous
fungus. The team, however, said it had not found ''convincing evidence as to how
this material was disseminated.''

In another incident, yellow powder, brought out from Laos on leaves, vegetables
and clothing, contained chemical substances that could be poisonous, the study
said. But the experts said they could not determine ''beyond a reasonable
doubt'' whether the samples had come from areas under chemical attack.

The team accepted with fewer reservations testimony from Afghan refugees who
said they had been driven by gas from hiding places in underground canals. The
victims had trouble breathing, their skin was irritated, they vomited and some
became unconscious. The study, however, attributed this to a ''harassing agent''
like tear gas.  Legal experts differ over whether such substances violate the
treaties banning chemical and biological weapons.

Contradictions and Difficulties

The report has many seeming contradictions between the testimony of refugees and
medical evidence. It also complains of laboratories in unnamed countries that
refused to analyze samples. It repeatedly says the experts were unable to reach
the site of an attack soon after it took place.

Neither Afghanistan, where Soviet troops have been battling a resistance
movement for three years, nor Laos, where Communist forces fight the insurgent
Hmong people, would allow the United Nations team to enter.

The experts were invited into Cambodia by guerillas dominated by the ousted Pol
Pot, whose coalition is recognized by the United Nations. But the report said
the experts were unable to work out arrangements assuring their safety,
communication and transportation, so the trip was never made. Instead, the
experts interviewed refugees, doctors and others and examined samples brought to
them in camps on Pakistan's border with Afghanistan and Thailand's with
Cambodia.

Much the same techniques have been used by the United States and others. On
Monday Secretary of State George P. Shultz presented Washington's latest,
detailed findings of chemical war and accused Moscow of ''a cynical disregard
for international law.''

Vague About Time and Place

The United Nations study said that many of the incidents described by the
refugees could be explained by natural causes or conventional weapons. In
addition, the refugees were often vague about time and place. Two Hmong refugees
suffering from fungus infection said it came from a yellow powder attack two
weeks earlier, the inquiry reported, but medical tests showed that the breaks in
their skin were at least three months old.

The experts did dismiss a Soviet contention that toxic symptoms could have been
caused by fungi spread from elephant grass growing in Vietnam. ''This
explanation to be true would require the occurrence of a series of events, each
of which is a low probability, and thus, in the opinion of the group is unlikely
to be valid,'' the inquiry said.

'A Step Forward'

The United States, disappointed with the team's report last year, has said it
does not want the group to continue. American officials have said that the
inquiry hobbled itself by insisting that firm conclusions could not be reached
without visiting the site of an attack but that no sites could be visited
safely.

However, the latest report won a more favorable review. Charles M.  Lichenstein,
a deputy United States delegate, called it ''a step forward'' although ''less
forceful than we hoped.''

Washington, he said, wants the United Nations to continue to play a role but in
a different form. The United States backs a resolution adopted in the General
Assembly disarmament committee asking the Secretary General to investigate
chemical warfare accusations and to prepare lists of experts and laboratories to
make inquiries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARCHITECTURE VIEW;
NOW THE RELIGION IS ANTI-MODERNISM

BYLINE: By Paul Goldberger

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1991 words


It is common to speak of this as a time of pluralism, as a moment in
architecture when the eclectic impulse is paramount - as a time, even, when we
yearn to expand our esthetic to take in all of history. After all, if there are
any buildings that seem to sum up the concerns of the moment they would have to
be the Portland (Ore.) Building by Michael Graves, which is a brightly colored
pile of reinterpreted classical decoration, and Philip Johnson and John Burgee's
A.T.& T. Building in New York, which twists and turns Renaissance and
Chippendale forms into a sumptuous skyscraper.

These two buildings - and dozens more that represent a similar impulse - emerge
out of the belief that the austere, cool forms of modern architecture are no
longer a valid expression. This is not, of course, in itself much news: the
reaction against the glass box has been with us for more than a decade now, and
the phrase Postmodernism, which is often used to describe this reaction, has
already become part of the architectural lexicon.

Now, Postmodernism is a term that is either comfortably or irritatingly vague,
depending upon what you expect of it, and it means very different things to
different people. At its best it suggests a movement away from the rigid, almost
Puritanical orthodoxy of Modernist architecture and an openness to the values of
pure composition, decoration and historical style. It seeks not to turn these
things into a new orthodoxy but to avoid the notion of any rigid orthodoxy at
all - to be pluralistic in the best sense, which is to say to embrace the idea
of quality more than the dogma of any individual style.

But as this reaction against Modernism becomes more and more of an established
thing, it has shown signs of turning into something much more than a movement
toward pluralism. It has become, in certain circles, as utter a dogma as
anything Modernism ever represented. We are increasingly seeing an attitude that
is summed up less by the term Postmodern than by the words anti-modern - a
tendency to reject Modernism in all its forms and aspects, to declare it wrong
in every fashion. It is a view that argues that Modernism is not just an
inappropriate style at this moment in history, but something more akin to an
immoral one.

Anti-Modernism exists both in theory and in actual buildings. Its most prominent
spokesman among practicing architects is probably Allen Greenberg, the
Connecticut architect who has designed Georgian and classical buildings as
precise in their historical recall as anything created in the 1920's. Now, Mr.
Greenberg is a gifted designer, and his own buildings manage to have the
pleasing and civilized, if slightly dry, air the best revivalist work of the
1920's had. If such architecture were all we were getting right now, this would
be a less exhilarating time, but a less disturbing one, too.

For far more troubling than a classical building by Allen Greenberg is the
anti-Modernist rhetoric that we are increasingly hearing from non-architects.
For years the writer and critic Henry Hope Reed has been arguing vehemently
against Modernism, calling it ''a cancer destroying visual America,'' a view
that has led him to dismiss such a masterwork as Frank Lloyd Wright's famous
house, ''Fallingwater,'' as ''a large split-level.''

Years ago this kind of view tended to be considered eccentric - even by those
who harbored serious doubts about Modernism themselves. But now it is more
difficult to consider Mr. Reed's attitude entirely outside the mainstream. His
extreme attack on Modernism has been joined by numerous other commentators, the
best-known of whom is surely the writer Tom Wolfe, who has raised the cry of
Modernism's dangers to a fever pitch.

Mr. Wolfe first began to sound the alarm about the evils of Modernist thinking
in ''From Bauhaus to Our House,'' a book that suggested that modern architecture
was a plot foisted on an unwilling world by a sly group of European
intellectuals. He returned to the subject recently in an essay in The Washington
Post that tries to make the point that the primary goal of modern art and
architecture was to perplex and annoy the public and separate the artist or
architect from the ''bourgeois'' taste of the general public. The people really
hate all modern things, Mr. Wolfe tells us, and it is the refusal of the
artistic community to recognize this that is the source of all of our problems.
If architects and artists would stop trying to jam this awful stuff down
people's throats and give them what Mr. Wolfe knows is the truly right kind of
art, serene joy would descend upon all of us.

This anti-modern attitude is disturbing, for it sounds so much like the kind of
arguments of moral superiority that the Modernists themselves made early in this
century - when they claimed that their way was the only true one. Architecture
that relies on historical style, buildings that have decoration, were somehow
unclean, decadent - even immoral, the Modernists argued back then, their
polemics reaching a climax, surely, in Adolf Loos's famous essay equating
ornament with crime.

The issue is not the moral rightness or wrongness of a particular style, and it
never was. The Modernists' dogma was as foolish as the anti-Modernists'; each
makes claims to a moral superiority that neither history nor common sense can
support. It is simply not true, as the anti-Modernists now tell us, that people
have always preferred classicism, that Modernism was a perverse break from a
great historical continuum, and that the only priority for us today is to get
back on that simple, single track. If only the history of art and the history of
culture were so simple.

What is the case today, certainly, is that we have lost faith in the rhetoric of
the early Modernists, and properly so. The Bauhaus promised a kind of social
redemption that no architecture, Modernist or otherwise, can truly provide. A
world of modern buildings will not assure the good life for all of us, any more
than a world of classical buildings will.

There are, however, certain failings that distinguish the modern movement, and
it is important at this moment in architectural history to keep them in mind.
Modern architecture -and modern art, for that matter - has created great
masterpieces; only a determined Philistine could be blind to the greatness of
Fallingwater or Le Corbusier's Villa Savoie, or Mies van der Rohe's Seagram
Building, to name but three. The problem is not in the inability of the
Modernist vocabulary to create meaningful works of art.

What Modernism has failed to do, however, is to create a workable, sound
vernacular - a language that can be comfortable not just for unique works of
art, but for the broader needs which buildings must serve. Modernism can create
great buildings, as much as it can create great paintings; what it cannot do as
successfully is create great cities. The exquisite, self-assured presence of the
Seagram Building is deadening when multiplied by 10 or 20 or 100 buildings all
across a city - its abstraction, so remarkable when seen in contrast to
classicizing, stone buildings around it, becomes merely emptiness when it takes
over all of Park Avenue.

Mies van der Rohe's buildings were once described as ''the ideal background
architecture of our time.'' Nothing could be farther from the truth; Modernist
buildings, by Mies or any other great modern architects, are foreground
buildings through and through. They demand our complete attention; they deal in
subtleties of spatial manipulation, movement, materials and proportion, and they
are, at bottom, abstract. It is these subtleties that can make them so powerful
as works of art, and that disappear so completely when Modernist ideas are
cheaply and crudely reproduced in building after building across the cityscape.

But to complain about the wretched effect the modern movement has had on cities,
and to assert that Modernism could never function as, say, Georgian architecture
did - to take but one example of a style that yielded both great masterworks and
a viable vernacular out of which an entire city could be beautifully molded - is
not to reject its continued value to us. To pretend, as the anti-Modernists do,
that modern architecture never existed is as foolish as pretending that
Stravinsky never wrote music or Joyce a novel. The works of Modernism exist, and
inevitably shape our own experience. And, after all, even if you believe that
Modernism was sinful, who could ever claim complete innocence after tasting of
sin?

For there continue to be times and places in which the Modernist esthetic speaks
appropriately to us, and to reject it is to approach architecture with an
attitude that can only be called Philistine. The best, and surely the most
poignant, example of this is the controversy surrounding Maya Yang Lin's design
for the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., on the Mall near the
Lincoln Memorial. When the design was undergoing public review, it received
considerable criticism on the grounds that it was too abstract - too much a
Modernist work that would not relate sufficiently to the artistic tastes of the
surviving Vietnam veterans who would see it.

The design certainly is abstract - it consists of two walls of granite, set to
form a V, with the land between the walls sloping downward and the names of the
57,000 Americans who died in Vietnam carved into the granite. It is also
hauntingly moving and eloquent in a way that no conventional - which is to say
classical - monument could be. Abstraction here fulfills a special function; it
creates a somber, pensive place that honors the dead and yet permits each of us
some leeway in making our own interpretation of the nature of the space.

A group of Vietnam veterans who were unhappy with Miss Lin's design, which was
chosen by a distinguished panel of artists and architects, ended up successfully
persuading the committee sponsoring the memorial and the Fine Arts Commission of
Washington to agree to the addition of a flagpole and a statue of three soldiers
to the design. They were encouraged by Mr. Wolfe, who in his Washington Post
essay argued that Miss Lin's design, because it was Modernist, was a deliberate
insult to those who died in Vietnam.

The controversy was a sad episode, and only partly because of such foolish
points as that last one. It was sadder still because it was so close to being
right. The arguments against modern architecture are not entirely wrong -they
are half right, which is much tougher.  Modernism is no insult to veterans or
anyone else, but it is true that the insistent abstraction of Modernism has
served us badly in too many places that cry out for a degree of warmth and
familiar symbol. But a monument is a different thing altogether; what we seek
from it is different from what we seek from, say, a house, and applying the
general case against Modernism here missed completely.

The movement of the last few years away from Modernist orthodoxy is the most
important esthetic event of the last 50 years, and it is to be welcomed. It is
only when it takes such simplistic, anti-Modernist form - and attempts to deny
the value of an appropriate and important modern design when it is created -
that it is cause for sadness.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Frank Lloyd Weber's 'Fallingwater' (page 36)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

40 YEARS AFTER, ARTISTS STILL STRUGGLE WITH THE HOLOCAUST

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 6; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3699 words


''At Auschwitz,'' wrote Elie Wiesel, ''not only man died but also the idea of
man.'' Some four decades have now passed since the Nazis murdered six million
European Jews, and that most tragic and incomprehensible of events remains the
formative experience of modern times, for, as Mr. Wiesel observes, the Holocaust
not only confronts us with a vision of radical evil but also forces us to
reassess our entire Enlightenment legacy of humanism - all our comfortable
theories about man and reason and God.

As far as some scholars are concerned, the Holocaust represents the first time
in history that reality exceeded the imagination, and the enormity of its horror
threatens to render it impervious to the interpretive impulses of art. To
transfigure the event into a work of the imagination, they argue, is somehow to
trivialize the experience of the survivors and the victims.

And yet, almost since World War II ended, writers and artists have accepted the
challenge of addressing the Holocaust, trying out a variety of approaches in an
attempt to scale what the critic Lawrence Langer calls ''the unconquered Everest
of our time.'' The earliest, autobiographical accounts by survivors have given
way to documentaries and, more recently, fictional treatments in film, theater
and books - fictional treatments increasingly written by individuals with no
direct experience of the war.

This season alone, there are several dramas dealing with the subject: ''Good,''
C.P. Taylor's story of a German professor's capitulation to Nazism, is currently
running on Broadway; ''The Workroom,'' Jean-Claude Grumberg's depiction of
survivors' attempts to come to terms with their past, recently completed a run
at the South Street Theater; and next week

''Black Angel,'' Michael Cristofer's play about the struggles of a former S.S.
officer to resolve his guilt, opens at the Circle Repertory. As for motion
pictures, the film version of ''Sophie's Choice'' - William Styron's
best-selling novel about a young writer's encounter with a beautiful, haunted
survivor of Auschwitz - opens this week; ''Mephisto,'' a Hungarian film about an
ambitious actor who gradually embraces Nazism, won last year's Academy Award for
best foreign film; and this year's New York Film Festival featured ''One Man's
War,'' a film collage about occupied France as seen through the eyes of a German
officer. On television, ''Blood and Honor,'' a twopart drama about the Hitler
Youth Movement, concludes tomorrow night on WPIX-Channel 11; and on Jan. 15.,
WNET-Channel 13 will begin airing ''Years of Darkness,'' a series of eight films
depicting the Nazi era and its aftermath.

Clearly the fact that more and more mainstream films and plays are focusing on
the Holocaust underlines the effort on the part of artists to deal, as their
19th-century counterparts once did, with significant historical subjects -
something conspicuously lacking in the willfully self-absorbed literature of the
last few decades. Yet if such attempts reveal the degree to which the Holocaust
has permeated our consciousness, they also demonstrate how the event has been
increasingly appropriated for artistic purposes. Indeed, a kind of intellectual
distancing has begun to occur in depictions of the Holocaust, which threatens to
trivialize, even distort, the actual event.

Why has the Holocaust come under so much artistic scrutiny? In part, it is the
need of any generation to come to terms with its past; such plays as David
Hare's ''Plenty'' - which deals with the plight of an Englishwoman, haunted by
her exploits in the Resistance - point up the current interest in the entire
period of World War II. Enough time has passed, after all, for artists to gain a
certain perspective on both the event and its aftermath, and that particular war
- in which evil and heroism seemed so clearly defined - perhaps lends itself
more readily to dramatization than other, more ambiguous episodes in history.

With the Holocaust itself, other factors are involved as well. As the remaining
survivors grow older, there is a certain urgency to commemorate their experience
before it is too late -an impulse also attested to by the remarkable profusion
of Holocaust courses and study centers. In addition, as the scholar Lucy
Dawidowicz points out, ''certain events in recent history have also brought the
subject to life in unexpected ways - the Eichmann trial, and then, in a funny
way, the war in Vietnam touched on some of the moral questions of the individual
responsibility of people involved in killing. And above all for Jews, I think,
the six-day war in Israel, when there seemed there was this threat to its very
life, caused American Jews to re-live in their minds their failure to rescue
European Jews during the war.''

As the actual historical event recedes in time, the degree of fictionalization
in Holocaust art increases. This is largely because it took time for the simple
facts to become accepted, and a longer time for them to seep into the general
cultural consciousness and be translated into art. The first efforts to write
about the Holocaust were testimonial in spirit, commemorative in mode. Soon
after the war ended, memoirs written by survivors of the ghettos and camps began
to appear; these autobiographical accounts attested to the writers' own survival
and informed the world of the atrocities committed.

In the wake of these works came documentary studies - for the most part, sincere
and heavily factual -which, in turn, led to more purely imagined
representations. Alain Resnais's ''Night and Fog'' and Marcel Ophuls's ''The
Sorrow and the Pity,'' for instance, helped lay the groundwork for movies like
Louis Malle's ''Lacombe, Lucien'' and Francois Truffaut's ''The Last Metro,''
just as documentary novels like John Hersey's ''The Wall'' preceded works like
''Sophie's Choice'' and D.M. Thomas's ''The White Hotel.'' Similarly,
documentary plays like ''The Deputy'' and ''The Investigation'' helped open the
way for later, more stylized dramas like ''Bent'' and ''Good.''

''Until the memoirs and so forth had appeared, the events were really
unimaginable,'' says Sidra DeKoven Ezrahi, the author of a highly praised study
of Holocaust literature titled ''By Words Alone.'' ''Now there's enough material
around so that anyone who does his homework can write a fairly credible history
or novel.''

Of course when dealing with Holocaust art, questions of morality overshadow
esthetic ones, and whether or not it is even right to fictionalize the Holocaust
remains an issue of debate. Critics have argued that while survivor memoirs
provide valuable testimony, the experience remains, in the end, incommunicable.
For others to intrude on that territory is not only presumptuous, but threatens
to trivialize the experience of those who suffered.

''The artistic representation of the naked bodily pain of those who have been
knocked down by rifle-butts contains the potential - no matter how remote - to
squeeze out pleasure,'' wrote the late critic T.W. Adorno, ''...through esthetic
principles or stylization and even through the solemn prayer of the chorus the
unimaginable ordeal still appears as if it had some ulterior purpose. It is
transfigured and stripped of some of its horror and with this, injustice is
already done to the victims.''

Silence, however, is risky too, for it can lead to indifference and cynicism -
the very things that helped lead to Hitler's rise. And more and more artists -
some out of ambition, some out of an earnest desire to commemorate and
understand - appear willing to take the subject on. Even George Steiner, who
once wrote of Auschwitz that ''in the presence of certain realities art is
trivial or impertinent,'' last year wrote ''The Portage to San Cristobal of
A.H.,'' a novel, recently adapted for the London stage, that portrays the
capture of Adolf Hitler by a group of Israeli Nazi-hunters.

In fact, many artists would argue that the enormity of the Holocaust may be
grasped best through metaphor and stylization: whereas the documentarians'
statistics and the sociologists' theories eventually numb the reader with
horror, an imaginative translation of those same facts can sometimes convey a
higher emotional and spiritual truth.

''What troubled me when I read things about the Holocaust,'' says William
Styron, the author of ''Sophie's Choice,'' is that while they were terribly
sincere, most of these novels and non-fictional accounts were so close to the
event - in the way they described things - that they suffocated the reader with
a sense of horror. All of which is important to record, but as art lacks, to me
at least, ultimate impact because it does not distance itself enough to be
moving. It's like going to an operating room - you're horrified when you're
there, not moved. It takes distance in time and space to register tragic
feelings about an event and for people to absorb the implications of things.''
Mr. Styron's own novel achieved esthetic distance by filtering the story of
Auschwitz through the perceptions of a youthfully innocent narrator, whose only
contact with the war came through his friendship with a survivor. It was a
technique that won Mr. Styron praise for narrative innovation and criticism for
trivializing the experience of the camps.

In an indirect way, of course, the Holocaust has had a resounding influence on
literature in general, underlining the limits of realism, and accelerating a
process already in progress - that is, the process of fragmentation, irony and
dislocation defined by such writers as Beckett, Ionesco and Joyce. When it comes
to writing about the event itself, the problems of representation are further
magnified -especially in the visual media of drama and film.

Many earlier dramatic works, in fact, simply avoided trying to depict the
horrors of the camps altogether: Arthur Miller's ''Incident at Vichy'' and
adaptations of Anne Frank's ''The Diary of a Young Girl,'' for instance, close
with their protagonists being taken off to meet their fates; others, like ''The
Pawnbroker,'' ''The Man in the Glass Booth'' and ''The Investigation,'' take the
form of post-mortems - inquiries made after the war into what happened to the
survivors and their persecutors.

Annette Insdorf, the film professor and critic, who recently completed a new
book titled ''Indelible Shadows: Film and the Holocaust'' - which will be
published by Random House in March - observes that most of the finer fiction
films have employed one of two narrative strategies in dealing with the
Holocaust. ''One way to deal with it, is with utter simplicity and respect,''
she says, citing such examples as Markus Imhoof's ''The Boat is Full'' and Peter
Lilienthal's ''David,'' both of which use limited canvases and understatement to
explore the event's reverberations. ''The other possible direction,'' Miss
Insdorf goes on, ''is extreme stylization, where there is a distancing through
esthetic innovation.''

Kakutani Part II

Lina Wertmuller's ''Seven Beauties,'' for instance, attempts to disturb the
viewer by juxtaposing scenes of monstrous horror with scenes of comic action;
and Hans-Jurgen Syberberg's 7 1/2-hour movie, ''Our Hitler,'' employs a
collage-like blend of newsreel clips, excerpts from ''Mein Kampf,'' survivors'
testimony and cabaret turns by actors, to demonstrate the Fuhrer's enduring
power and appeal.

As the producer and director Joseph Papp sees it, such stylized approaches can
result in a kind of intellectualization that removes the visceral impact of the
event. ''Recently I feel, a certain esthetic approach has tended to vitiate the
directness of the historical fact of it,'' he says. ''Which has to do not just
with what's happening in film and theater but with political changes that have
taken place - we see Germany now as our ally. It also shows that the generation
that's been affected more directly by the Holocaust has gotten much older, and
with the influx of the new generation, the issue's become more distant.''

As the Holocaust is estheticized, the moral issues tend to become obscured. In
some cases, artists have even inadvertently glamorized the Nazis by playing upon
the erotic possibilities of a situtation defined by absolute power and absolute
submission. Liliana Cavani's ''The Night Porter,'' for instance, depicts, with
sumptuous elegance, a sado-masochistic relationship between a former S.S.
officer and a woman raped by him in a concentration camp. And Luchino Visconti's
''The Damned'' attempts to draw parallels between a wealthy family's dissolution
and Nazi Germany through a lavish, operatic presentation - including scenes of
incest and a homosexual orgy - that ends up shifting the focus away from the
brutality of the events to the morbid beauty of the images. With such films,
writes Saul Friedlander in a forthcoming book, ''Reflections of Nazism,'' there
is a ''dissonance between the declared moral and ideological position of the
author or the filmmaker (the condemnation of Nazism and the will to understand)
and the esthetic effect, be it literary or cinematographic (Nazism as an
unlimited field for the surge of imagination, for the use of esthetic
effects).''

Their voyeuristic appeal aside, films like ''The Damned'' and ''The Night
Porter'' also underline artists' heightened fascination with Nazism itself.
While earlier dramatic works such as ''Anne Frank,'' ''Incident at Vichy'' and
''The Pawnbroker'' focused on the plight of victims and survivors, more recent
ones - including ''Good,'' ''Black Angel,'' ''The Portage to San Cristobal,''
''Mephisto,'' ''Lacombe, Lucien,'' ''The Conformist,'' ''Marathon Man,'' and
''The Boys from Brazil'' - have concentrated on the Nazis and their
collaborators - how an individual became one, or what happened to him after the
war.

''Suffering,'' says Sidra Ezrahi, ''is a subject that isn't as titillating as
the subject of evil - the most fascinating character in 'Paradise Lost,' after
all, is Satan - and in a paradoxical way, maybe for those who are not survivors
themselves, it's easier to imagine oneself as an oppressor than as a victim.
We're talking about imagining oneself into history, and the theories of human
behavior that have evolved about evil are in many ways more convincing or more
attractive than the theories that have evolved around the victims.''

The theory Mrs. Ezrahi is referring to, of course, is Hannah Arendt's famous
''banality of evil'' doctrine - a doctrine that emphasizes the ordinary,
bureaucratic face of evil. Dramatic works like ''Good'' or ''Mephisto'' tend to
force the audience into an identification of sorts with the protagonist by
making it question its own values and predilections - something Miss Insdorf
sees as a sign of new sophistication in Holocaust movies.

''A film that invites us to sympathize or empathize with the victim can result
in easy pathos,'' she says, ''whereas a film like 'Mephisto' - to the degree we
can identify with the character who slowly and gradually moves from being an
intelligent actor to being a Nazi mouthpiece - alerts us to our own capacity if
not for evil, then for taking the odiously easy way out. It's part of the
growing nuance in films dealing with the Holocaust. Also, from a filmmaker's
perspective, a film about a victim can potentially insularize the film; it can
enclose it as a past event. To the degree that we can identify with a
victimizer, it takes us out of the realm of historical or commemorative film,
and invites us to ask about our own capacity for indifference or for evil.''

The problem with this universalization is that it accelerates what Elie Wiesel
has identified as the ''general tendency to de-mystify, demythify and de-Jewize
the event.'' Besides helping us understand the event, psychological studies can
also provide a kind of rationale for the victimizers' actions, and the more we
sympathize with someone like the protagonist of ''Mephisto,'' the more evil is
domesticated and normalized. It loses its demonic aspect, and the Holocaust
becomes no more than another depressing episode in human history. As a result,
historical responsibility for what happened is diminished or removed.

Peter Weiss's play ''The Investigation,'' for instance, uses testimony drawn
from the German war-crimes trials of 1964-65 to explore what he called ''a
universal human problem.'' ''I do not identify myself any more with the Jews
than I do with the people of Vietnam or the blacks in South Africa,'' said the
late Mr. Weiss in an interview at the time. ''I simply identify myself with the
oppressed of the world... 'The Investigation' is about the extreme abuse of
power that alienates people from their own actions. It happens to be German
power, but that again is unimportant. I see Auschwitz as a scientific instrument
that could have been used by anyone to exterminate anyone. For that matter,
given a different deal, the Jews could have been on the side of the Nazis. They,
too, could have been the exterminators.''

Given such attitudes, the Holocaust gradually becomes nothing but a metaphor,
and as Lucy Dawidowicz points out, ''people forget that Auschwitz was built to
kill the Jews - it is not a metaphor for some unspecified evil.'' In the poem
''Lady Lazarus,'' Sylvia Plath draws an analogy between the suffering of Jewish
concentration camp victims and her own suicidal state of mind. In the movie
''Our Hitler,'' Hans-Jurgen Syberberg implies that Hitler's policies live on
everywhere, in practically every human action, going so far as to draw a
parallel between the Fuhrer's extermination program and a studio's crude editing
of a director's film. And in the film ''Seven Beauties,'' Lina Wertmuller uses
the concentration camps as symbol for the world, implying that life without is
as brutal as life within.

Miss Wertmuller's vision, Bruno Bettelheim observed in an essay, ''posits the
argument that there is not much reason to get excited about the concentration
camp world or the Nazis and Fascists; after all, there is little difference
between genocide and everyday life.'' It is an argument totally at odds with the
experience of survivors like Mr. Bettelheim himself. Their experience, he wrote,
''taught us that miserable though the world in which we live may be, the
difference between it and the world of the concentration camps is as great as
that between night and day, hell and salvation, death and life.''

As the historicity of the Holocaust gives way to metaphor, artists begin to
appropriate it for their own purposes - their own artistic vision takes priority
over the subject matter, whereas earlier artists tended to use their gifts to
transmit and preserve the event. Through a careful choreography of facts about
Auschwitz, Peter Weiss's ''The Investigation,'' for instance, offers an
indictment of capitalism - the system that Mr. Weiss, a socialist, holds
responsible for the war. Martin Sherman's ''Bent'' addresses the question of
whether Jews or homosexuals suffered more at the hands of the Nazis. Other
artists, particularly in Communist nations, have used the Holocaust as a
backdrop for their stories, in order to safely make points about their nation's
current political climate; and still others employ it simply for dramatic effect
- as Arthur Miller did in ''After the Fall.''

Because artistic representations of the Holocaust - especially movies and
television specials such as NBC's controversial ''Holocaust'' series -reach a
considerably larger audience than scholarly studies and documentaries, they tend
to imprint themselves on the public memory. As Alfred Kazin observes, ''many
people seem to know nothing about the Holocaust except what they get from this
stuff.'' The result can be a fuzzy sense of what actually happened - something
particularly distressing, given the impulse on the part of some people to deny
that the Holocaust ever took place.

''We still have too tenuous a grasp of what took place for art to fool around
lightheartedly,'' says Alvin Rosenfeld, author of ''A Double Dying - Reflections
on Holocaust Literature.'' ''There is a strain of exploitation evident and if it
gets out of hand, the result somewhere up the road will be a very unsteady sense
of those years.  We have not yet transmitted it accurately, and we're already
transfiguring it.''

In some cases, outright distortion can result, as Mr. Bettelheim once contended.
''The total passivity of the prisoners in 'Seven Beauties' is one of the many
devices that the film uses to indicate that in order to survive one had to play
entirely along with the oppressors, when actually the opposite was true,'' he
wrote in an essay. ''By showing the prisoner who had thoughts of a better world
committing suicide, like Pedro, and having Pasqualino, who had no thought
whatever of creating a better world, survive, 'Seven Beauties' falsifies what
survival was all about.''

Can artistic works deal with the Holocaust without distorting it?  Must any
attempt to filter its horrors through the imagination end in a sincere but
garbled scream? Whatever its dangers, art - even failed art -does contribute to
the ongoing discussion about the Holocaust, and in so doing, keeps important
questions alive. Camus once wrote that ''to talk of despair is to conquer it,''
and most artists would agree that that is reason enough to go on.

''Though my parents are Holocaust survivors, it's only when I saw 'Night and
Fog' that I could suddenly put a frame around the era and visualize it,'' says
Miss Insdorf. ''There is a great burden on film to be authentic and specific,
but at this stage in my life I would prefer a slightly cheapened soap opera like
'Holocaust' to nothing at all, because I believe there's always a response to a
film like that by other filmmakers to make better attempts. Because there are
people who deny the Holocaust ever took place, film and even clumsy
fictionalization are one more piece of ammunition to keep the very experience
somewhat vivid. Even if it's trivialized fiction, at least it allows young
people who never were near it to know that there were victims and victimizers,
to know that something horrible happened.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Florinda Bolkan and Helmut Berger (page 16)
photo of Giancarlo Giannini (page 16) photo of Alan Howard photo of Meryl Streep
and Kevin Kline photo of Klaus Maria Brandauer photo of Susan Strasberg and
Joseph Schildkraut photo of Fritz Weaver photo of Alan Webb and Alec McCowen

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
'THE LAST WORD' OFTEN DOESN'T SAY MUCH

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1254 words


The first word about ''The Last Word,'' ABC's new hour-long midnight entry, is,
it's a magazine show. But what sort of magazine?  Partisan Review? Vogue?
Country Life? A hint is provided by the Art Deco frame of the title, which calls
to mind some minor magazines that were published between the declining years of
Art Deco and the surging years of television. One of the more popular of them
was Coronet, a pocket-sized effort to attract readers who found the Reader's
Digest too demanding. In basic ways, the late-night television show is the
incarnation for our time of the late magazine.

The star of ''The Last Word'' is Phil Donahue, coming to us from Chicago. In a
sort of preliminary bout, he engages that evening's experts, who represent
opposing sides of an issue; then, in his inimitable manner, he bounds like an
animal trainer among the ordinary Chicagoans in the studio, lashing about with
his microphone, prodding, provoking, shocking the creatures through his hoop.
The more impassioned their reactions, the more successful his act. Such is the
role that has earned him celebrity.

After a quarter-hour of his sort of commotion, things quiet down a bit as Greg
Jackson takes over. Having demonstrated as the invisible interlocutor on the
lamented CBS Cable's ''Signature'' that he is capable of conducting sustained
exchanges, Jackson is now reduced to serving as a bridge between viewers and
experts. His guests are with him in the studio or televised in from around the
country, from exotic places like San Quentin penitentiary when possible. And
then there are the other guests: the call-ins. Jackson serves as translator of
their questions to the experts, his task being to juice up the give-and-take. No
sooner does he manage to stimulate an interesting answer, however, then he must
accept another telephone call or pause for a couple of commercials; instead of
follow-up, there is break-away. This jerky pace gives an impression of energy
and strains no attention span.

A dash of leavening, like a discussion of Vietnam veterans, may be dropped into
the show, but most of the hour is taken up with sizzlers like Tylenol, spies,
burglars, artificial insemination (with a reallife artificially conceived baby
on screen), religion in the schools - much the sort of story that was featured
month after month on the cover of Coronet, which depended for its circulation on
newsstand sales. Now and then, the producers score a coup, combining, for
example, sex and crime in stories about conjugal visits for prisoners and
homosexual rape behind the bars. One can understand why the National Enquirer is
buying commercial time on this show.

Coronet was always a cut or two below the giant popular magazines of its time -
a touch more titillating, a bit more simplistic, better at blurbs than at
content. On ''The Last Word,'' Jackson supplies the blurbs as lead-ins to the
show. One night, for example, he tantalized with the promise of a former spy who
had been ''nose to nose against the Russians''; the actual interview contained
no hint of intimate acquaintance with the K.G.B., much less any nose rubbing. In
his announcement of the conjugal visitation segment, Jackson played up the
subject of homosexual rape, although it was not to receive their full attention
until the following night.

Just as Coronet was wont to feature instantly recognizable names, particularly
from Hollywood, so now we have Donahue discussing the nuclear freeze with Paul
Newman and Charlton Heston. Oh, for those innocent times when magazines invaded
merely the sex lives of film stars and left their minds alone.

A favored ploy of Coronet was the use of scare phrases to lend an aura of
portent to its prodigiously ordinary stories. So, now, Donahue, in discussing a
''genius sperm bank'' with the reasonableseeming doctor who runs it, tossed in
the name of Adolf Hitler and his master-race theories to heat up the studio
audience.  When the conversation with the doctor became too sensible, Donahue
opened the cage of his Chicagoans. It's a letters-to-the-editor column come to
jabbering life. The call-ins from viewers are less frenetic, probably because
they are removed from the Donahue presence.

Finally, what makes this new television series and the old magazine cousins
under their different kinds of skin is the attitude toward their audiences.
Coronet's buyers could read - if without much joy in the task. It was therefore
important that every article captured the attention fast but never imposed upon
it. Those four- and five-minute segments on ''The Last Word'' are modeled on the
old editing strategy of keeping pieces short and punchy. The nightly subjects of
the television show -crime, money, religion, sex (in a mild form), children,
health - were the staples of Coronet as well, and usually the promise exceeds
what is delivered. So now, on ''The Last Word,'' the discussion of spying was
familiar; a panel on political-action groups was nearly incoherent; the
interviews with inmates and their wives were predictable; the burglars on
burglary were silly - a case of con men pulling a new con, with Jackson's
solicitous cooperation; the actors on a nuclear freeze were show biz. In its
striving for flash and speed, the program, like the magazine, has no time for
complexity or nuance.

The great trick of mass communications, like the shadier kinds of mass
merchandising, is to pull the customer in, make the sale and get him onto
something else before he has a chance to be disappointed with what he's just
bought. Did such a magazine, does such a television magazine mislead more than
it informs? At their best, both can deliver bits of information and opinion in
palatable form, like orange-flavored vitamins for the kids. Only often, there's
no vitamin beneath the flavoring.

The audience that sustained Coronet moved swiftly to television.  Why not? Here
was a medium that could offer everything the magazine offered - and far more
vividly. ''The Last Word'' is able to pander to its much larger audience to a
degree that no magazine editor could match. Using the wonders of television and
telephone, the show turns the viewers themselves into stars of the occasion.
This enables Donahue and Jackson to become tribunes of the people. Whereas
Coronet presented its experts respectfully, if sometimes simple-mindedly, they
often beard the experts, bringing them down a peg with skeptical questions and
attitudes.

There is something appealingly democratic about this sort of pop populism, but
also something demagogic. At the same time that citizens in the studio and at
home are invited to express real concerns, they are also prodded to vent or
invent irritations, suspicions, prejudices. The effect, particularly of the
Donahue sections, is to sanction the ordinary Joe's mistrust of knowledge and
credentials, to flatter his ignorance, to confuse common sense with common
foolishness.

It comes as a relief when Donahue tries to provoke a member of the audience into
some high-pitched response only to be told that the issue doesn't really matter
all that much. You can't agitate all of the people all of the time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Phil Donahue

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SHOPPING MALL MEDICINE

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 6; Page 146, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4640 words


Milt Freudenheim, an editor on The New York Times Week in Review, is writing a
book about the nursing profession.

By Sunday, 16 patients had walked in -without appointments - to see Dr. Joel S.
Prawer, a bearded, 31-year-old, board-certified family physician. Every day,
from 8 A.M. to 8 P.M., Dr. Prawer or one of his colleagues is on duty in a new
sand-colored stucco medical building next to a shopping center and a McDonald's
restaurant in St.  Petersburg, Fla.

Sylvia Peollmann, formerly of Wauwatosa, Wis., came in for a checkup ''because
it was convenient,'' she said. She had received an advertising brochure a few
weeks before, when she moved into her new home, a mile from the center. Arlene
Krause, a junior-college student in shorts and sun top, had an eye irritation.
''I was driving by,'' she said, ''and saw the sign.'' The blue-and-white sign on
a post near the road reads: ''MedFirst -Physician Care - Open 7 days a week.''
The $1 million facility in St. Petersburg is one of 49 Med-PAGE 147 First
offices that have opened during the last year in 10 states. It is capable of
handling 18,000 patients a year. Its parent company is a division of Humana, a
medical conglomerate in Louisville, Ky., with revenues last year of $1.9
billion. Humana, which also owns 89 hospitals, is planning 51 more MedFirst
centers around the country by next August. It will have the capacity to provide
medical care for 1.8 million patients a year. Humana's treatment centers are
administered by representatives of the parent company and staffed by physicians
earning $40,000 to $60,000 a year and more.

The Humana centers represent just one dimension of a revolution that is taking
place in the delivery of primary health care in America - the first line of
medical treatment. Demand for services has exploded during the last two decades
as Government and private medical-insurance coverage has grown. But because
doctors have become increasingly specialized and because 14 percent of American
families move every year, leaving their family physicians behind, more and more
patients have been turning to hospital emergency departments for their primary
care.

Last year, for example, there were 81 million patient visits to emergency
departments, nearly double the 1960 total, according to the American Hospital
Association. The impact, even on the country's largest hospitals, has been
overwhelming. On one recent holiday, Mount Sinai Hospital in New York posted a
sign at the emergency desk: ''4-hour wait'' - a 90-minute understatement, as it
turned out.

Many patients, of course, continue to visit their family doctors.  But millions
of others, dismayed at long waits - either for appointments with private doctors
or in hospital waiting rooms -are turning to easy-access, no-wait health care in
walk-in medical-treatment centers. These controversial - and often highly
profitable - new kinds of doctor's offices are opening by the hundreds all over
the country. Some, like MedFirst, advertise family care and stress convenience,
but avoid controversy by playing down any resemblance to full-service hospital
facilities. Others, however, advertise themselves as ''emergency rooms,'' even
when they have no connection with a hospital and do not offer a full range of
emergency services. ospital emergency departments exist to save lives, caring
for victims of heart attacks, car accidents and homicidal mayhem.  Specially
trained triage nurses check every patient promptly, so those in danger can be
cared for immediately. But thousands of emergency-room patients suffer from
ailments which, though painful, are not life threatening - sore throats and
sprained ankles, for example. At the same time, many others, who are not covered
by private medical insurance, use hospital emergency departments for routine
medical care - everything from wax in the ears to prescriptions for pills.

In an effort to cope with the soaring demand for their services, more than 130
hospitals have opened satellite emergency centers since 1979. Sometimes the
satellites are in underserved areas, but many are opened to prevent competitors
from grabbing business that has become important to hospital balance sheets.

Those centers that are not connected with a hospital are generally owned and
operated by physicians with hospital experience. Their patients are usually
treated for relatively minor complaints, and their hours are convenient - often
including nights and weekends.  But these facilities are not open round the
clock, like a hospital emergency department. While major hospitals are usually
in the inner cities, most of the free-standing centers are located in suburbia,
where they cater largely to white, middle-class patients.

''Free-standing emergency rooms'' served four million patients last year, and
there is every indication that the number is still increasing. The explosive
growth of these centers, from a handful in 1975 to nearly 600 in 40 states
today, has touched off angry arguments about medical ethics and ''McDonald's
fast-food medicine.'' The medical profession has been battling over guidelines
to regulate the new centers.

Critics, who include state health officials, legislators, physicians and
hospital administrators, contend that
1st JUMP
putting ''emergency'' on a sign implies the promise of a quality of medical care
that the centers cannot deliver.

Dr. Robert L. Gordon strongly disagrees. His Warwick Emergency Room -one of the
first of its kind - is in the Airport Plaza shopping center in Warwick, R.I.,
across from a Carvel ice-cream stand. The McDonald's and the Burger King at the
corner testify to the high volume of traffic passing by.

Dr. Gordon's office, open daily from 8 A.M. to 9 P.M., maintains a physician,
one registered nurse, one licensed practical nurse, X-ray and laboratory
technicians and a white-only dress code that applies even to the bookkeeper.
Facilities include 10 small examining booths behind curtains, a defibrillator to
stabilize heartbeat, and a ''crash cart,'' equipped with a cardiac monitor,
drugs and other devices used in treating cardiac arrest.

The Warwick office, like most free-standing medical-treatment centers, charges a
fee that is competitive with most nearby doctors but considerably lower than
many hospitals receive (from Medicare, Medicaid, Blue Cross or other insurance
plans) for the same treatment. A patient with a sore throat pays $34 -$20 for
the visit plus $14 for the lab test to check a throat culture. A sprained ankle
costs $59 - $25 plus $34 for an X-ray. The Warwick Emergency Room accepts
third-party payments when applicable, as do most of these facilities.

''The whole issue about the word 'emergency' is just crazy,'' said Dr. Gordon,
who worked in a hospital emergency department prior to opening his Warwick
office in 1975. ''Whether you use it or not, you see pretty much the same type
of patient.'' The Warwick office rarely deals with major trauma cases, he said,
because city-operated ambulances do not bring them. Also, the Rhode Island
Legislature has instructed the state health department to regulate treatment
centers - like Dr. Gordon's - that are not attached to a hospital; he is
vigorously fighting regulation.  Emergency medicine has evolved rapidly since
the 1960's, when new methods for saving lives, tested by Army medics in Vietnam,
were successfully transferred to the United States. Emergency-room work gained
respect, and in 1979 emergency physicians became a specialty recognized by the
American Board of Medical Specialties.  Requirements for board certification
were drawn up, but the specialty is still so new that few doctors in hospital
emergency departments - or in independent treatment centers - are certified
emergency specialists. Many were trained as internists or family-practice
physicians.

''In the hospital,'' said Dr. Gordon, ''we saw that only 15 percent of the cases
were true emergencies. The word had started to mean nosebleeds, cuts, something
stuck in your eye, bee stings, where they want immediate attention.'' In
addition to these kinds of complaints, Dr. Gordon said that at his Warwick
office he often sees patients whom he describes as ''middle-aged men with chest
pain, who don't want to think they have a heart condition.''

''They want reassurance and to be checked out,'' he explained.  ''We are
lower-keyed, less threatening, less austere, more convenient. They associate a
hospital with death.''

But critics suggest that diverting emergency cases to an office advertised as an
emergency room can squander lifesaving minutes.  ''When we do get a critical
case,'' Dr. Gordon replies, ''we are very capable of diagnosing them,
stabilizing them and getting them to a hospital. The nearest is six miles away.
We've saved a lot of people who wouldn't have made it to the hospital.''

''One man's emergency may not be another man's,'' muses Frank Gulla, one of Dr.
Gordon's original partners. Dr. Gulla left Rhode Island in 1977 and opened the
New Jersey Emergency Room in a mall in Wayne, N.J. But he changed his sign to
Willow Brook Medical Treatment under pressure from state medical authorities,
who thought that the use of the word ''emergency'' was misleading and that the
inclusion of the state's name made it sound official. ''I toned down our
exposure; now we don't accept emergencies,'' he said, although a sign not yet
removed from the back door of his office reads: ''Emergency Medical Treatment.''

''It's just a walk-in clinic, open 9 to 5, six days a week, more like a general
practitioner's office, but with no wait.'' In Rhode Island, one of Dr. Gordon's
many competitors (half a dozen within five miles, said an aide) is the North
Kingstown Medical Treatment Center. Avoiding controversy, it advertises
''general medicine and urgent care.''

But Dr. Gordon, tall, dark and forceful, his German shepherd dog, Bruno, at the
office with him, is adamant. ''I think the legislatures and health departments
should lay off,'' he said. His concern is not wholly disinterested. ''If we
didn't use the word, we would lose out in many instances,'' he said, explaining
that patients would not be as likely to come in.

His patients have their own notions of what an emergency is, judging by seven
people who came in between 2 and 3 P.M. on a recent Tuesday afternoon. They
included a man who had cut his hand on a machine at work; a woman with
laryngitis; a man bitten on the nose while playing with a dog; a woman with
chest congestion; a man who needed a physical for a new job; a boy, 11, who
sprained his finger playing basketball, and a husky 20-year-old who had injured
a shoulder while wrestling.
2d JUMP The pace is fast and profitable - 60 to 70 patients a day, 95 on a busy
Monday. Waiting time is short. Dr. Gordon's operation is keyed to cost
efficiency, unlike some hospitals or doctors' offices. Dr.  Steven Pezzullo, who
works a 45-hour week at the Warwick office, could earn $90,000 this year on a
fee-for-service basis, depending on how many patients he treats. He is unlikely
to be diverted by time-consuming, life-threatening situations that hospitals
must handle, and he doesn't leave the office to perform duties at a hospital.
Dr. Gordon operates four treatment centers in Rhode Island and Massachusetts.
''It's what people want,'' he said, ''quick attention, like fast food.'' ''It is
fast-food medicine'' one critic agrees sardonically. He is Dr. Donald D.
Trunkey, the chief of surgery at San Francisco General Hospital. ''It's
convenience for the physician, convenience for the patient,'' he said. ''But it
goes against the grain of the physician-patient relationship. It destroys the
longstanding personal, human relationship a physician should have with a
patient.''

The medical profession is split at least three ways over shoppingmall treatment
centers. Dr. Trunkey is a member of an American Medical Association commission
that has been grappling with the issue for more than a year. Leaders of the
54,000-member American Academy of Family Physicians contend that their
storefront competitors do not provide the continuing doctor-patient relationship
they consider essential to good medicine. And caught somewhere in the middle is
the American College of Emergency Physicians: Most of its 11,000 members work in
hospital-based emergency departments, but a sizable number have an interest in
the free-standing establishments as actual or potential owners or employees.

Dr. Trunkey and others on the A.M.A. commission object to stretching the use of
the word ''emergency'' to offices that offer routine medical care.

''It's unethical,'' said Dr. Robert W. Gillespie, the head of the A.M.A.
commission. ''It's poor medicine to hang a sign out and say, 'We're emergency
this or that.' If I asked 100 people what emergency means, they would say, 'It
means available to give them care every hour of the day or night by people who
are qualified.' ''

Dr. Gillespie, who runs the burn unit at St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Lincoln,
Neb., describes the ''emergicenters'' as purely entrepreneurial activities.
''They're not out to improve the quality of medicine; they're looking at another
form of revenue,'' he said.  ''They want to put up a 'Doc in the Box' sign every
place there's a McDonald's.''

The A.M.A. group drafted guidelines on free-standing centers, but they have been
sent back for further study. Seven years ago, the Federal Trade Commission
placed restraints on the A.M.A.'s longstanding practice of setting ethical
standards. And the the doctors' group has been fighting the governmental
restrictions ever since. The Supreme Court recently declined to hear a case
challenging the F.T.C., and the A.M.A. has been lobbying Congress in an effort
to win exemption from Federal jurisdiction.

The proposed A.M.A. guidelines say any facility billed as an emergency room
should be operational 24 hours a day, every day of the year. It should have at
least one licensed physician and one registered nurse, trained and qualified in
emergency care, on duty at all times. In many cases, Dr. Gillespie charged,
''patients are seen not by a physician but by a physician's assistant or other
personnel.'' However, in all but one instance, free-standing treatment centers
surveyed by the American College of Emergency Physicians said that a doctor was
present at all times. And Dr.  Gordon, for example, does not employ physician's
assistants.

Also, according to the proposed A.M.A. guidelines, the facilities should be
linked with emergency medical services for transfer of patients to nearby
hospitals when necessary. Surveys indicate that 80 percent of the independent
free-standing centers lack this backup.

Some hospital-based doctors also criticize the new centers for their
single-minded devotion to profitability. ''These people,'' Dr.  Gillespie
continued, ''have to address the fact that they are part of the medical
community. They have to share in the care of individuals who do not have the
ability to pay. Free-standing centers should make available their services,
regardless of the patient's ability to pay, with no qualifications.

''Not one of the 600 facilities is located in the areas where one would think
most need would arise - depressed or poverty areas,'' he said, referring to the
number of free-standing treatment centers currently in existence. ''All of them
are located in shopping centers.''

There is no indication that the new centers are stealing patients away from
hospitals. The American Hospital Association found this year that hospitals
recorded no decline in emergency-department patient traffic when free-standing
facilities were opened nearby.

Private practitioners, on the other hand, are feeling the pinch.  Reflecting
concerns of private doctors, Dr. Ernie J. Chaney, the former president of the
American Academy of Family Physicians, criticized the centers sharply. ''People
ought to know what they are getting when they go to the centers,'' he said.
''They are not emergency rooms, and you should not be lulled into thinking you
are going into an emergency room.''

''They do not give continuing, comprehensive health care,'' Dr.  Chaney
continued. ''The true definition would be: episodic healthcare centers. They are
like a military hospital - you may see a different doctor every time. I have
charts and records. Lately, I have been delivering babies for young women whom I
delivered when they were born.

''We are not concerned by competition - most people would prefer to have a
family physician for continuing care,'' he said. ''But we are concerned that we
do not face unfair competition. If they are run by hospitals, the emergency
rooms are reimbursed on a cost-plus basis.  They bill Medicare, Medicaid and
third-party payers (Blue Cross, for example) and get paid considerably more for
the same service.''
3rd JUMP

The American College of Emergency Physicians has taken a cautious approach. It
recently published guidelines of its own, which specify equipment and staffing
for facilities using the term ''emergency'' or ''emerg-'' in their name. But
this set of guidelines deals gingerly with some issues. Rather than requiring
facilities to provide expensive round-the-clock service, the guidelines merely
recommend ''that 24-hour access to emergency care be available in each
community.'' Presumably the local hospital does the rest. ''Probably a majority
of people who run these things are our members,'' said Dr. B. Ken Gray, former
president of the emergency physicians' group. ''I have every confidence they
will meet our guidelines.'' Dr. Prawer of MedFirst in St. Petersburg is reaching
for a combination he hopes will bring recent medical trends into harmony with
more traditional approaches. His landlord, Primary Medical Management Inc., a
division of Humana, selected this highway location for convenience - witness the
shopping center next door. But Dr. Prawer plays down emergency medicine.
Instead, he emphasizes plans to build a family practice - patients who will keep
coming back.

Humana has skirted controversy by shunning the ''emergency'' buzzword.
Advertising speaks blandly of ''immediate'' medical care, convenience and easy
access. ''We take calls at night, after we close,'' Dr. Prawer said. ''But we
get very few, because they know they can always come in the next morning.'' From
8 P.M. to 8 A.M., calls are taken by an answering service, which then contacts
one of the MedFirst doctors. ''If they are sick and need to be seen,'' Dr.
Prawer added, ''we send them to the hospital emergency room. That's the way it
is done in private practice here.''

Dr. Prawer did his residency in family practice at a St. Petersburg hospital and
still spends one day a week as assistant director of the hospital's
family-practice residency program. He gives his patients his personal work
schedule and encourages appointments at quiet hours. No appointments are made
for the lunch hour, when walkin traffic is heavy. ''Patients really do want to
see the same guy,'' he said. ''If you are interested in their coming back, you
spend more time with them.''

Humana had expected most of the patients to be one-timers, ''more episodic,''
Dr. Prawer said. ''But I always said the only way I would want to do it was to
provide ongoing care. We've been open eight months and about 60 percent of our
patients are repeats. We're very pleased about it.'' As for Dr. Gillespie's
point about the obligation to treat the needy, he said: ''In a true emergency,
when a person comes in bleeding or with chest pains, respiratory problems, we'll
see them, regardless of their ability to pay.'' But he frankly admits he does
not want to join the handful of doctors in Pinellas County who routinely treat
low-income Medicaid patients. He sends indigents with nonemergency ailments to
his clinic downtown, which has a contract for repayment by the county.

Wendell Cherry, president of Humana Inc., explained the economics.  Medical
directors, like Dr. Prawer, make more than the $40,000 to $60,000 a year earned
by staff physicians. Young doctors, who often come out of medical school
carrying debts of $60,000, are offered freedom from the additional costs of
borrowing to invest in an office. ''We have an administrative deal with the
doctor,'' Mr.  Cherry said. ''He gets a percentage of his fee.'' Humana's local
managers hire the nurses, technicians and bookkeepers. They also do promotion,
which includes selling nearby businesses on quick - and thus costsaving -
treatment available for industrial accident victims.

Research conducted by Humana found that 25 percent to 35 percent of suburban
households do not have a family physician. ''Our market studies have shown that
a signficant number of people have the resources, the money and jobs to support
this kind of medical care,'' Mr. Cherry said, adding that many have difficulty
dealing with the current health-care system.  Convenience is the prime
attraction of the health-care centers.  Most of Dr. Prawer's patients come from
the neighborhood or drive by every day on the highway. And Alma Dixon, who
stopped in for medicine for her blood pressure, said she knew the office was
open on Sunday and that no appointment was necessary.

''If they wait half an hour here they're not happy.'' commented Dr. Gordon in
his treatment center in Rhode Island. ''They could drive 10 minutes to a
hospital instead of coming here. Or they could just as well wait in their
doctor's office. We really have been spoiling the public rotten.''

One reason Humana has been able to recruit doctors for dozens of new offices is
that new physicians in unprecedented numbers are coming out of the medical
schools and graduate programs eager to be of service. Recession, meanwhile, has
begun to make a dent in the health-care system's cash flow, forcing doctors to
be even more competitive.

Two years ago, the Federal Government forecast that physician surpluses would be
felt by 1990. The projections are still on target, even though admissions to
medical schools leveled off this year, according to Prof. Dale L. Hiestand, a
health manpower researcher at Columbia University. Indications of surplus
already have shown up in Seattle, San Francisco, Portland, Ore., and Boston. The
Federal survey found 54,350 physicians in general and family practice; by 1990,
it forecasts, the total will pass 64,000.

Existing specialists, according to Professor Hiestand, ''are finding they have
more time on their hands. They are sliding over into giving primary care. And
more physicians are available now for salaried jobs in emergency rooms and
office practices.''

Dr. Leonard D. Fenninger, the A.M.A.'s vice president for medical education and
scientific policy, is cautious. ''There are still segments of the population who
do not have sufficient services,'' he said, ''so it is still difficult to talk
about a surplus.'' But in some small cities, he said, service has improved
dramatically. In New York and Portland, Ore., a few physicians have even
established services that offer house calls.

The competition may mean better service for patients. ''With more and more
physicians available, we will see them keeping their offices open longer and on
weekends, resulting in fewer visits to hospital emergency departments,'' said
Ralph Cross, a vice president of Methodist Hospitals of Dallas and the vice
chairman of the A.M.A.  commission. In addition, many hospitals are bracing for
cutbacks if Congress agrees to curb Medicaid and Medicare, which pay for large
numbers of their patient visits.

Doctors are also sensitive to the economic troubles. ''There are signs that
health care is taking on some characteristics of a buyers' market,'' said Dr.
Andy P. Morley Jr. of Decatur, Ga., a spokesman for the family physicians'
group. ''With inflation, recession and heavy unemployment, coupled with cutbacks
in health subsidies, all health professionals face leaner times.''

In Detroit, where the recession has hit particularly hard, hospitals, too, are
feeling its effects in force. At the William Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak,
Mich., said Dr. Gray of the emergency physicians' group, ''we've had a dropping
off in numbers of emergency-room visits. Unemployment is high, and now workmen's
benefits have run out.'' People hurt in car accidents have no choice, of course.
But for less-urgent ills, Dr. Gray said, ''people who are uncovered just don't
come in.'' Federal officials recently estimated that 16 million people -
unemployed workers and their families -have lost health-insurance coverage.

For the vast majority of Americans who are still covered, however, the system
has been changing fast. ''Supreme Court decisions have eliminated barriers to
competition, releasing pent-up demand,'' noted Michael Le Coney, a
securities-research vice president at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith.
With no restrictions on advertising, and controls through physician peer
pressure loosened, Mr. Le Coney said, huge health-care companies like Humana,
Hospital Corporation of America and a few others have expanded rapidly and
profitably.

In a study of free-standing treatment centers, Mr. Cross, the Dallas hospital
administrator, said they can offer some physicians 25 percent return on initial
investment. Not surprisingly, new offices continue to proliferate, faster than
the American Hospital Association has been able to count. And outsiders are
watching the phenomenon closely. Among interested observers spotted at a recent
seminar on free-standing treatment centers were representatives from a large
Middle Western pharmaceuticals maker and from one of the country's biggest soap
companies.

At the same time, many patients' perceptions of their needs have been changing.
''People are educating themselves,'' Mr. Le Coney suggested. ''They want to make
their own decisions. They aren't afraid of going to an outpatient center. The
doctor has been knocked off the pedestal. He ain't a god any more.''

Dr. Chaney, the former president of the family physicians' group, believes in
meeting changing times head on. ''You may have to change your style of
practice,'' he advised his members. ''You may have to be open evenings.''

Or, as Dr. Prawer sees it: ''Basically, competition may not lower the prices,
but it is going to increase the service.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dr. Frank Gulla

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LETTERS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 174, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 359 words


What's Wrong With the Military?  In ''What's Wrong With Our Defense
Establishment?'' (Nov. 7), Gen.  David C. Jones begins by criticizing World War
II military organization (''fought along service lines ... split authority''),
but ends by seeking to help ''the Eisenhowers, the Nimitzes, the MacArthurs of
the future.'' He cannot have it both ways. Does he really believe MacArthur or
Nimitz should have been designated the boss of the other?

He mentions ''confused objectives and unclear responsibilities'' in Vietnam, but
fails to note that organizational problems were made worse by having Gen.
William Westmoreland's chain of command go through a ''unified'' command in
Hawaii instead of directly to Washington. As the President and the Joint Chiefs
indicated by actions taken at the time, this made little sense, and actually
made a case against unified commands.

The original meaning of ''joint'' has been forgotten in the rush to assemble
overhead general staffs. In World War II, ''joint'' meant that President
Roosevelt, with the help of a ''coordinating'' J.C.S.  chairman (Leahy), worked
directly with three major strategists (Marshall, King, Arnold). Reinstating this
effective definition might involve making today's chairman less a commander than
a coordinator.  There may be no need for a separate ''joint staff,'' only for
planning groups which include present members of the service staffs.  Everyone
forgets that today's ''unified commands'' are residues of occupation forces, not
examples of operational effectiveness.  FREDERICK C. THAYER Associate Professor
University of Pittsburgh United States Air Force (Col., retired)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOTABLE BOOKS OF THE YEAR

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 15259 words


The following list has been selected from titles reviewed since the Christmas
Issue of December 1981. Such a list can only suggest the high points in the main
fields of reader interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject
headings. Quoted comments are from The New York Times Book Review.

Autobiography & Biography

BISMARCK. By Edward Crankshaw. (Viking. $19.95.) An eminently readable biography
of the Iron Chancellor that is also ''a cautionary tale about political and
military power.''

BOCCACCIO. By Thomas Bergin. (Viking. $25.) A comprehensive introduction to the
life and works of the early Renaissance master.  CAMUS. By Patrick McCarthy.
(Random House. $17.95.) A new biography ''tracing Camus's private life and his
career as a journalist, editor and theater director'' that ''presents an
anguished, self-doubting man who was less heroic than the legend.''

CHINABOUND. A Fifty-Year Memoir. By John King Fairbank. (Harper & Row. $20.)
The dean of American China studies looks back on his life and career with
''verve and style and a wry, self-deprecating humor.''

THE CHOSEN INSTRUMENT. Pan Am. Juan Trippe. The Rise and Fall of an American
Entrepreneur. By Marylin Bender and Selig Altschul.  (Simon & Schuster. $19.95.)
This ''exceptionally well-done and interesting example of the generally dull
genre of business history is the interwoven story of Juan Trippe and Pan
American World Airways.''

CLARE BOOTH LUCE. By Wilfrid Sheed. (Dutton. $12.95.) This meditation on the
life of the writer and diplomat (who did much more than marry the right man at
the right time) is sometimes intimate and personal, sometimes reportorial.

CHURCHILL. Young Man in a Hurry 1874-1915. By Ted Morgan. (Simon & Schuster.
$22.50.) ''The fascinating story of Churchill from his birth until what appeared
to be the end of his career as a Cabinet minister in 1915.'' THE CORRESPONDENCE
OF BORIS PASTERNAK AND OLGA FREIDENBERG 1910-1954. Edited by Elliott Mossman.
(Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  $19.95.) These letters between cousins form an
unusual record of Russian life in this century and ''a historical and literary
document of the first importance.''

COURIER FROM WARSAW. Jan Nowak. (Wayne State. $24.95.) The memoir of one of the
most courageous underground operatives during World War II, a courier to and
from Sweden, is ''as fascinating and thrilling ... as the best of John le
Carre's novels.''

THE DIARY OF VIRGINIA WOOLF. Volume IV. Edited by Anne Olivier Bell. (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. $19.95.) In this volume Mrs. Woolf, now past 50, is at the
height of her literary powers, and the entries show her ''extraordinary
vitality, wit and beauty.''

DOROTHY DAY. A Biography. By William D. Miller. (Harper & Row.  $18.95.) This
first biography of the remarkable activist and founder of The Catholic Worker,
written by one of her longtime associates, ''will provide a solid basis for all
the interpretations to come.''

DREAMS DIE HARD. By David Harris. (St. Martin's/ Marek. $14.95.) A personal
memoir, mostly about the late political activist Allard Lowenstein, his
followers and the crusades of the 60's by a once ardent, now somewhat
embittered, protege. Not ''a hatchet job, although some of Mr. Lowenstein's
friends may see it that way.''

EARL WARREN. A Public Life. By G. Ed-ward White. (Oxford. $25.) A ''serious and
fascinating'' examination of the career of the late Chief Justice, who carved
out a decisive role on the Supreme Court.

EDIE. An American Biography. By Jean Stein. Edited with George Plimpton. (Knopf.
$16.95.) Edie Sedgwick, heiress, 60's scene maker and underground star, died of
a drug overdose 11 years ago. The ''eminent and estimable'' account of her life
was compiled from interviews with scores of famous and not so famous people who
knew her, however slightly.

FAMILY INSTALLMENTS: Memories of Growing Up Hispanic. By Edward Rivera. (Morrow.
$14.50.) An affectionate, novelistic but transparently autobiographical account
of the Americanization of a Puerto Rican family in Spanish Harlem.

FELIX FRANKFURTER AND HIS TIMES. The Reform Years. By Michael E.  Parrish. (Free
Press. $17.95.) An ''able new study'' arguing that the change in the judge's
political outlook from progressive to conservative occurred in the years after
World War I.

FLAWS IN THE GLASS. A Self-Portrait. By Patrick White. (Viking.  $14.95.)
Brilliant bits and pieces by the Australian Nobel Prize winner that equal
''about as absorbing an autobiography as has been written by a novelist in this
century.''

FREDERIC REMINGTON. A Biography. By Peggy and Harold Samuels.  (Doubleday.
$24.95.) ''Far more thorough and judicious than the three previous biographical
studies'' of the painter, sculptor and essayist whose work epitomized the myth
of the great American West.

GROWING UP. By Russell Baker. (Congdon & Weed. $15.) A ''hopeless muddle of
sadness and laughter that bears a suspicious resemblance to real life,'' by the
Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist for The New York Times.

HANNAH ARENDT. For Love of the World. By Elisabeth Young-Bruehl.  (Yale.
$25.) A ''scholarly, carefully researched'' personal and intellectual biography
of the German-born philosopher and social critic, written by a former student.

H.D. The Life and Work of an American Poet. By Janice S. Robinson.  (Houghton
Mifflin. $17.95.) ''An extremely interesting and informative'' biography of the
writer Hilda Doolittle.

HUNGER OF MEMORY. The Education of Richard Rodriguez. By Richard Rodriguez.
(Godine. $13.95.) A Mexican-American's ''superb autobiographical essay,''
written with ''exquisite clarity,'' about the experience of bridging two
cultures and languages.

THE JOURNALS OF SYLVIA PLATH. Edited by Ted Hughes and Frances McCullough.
(Dial. $16.95.) Though this volume does not include the poet's diaries from her
last three years, it still provides an invaluable key to the ''life from which
the poems sprang.''

KAFKA. A Biography. By Ronald Hayman. (Oxford. $19.95.) ''The first
comprehensive biography of Kafka in English, the chronicle of a death in life,''
in which it becomes clear that ''fanciful as Kafka's fiction is, it mirrored his
condition.''

KATHERINE ANNE PORTER. A Life. By Joan Givner. (Simon & Schuster.  $19.95.) Only
two years after Katherine Anne Porter's death at the age of 90, a biographer
attempts to sort the facts from the fictions that the talented Southern writer
wove about her life.

LAST WALTZ IN VIENNA. The Rise and Destruction of a Family, 1842-1942. By George
Clare. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $16.50.) A loving memoir of three generations
of the author's family, ending in the extermination camps of 1942.

LEONARDO DA VINCI. The Marvellous Works of Nature and Man. By Martin Kemp.
(Harvard. $30.) A study of the works and of their creator ''as a whole man, not
exclusively as an artist.'' The author exhibits ''a commanding control over the
entire history of thought that was available to Leonardo and his
contemporaries.''

LET THE TRUMPET SOUND. The Life of Martin Luther King, Jr. By Stephen B. Oates.
(Harper & Row. $19.95.) ''The most comprehensive account'' of the life of the
late civil rights activist, who ''emerges as a charismatic leader, a brilliant
tactician of the civil rights struggle, but also a deeply troubled man.''

THE LETTERS OF GUSTAVE FLAUBERT 1857-1880. Edited and translated by Francis
Steegmuller. (Harvard. $15.) ''Bawdy, crude, splenetic,'' these letters,
beginning after Flaubert was famous for ''Madame Bovary,'' ''course with stifled
vigor.''

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF JOE McCARTHY. By Thomas C. Reeves. (Stein & Day. $19.95.)
The first ''full-scale, intensively researched'' biography of the Senator from
Wisconsin. A ''complex portrait of a politician ... who destroyed himself
because of faults both of the head and of the heart.''

THE LIFE OF JOHN BERRYMAN. By John Haffenden. (Routledge & Kegan Paul. $22.50.)
An ''appalling story of love of drink'' that ''tells a story, not a legend,''
about the the poet who longed to become a hero of his generation before he
committed suicide 10 years ago.

LORD BYRON. Selected Letters and Journals. Edited by Leslie A.  Marchand.
(Belknap/ Harvard. $17.50.) The poet's letters cover everyday life and gossip,
''but behind these concerns there is always a vision of history, humanity and
eternity.''

LULU IN HOLLYWOOD. By Louise Brooks. (Knopf. $15.) ''Terse, raffish,
authoritative essays'' on American film by the former actress and star of
''Pandora's Box.''

MABEL. By Betty Harper Fussell. (Ticknor & Fields. $15.95.) ''A bold and
satisfying'' film biography of Mabel Normand, Hollywood's first ''I-Don't-Care
Girl.''

THE MAN WHO WAS VOGUE. The Life and Times of Conde Nast. By Caroline Seebohm.
(Viking. $18.95.) Conde Nast was also Vanity Fair and House & Garden and a
conspicuous social arbiter in the 20's. His biography is strengthened by the
author's ''access to hithertounpublished Nast company archives.''

A MARGIN OF HOPE. An Intellectual Autobiography. By Irving Howe.  (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. $14.95.) A personal memoir by one of the more vigorous
combatants among ''the New York intellectuals'' who fought passionately in the
30's and 40's over literature, socialism, their Jewish heritage and what it
means to be an American.

MILES DAVIS. A Biography. By Ian Carr. (Morrow. $14.95.) ''The best biography of
a modern jazz musician to date'' addresses not just the bop, cool, modal and
fusion trumpeter but American jazz itself.

A MINGLED YARN. The Life of R.P. Blackmur. By Russell Fraser.  (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.  9.95.) A look at the maverick critic and teacher, who was as famous
for his personal crotchets as he was revered for his critical and moral
insights.

MOZART. By Wolfgang Hildesheimer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $22.50.) A
''thoughtful and intriguing'' biography of the composer by a German novelist
whose aim was to chip away at the received, official Mozart to get at the real
man.

MUSSOLINI. By Denis Mack Smith. (Knopf. $20.) ''The leading historian of modern
Italy in the English-speaking world'' takes care never to ''waver from his
protagonist,'' a character ''even worse than the conventional image.''

NADIA BOULANGER. A Life in Music. By Leonie Rosenstiel. (Norton.  $24.95.) A
biography of one of the most influential music teachers of the 20th century and
possibly all time, based on previously unavailable papers.

NAMESAKE. By Michael Goldberg. (Yale. $13.95.) The memoir of an assimilated
French Jew who found himself unable to kill the Nazi responsible for his
father's death at Auschwitz but finally able to reclaim his own identity - and
his Jewish surname.

THE NOEL COWARD DIARIES. Edited by Graham Payn and Sheridan Morley. (Little,
Brown. $22.50.) Excerpts from four decades of the sometimes mawkish, sometimes
glamorous diaries of the author-performer-composer.

AN ORPHAN IN HISTORY. Retrieving a Jewish Legacy. By Paul Cowan.  (Doubleday.
$15.95.) The fifth-generation scion of a prominent American Jewish family
explains both his assimilation and his adult search for his religious identiy.

PASOLINI. A Biography. By Enzo Siciliano. (Random House. $20.) The first
biography of Pier Paolo Pasolini, the Italian poet, film maker and political
activist who was murdered in 1975.

THE PAST HAS ANOTHER PATTERN. Memoirs. By George W. Ball. (Norton.  $19.95.) A
''colorful and thought-provoking tour'' of the author's career in government.

THE PATH TO POWER. The Years of Lyndon Johnson. By Robert A. Caro.(Knopf.
$19.95.) A ''fascinating, immensely long and highly readable'' account of the
late President's early years in Texas and the first stages of his political
career, by the author of ''The Power Broker.''

POETS IN THEIR YOUTH. A Memoir. By Eileen Simpson. (Random House.  $15.50.) John
Berryman's widow, a psychotherapist, recalls with ''the feel of truth'' the
literary generation of the 40's and 50's: Berryman, R.P. Blackmur, Delmore
Schwartz, Robert Lowell and others.

THE POLITICIAN. The Life and Times of Lyndon Johnson. The Drive for Power, From
the Frontier to Master of the Senate. By Ronnie Dugger.  (Norton. $18.95.) A
''wild Texan's portrait of a wild Texan'' in which the editor of The Texas
Observer suggests that it was Texas itself that made Lyndon Johnson who he was.

PSYCHIATRIST OF AMERICA. The Life of Harry Stack Sullivan. By Helen Swick Perry.
(Belknap/Harvard. $20.) The life and ideas of one of America's most gifted
psychiatrists, as seen by a former student and the editor of his posthumous
papers.

REAGAN. By Lou Cannon. (Putnam's. $18.95.) A life of the President that relies
on ''hard reporting rather than drug store psychoanalysis to explain the inner
forces that propelled him into the White House.''

RICKOVER. By Norman Polmar and Thomas B. Allen. (Simon & Schuster.  $20.75.) An
unauthorized, revealing biography of the cantankerous admiral who built the
nuclear Navy and the first commercial nuclear power station virtually
single-handed.

ROBERT LOWELL. A Biography. By Ian Hamilton. (Random House.  $19.95.) A
''powerful and affecting portrait'' of the important American poet, two-thirds
of whose life was spent coping with mental illness.

THE SACRED JOURNEY. By Frederick Buechner. (Harper & Row. $9.95.) A
''fascinating'' and ''beautifully written autobiography'' by the distinguished
writer-clergyman.

SCENES OF CHILDHOOD. By Sylvia Townsend Warner. (Viking. $10.95.) ''Literate,
reflective, evocative'' reminiscences of the world of her privileged childhood
by the late English novelist, poet and biographer.

A SECRET SYMMETRY. Sabrina Spielrein Between Jung and Freud. By Aldo Carotenuto.
(Pantheon. $16.95.) The diary and letters of an analysand (and mistress) of
Jung's who later became a psychoanalyst herself under Freud at the Vienna
Psychoanalytic Society. A ''valuable footnote to the early history of
psychoanalysis.''

SKETCHES FROM LIFE. The Autobiography of Lewis Mumford. The Early Years. By
Lewis Mumford. (Dial. $19.95.) The ''introspective'' first volume of the
autobiography of this century's ''greatest architecture critic.''

SOMETHING LIKE AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY. By Akira Kurosawa. (Knopf. $15.) The great
Japanese film director has written ''a fascinating, moving record of one man's
pursuit of excellence in a single art.''

STANDING FAST. The Autobiography of Roy Wilkins. By Roy Wilkins with Tom
Mathews. (Viking. $16.95.) This account of the civil rights movement in this
century is ''the last legacy of a distinguished citizen,'' the executive
secretary of the N.A.A.C.P. for 24 years.

STRAVINSKY. Selected Correspondence. Volume I. Edited by Robert Craft. (Knopf.
$27.50.) This first volume of the letters of perhaps the dominant composer of
the 20th century shows a man who worked incessantly and sometimes exploited his
friends in the process.

'SUBTLE IS THE LORD ...' The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein. By Abraham
Pais. (Oxford. $25.) The first biography to emphasize the physicist's scientific
research rather than his life is ''splendid,'' if ''written in a rigorous
vocabulary.''

THESE THE COMPANIONS. Recollections. By Donald Davie. (Cambridge.  $22.50.) The
British poet, teacher and critic sketches ''individuals, some of them obscure,
and the places, some well off the beaten path, that contributed to his growth as
a writer,'' beginning with his boyhood in Yorkshire.

THOMAS E. DEWEY AND HIS TIMES. By Richard Norton Smith. (Simon & Schuster.
$22.50.) A ''richly detailed'' account of the man who was governor of New York
for 12 years and twice Republican candidate for President.

THOMAS HARDY. A Biography. By Michael Millgate. (Random House.  $25.) A
''scrupulously fair and sensitive'' biography by the author of ''Thomas Hardy:
His Career as a Novelist.''

THOMAS MANN. The Making of an Artist, 1875-1911. By Richard Winston. (Knopf.
$17.95.) A meticulous, compassionate biography of the first half of the
writer's life.  THE TORCH IN MY EAR. By Elias Canetti. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
$16.50.) The second volume of the autobiography of the 1981 Nobel Prize winner
describes his youth in Vienna, Berlin and Zurich and his first literary
ambitions.

THE TRUANTS. Adventures Among the Intellectuals. By William Barrett. (Anchor/
Doubleday. $15.95.) Portraits, reminiscences and judgments of the Partisan
Review crowd of the 40's by an eloquent insider.

UNFRAMED ORIGINALS. Recollections. By W.S. Merwin. (Atheneum.  $14.95.) Six
related essays on the family of the poet and translator and on himself as a
child and young man.

VEDI. By Ved Mehta. (Oxford. $16.95.) The New Yorker writer recalls his
childhood ''in the most alien world imaginable - a Bombay slum school for the
blind that Mr. Mehta attended 40 years ago.''

WALTER BENJAMIN. The Story of a Friendship. By Gershom Scholem.  (Jewish
Publication Society. $13.95.) The account of a quarter century of conversation
and correspondence with one of Germany's major metaphysicians and literary
commentators.

WHERE HAVE I BEEN? By Sid Caesar with Bill Davidson. (Crown.  $12.95.)
Appallingly and fascinatingly candid autobiography of the first great television
comic, including long years totally lost in a sea of alcohol.

THE WIDER SEA. A Life of John Ruskin. By John Dixon Hunt. (Viking.  $25.) An
urbane biography of the sage who entranced Victorian England with his writing on
art and then expanded his criticism into social commentary, with profound
consequences for British politics.

WINTER SEASON. A Dancer's Journal. By Toni Bentley. (Random House.  $11.95.)
''One of the most intelligent and introspective glimpses ever offered into one
of the most competitive and excruciatingly nervous existence in the arts,'' by a
22-year-old member of the corps of the New York City Ballet.

WITNESS TO POWER. The Nixon Years. By John Ehrlichman. (Simon & Schuster.
$17.50.) These memoirs are ''to your ordinary history as kung fu is to
calisthenics.'' They are ''unfair, bitchy, spiteful, gossipy, distorted,
self-serving - and eminently entertaining.''

YOU CAN GO HOME AGAIN. By Nora Johnson. (Doubleday. $15.95.) A memoir of her
marriages and homes in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia; Larchmont, N.Y.; Hollywood; and
Vermont by the author of ''Flashback'' and daughter of the screenwriter Nunnally
Johnson.

Children's Books

AIRPORT. Written and illustrated by Byron Barton. (Crowell. $9.95.  Ages 3 to
5.) Bold, colorful illustrations make this tour of plane and terminal a
''first-class trip all the way.''

THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE: They Said It Couldn't Be Built. By Judith St.  George.
Illustrated. (Putnam's. $10.95. Ages 11 to 15.) The people and the work behind
the building of the span that celebrates its centennial next year. ''A tale of
grit, intelligence and imagination.''

THE DARKANGEL. By Meredith Anne Pierce. (Atlantic-Little, Brown.  $11.95. Ages
12 and Up.) A compelling fantasy pitting a servant girl against a handsome but
evil vampire.

DOCTOR DE SOTO. Written and illustrated by William Steig. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $11.95. Ages 4 to 7.) A dentist mouse and his wife outfox a fox patient
in a tale by a perennial favorite authorillustrator.

THE GOLEM. By Isaac Bashevis Singer. Illustrated by Uri Shulevitz.  (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux. $10.95. Ages 10 and Up.) A Nobel laureate's compelling and
compassionate retelling of the legend concerning the Jews of old Prague and a
clay giant.

HELP! LET ME OUT! By David Lord Porter. Illustrated by David Macaulay. (Houghton
Mifflin. $8.95. Ages 4 to 7.) Hugo is left speechless when he and his voice
become separated. A funny fantasy with comic art by an illustrator known for his
excellent draftsmanship.

HERBERT ROWBARGE. By Natalie Babbitt. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $11.95. Ages 14
and Up.) A fictional biography of an Ohio amusement park owner, whose life is
shaped, skewered and stunted by his unknown identical twin. ''Richly
rewarding.''

HOMESICK: My Own Story. By Jean Fritz. Illustrated by Margot Tomes and with
photographs. (Putnam's. $9.95. Ages 10 to 14.) Warm, anecdotal personal memoir
of growing up the daughter of missionaries in China in the mid-1920's, and
coming home to America.

JAKE AND HONEYBUNCH GO TO HEAVEN. Written and illustrated by Margot Zemach.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $13.95. Ages 4 to 8.) Man and mule raise a ruckus in
Paradise. Exuberant watercolors and words echo the soul and spirit of black folk
tales.

JOURNEY TO THE PLANETS. By Patricia Lauber. Illustrated. (Crown.  $11.95. Ages
10 and Up.) An up-to-date survey of earth and its neighbors in space.
Illustrated with crisp NASA photographs.

MARKED BY FIRE. By Joyce Carol Thomas. (Flare/ Avon. Paper, $2.25.  Ages 12 and
Up.) An eloquent first novel about the joys and sorrows of a black girl's first
20 years in a small Oklahoma community.

THE MURDER OF HOUND DOG BATES. By Robbie Branscum. (Viking. $9.95.  Ages 8 to
11.) Was it Faith, Hope or Veela - his guardian aunts - who did in Sassafras
Bates's dog? ''A book exuding the scorching heat and dust of an Arkansas summer
day.''

THE PHILHARMONIC GETS DRESSED. By Karla Kuskin. Illustrated by Marc Simont.
(Harper & Row/Charlotte Zolotow. $10.50. Ages 6 to 9.) In a well orchestrated
''symphony of words and pictures,'' an artist and a poet give us the personal
preparations of 105 musicians getting ready for an evening's performance.

SWEET WHISPERS, BROTHER RUSH. By Virginia Hamilton. (Philomel.  $10.95. Ages 11
to 15.) ''The supernatural, the search for identity, the need to belong to a
family and the pain of belonging'' in a novel about a 14-year-old black girl.
This author's best novel to date.

TERPIN. By Tor Seidler. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $8.95. Ages 12 to 16.) Using
clear, precise prose, this story about man and boy coming to know the penalties
and rewards of truth operates on several levels.

THE TWO-THOUSAND-POUND GOLDFISH. By Betsy Byars. (Harper & Row.  $9.95. Ages 9
to 12.) In Los Angeles 8-year-old Warren daydreams bizarre movie scripts and
misses his mother who's on the run from the F.B.I. A skillful blend of fantasy
and reality.

Crime

AMERICAN QUARTET. By Warren Adler. (Arbor House, $13.95.) No mystery here about
the killer but a probing psychological examination of a Washington socialite's
kinky mind. The cops have to handle a series of apparently unrelated murders,
and there is a down-to-the-wire finish that ties in with the assassination of
President Kennedy. High-class suspense.

CAT CHASER. By Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House, $13.50.) Perhaps a little more
self-indulgent than the previous Leonard books but a superior example of gritty
writing and violent action. The locale is Florida, where an ex-Marine, now a
motel owner, gets mixed up with some deadly Latin American types.

CORRIDORS OF DEATH. By Ruth Dudley Edwards. (St. Martin's, $10.95.) A rather
offbeat novel about murders in the higher echelons of the British civil service.
Even with a rather contrived ending, the book manages to hold one's interest.
The plotting and writing are good, and - just as important - the unflattering
look at the workings of the British bureaucracy is convincing.

THE DARK WIND. By Tony Hillerman. (Harper & Row, $12.95.) The fifth in a series
about Indian cops on reservations in New Mexico and Arizona. Tony Hillerman
offers his usual blend of action, tightly plotted mystery, a great deal about
Indian lore and expert, sensitive writing.

THE MANUSCRIPT MURDERS. By Roy Harley Lewis. (St. Martin's, $10.95.) Matthew
Coll, a former British secret service agent and now a bookseller, bids on an
Elizabethan manuscript that relates to the Dark Lady of Shakespeare's sonnets. A
murder takes place, and Coll wonders if the manuscript is a forgery. This is not
only a wellplotted mystery but an informative book about Elizabethan literature
and printing and the research of contemporary scholars.

THE MIDNIGHT MAN. By Loren Estleman. (Houghton Mifflin, $12.95.) Amos Scudder,
the private eye working out of Detroit, is pitted against killers in a case that
involves him personally. An unusual touch comes with the appearance of a bounty
hunter from Texas. Rough, tough, side-of-the-mouth stuff, hectic action,
expertly written.

NEVSKY'S RETURN. By Dimitri Gat. (Avon. Paper, $2.50.) An unusual and gripping
entry about a private eye in Pittsburgh, where some strange things are happening
in the Russian community. Yuri Nevsky, the American-born investigator of Russian
descent, finds himself in a tangle that involves a religious tradition going
back to medieval Russia. The ending is nightmarish.

TROTSKY'S RUN. By Richard Hoyt. (Morrow, $12.50.) Espionage with a difference:
Richard Hoyt brings in Kim Philby, the British traitor.  The main figure is an
American President-to-be who may or may not be controlled by the K.G.B. American
intelligence has to find out, and naturally the Russians have a big stake in
this particular game. The book becomes tremendously complicated, but Mr. Hoyt
ties things up with a lovely, unexpected ending.

AN UPRUSH OF MAYHEM. By Jack S. Scott. (Ticknor & Fields, $10.95.) Another in
the series from England featuring the unlovely Detective Inspector Stanley
Rosher. There is a great deal of slapstick but also some black humor, lively
dialogue and sharp observation. The gamy argot of the London underworld rings
true.

WALK A WINTER BEACH. By Sandra Johnson. (Delacorte, $10.95.) A New York cop
tracks down his wife's killer. Most of the action takes place in Montauk, L.I.,
and Sandra Johnson's characters have unusual depth: among them a Jewish Mafia
leader of intelligence and charm.

Current Affairs & Social Comment

AMERICA IN SEARCH OF ITSELF. The Making of the President, 1956-80.  By Theodore
H. White. (Bessie/Harper & Row. $15.95.) Partly reminiscences of Presidential
politics since the mid-1950's, partly an account of the 1980 campaign by one of
America's ''most celebrated political writers.''

AMERICAN JOURNEY. Traveling with Tocqueville in Search of ''Democracy in
America.'' By Richard Reeves. (Simon & Schuster.  $15.95.) This retracing of
Alexis de Tocqueville's 1831 travels around the United States ''makes
fascinating, and chilling, reading.''

ATLANTIC HIGH. A Celebration. By William F. Buckley Jr.  (Doubleday. $22.50.)
The novelist, sailor and conservative thinker, writer and editor describes an
Atlantic crossing in a 71-foot ketch and ''the camaraderie of people who join
together in a physical experience.''

THE BEST DEFENSE. By Alan M. Dershowitz. (Random House. $16.95.) The Harvard law
professor reviews many of his most provocative cases, some of which have
involved Constitutional issues.

THE BREAKS OF THE GAME. By David Halberstam. (Knopf. $15.) Professional
basketball exposed and celebrated by the well-known student of power politics.

CHINA. Alive in the Bitter Sea. By Fox Butterfield (Times Books.  $19.95.) The
sometimes gloomy observations of the first New York Times correspondent to be
based in Peking in 30 years are ''informative, disturbing, poignant and
absorbing.''

CRISIS. The Last Year of the Carter Presidency. By Hamilton Jordan. (Putnam's.
$16.95.) Jimmy Carter's White House chief of staff reveals his efforts to free
the American hostages in Iran.

DICTATORSHIPS AND DOUBLE STANDARDS. Rationalism and Reason in Politics. By Jeane
J. Kirkpatrick. (American Enterprise Institute/Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) A
collection of 11 essays by the United States representative at the United
Nations that shows Mrs.  Kirkpatrick's development from ''an academic
intellectual writing about politics to an intellectual embroiled in politics.''

AN END TO SILENCE. Uncensored Opinion in the Soviet Union from Roy Medvedev's
Underground Magazine ''Political Diary.'' Edited by Stephen F. Cohen. (Norton.
$19.95.) The first translation of 40 of the issues of the mimeographed monthly
magazine that circulated among not more than 50 subscribers in Moscow from 1964
to 197l, filled with fascinating debates on intellectual and political issues.

FROM THE CENTER OF THE EARTH. The Search for the Truth about China. By Richard
Bernstein. (Little, Brown. $15.95.) Time magazine's correspondent in Peking has
written a ''wry, acerbic, masterfully conceived account of China in the early
1980's.''

GREED IS NOT ENOUGH. Reaganomics. By Robert Le-kachman. (Pantheon.  $13.50.) A
critique of current domestic policy by one of America's leading economists.

THE IMPERIOUS ECONOMY. By David Calleo. (Harvard. $17.50.) The theme of ''this
fine book'' is not so much the decline of America as the revival of the world
since 1945.

INDECENT EXPOSURE. A True Story of Hollywood and Wall Street. By David
McClintick. (Morrow. $17.50.) A reporter's account of the scandal that engulfed
Columbia Pictures when it was found that the president of its movie and
television divisions, David Begelman, had embezzled $6l,008.

THE INVISIBLE BANKERS. Everything the Insurance Industry Never Wanted You to
Know. By Andrew Tobias. (Linden/Simon & Schuster.  $15.50.) A ''good read''
about the insurance business, by the author of ''The Only Investment Guide
You'll Ever Need.''

KEEPING FAITH. Memoirs of a President. By Jimmy Carter. (Bantam.  $22.50.) The
former President's account of his term is ''impersonal,'' but his descriptions
of his meeting with Leonid Brezhnev, the Iranian hostage crisis and the
negotiations at Camp David that led to the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty are all
''absorbing.''

THE KILLING OF BONNIE GARLAND. By Willard Gaylin. (Simon & Schuster. $16.50.) In
his examination of the murder of a Yale undergraduate by her boyfriend, Willard
Gaylin explores the effectiveness, judiciousness and morality of the insanity
plea as well as the notion of crime as social pathology.

LABYRINTH. By Taylor Branch and Eugene M. Propper. (Viking.  $17.95.) A
''suspenseful'' narrative about the 1976 assassination in Washington of Orlando
Letelier, a former Chilean diplomat often critical of Augusto Pinochet.

THE MONEY LENDERS. Bankers and a World in Turmoil. By Anthony Sampson. (Viking.
$16.95.) An ''excellent exercise in the higher journalism'' about the adroit
maneuvering and constant invention of new economic mechanisms by world bankers
who keep the global economy working.

THE PUZZLE PALACE. A Report on America's Most Secret Agency. By James Bamford
(Houghton Mifflin. $16.95.) The first full account of the National Security
Agency, the United States' biggest and most technologically developed
intelligence outfit.

THE REFUSED. The Agony of the Indochina Refugees. By Barry Wain.  (Simon &
Schuster. $16.50.) ''Mr. Wain's book breathtakingly charts almost every sea mile
of the refugee-laden junks'' that bore nearly two million fleeing people from
Indochina.

THE RISE AND FALL OF DIAMONDS. The Shattering of a Brilliant Illusion. By Edward
Jay Epstein. (Simon & Schuster. $14.50.) ''Cartels, like diamonds, are not
forever,'' suggests the author of this expose of pricing, mining and marketing
policies in the diamond industry.

THE RISE OF POLITICAL CONSULTANTS. New Ways of Winning Elections.  By Larry J.
Sabato. (Basic. $20.95.) ''There is absolutely no better guide'' to political
technology. ''Solid but not stuffy, lightened by professorial wit ... guided by
ethical considerations without being pious.''

''SOMEBODY IS LYING.'' The Story of Dr. X. By Myron Farber.  (Doubleday.
$17.95.) A New York Times reporter recounts not only the 1977 trial in which Dr.
Mario E. Jascalevich was acquitted of multiple murders of his patients but also
his own experiences - in jail and out - protecting his sources and notes.

THE UNDERCLASS. By Ken Auletta. (Random House. $17.50.) An examination of life
among the chronically poor by a reporter who studied Federal and local job
training programs around the country.

THE WEST BANK STORY. By Rafik Halabi. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  $12.95.) This
Israeli Arab journalist's condemnation of both his country's policy in the
occupied territories and the Palestine Liberation Organization is ''strong
enough to disturb even the most ardent supporters of Israel.''

Essays & Criticism

AGON. Towards a Theory of Revisionism. By Harold Bloom. (Oxford.  $19.95.)
Essays on American writers from Emerson and Whitman to John Ashbery, in which
Harold Bloom further develops his ''theory of poetic creation as a desperate
wrestling with forebears.''

ALL THAT IS SOLID MELTS INTO AIR. The Experience of Modernity. By Marshall
Berman. (Simon & Schuster. $17.50.) The noted sociologist argues that ''the
modern age has lost touch with the roots of its own modernity.''

AS THEY WERE. By M.F.K. Fisher. (Knopf. $13.95.) A collection of essays, chosen
from 50 years of writing, by Mary Frances Kennedy Fisher, who ''in a properly
run culture ... would be recognized as one of the great writers this country has
produced in this century.''

THE BOOK KNOWN AS Q. A Consideraton of Shakespeare's Sonnets. By Robert Giroux.
(Atheneum. $17.95.) ''A modest, fair-minded introduction to the history and
scholarship of the sonnets.''

THE BOY SCOUT HANDBOOK AND OTHER OBSERVATIONS. By Paul Fussell.  (Oxford.
$15.95.) A collection of 33 essays about literature, war, travel - plus one
about the Scout handbook.

DOWN THE RIVER. By Edward Abbey. (Dutton. Cloth, $13.95. Paper, $6.95.) The
latest collection of essays - about rivers, mountains, deserts, freedom - by the
Southwestern writer.

EMERSON'S FALL. A New Interpretation of the Major Essays. By B.L.  Packer.
(Continuum. $14.95.) A ''brilliant new interpretation'' of Emerson's literary
method based on his essays and journals.

THE EMPIRE OF SIGNS. By Roland Barthes. Translated by Richard Howard. (Hill &
Wang. $12.95.) The ''Artful Dodger of French letters'' studies the Japan of his
imagination, a ''hypothetical society where things possess an innocence.''

THE ESSENTIAL EARTHMAN. Henry Mitchell on Gardening. By Henry Mitchell.
(Indiana. $12.95.) ''The most soul-satisfying gardening book in years,'' by the
gardening columnist of The Washington Post.

FADING FEAST. A Compendium of Disappearing American Regional Foods. By Raymond
Sokolov. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $17.95.) ''Savory short essays with
recipes,'' written originally for Natural History magazine.

THE FAMILY IDIOT. Gustave Flaubert 1821-1857. Volume I. By Jean-Paul Sartre.
Translated by Carol Cosman. (Chicago. $25.) The first of five volumes
translating the 3,000-page work on Flaubert that Sartre left unfinished at his
death - a powerful philosophical, literary and biographical analysis.

THE FASHIONABLE MIND. Reflections on Fashion 1970-8l. By Kennedy Fraser. (Knopf.
$14.50). Worldly, realistic, witty, wise observations on the world of women's
fashions and the fashions of the beau monde collected from Kennedy Fraser's
reports in The New Yorker.

GOING TO THE DANCE. By Arlene Croce. (Knopf. $8.95.) A new collection of dance
criticism by The New Yorker's critic: ''She sees, she memorizes, she recalls the
image as she writes, and, reading her, you see it too.''

THE GREAT CODE. The Bible and Literature. By Northrop Frye.  (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich. $14.95.) The self-contained first volume of Northrop Frye's ''big
book about the Bible'' - a literary analysis of its unity and its language.

GROUP PORTRAIT. Joseph Conrad, Stephen Crane, Ford Madox Ford, Henry James and
H.G. Wells. By Nicholas Delbanco. (Morrow. $11.50.) A critical rumination on the
lives and work of five writers who lived near each other in England at the turn
of the century.

THE IMAGE AND THE EYE. Further Studies in the Psychology of Pictorial
Representation. By E.H. Gombrich. (Cornell. $38.50.) A sequel to his famous
''Art and Illusion,'' this volume is a collection of papers in which E.H.
Gombrich investigates what he calls ''the equation between life and the image.''

IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF JOHNSON AND BOSWELL. By Israel Shenker.  (Houghton Mifflin.
$13.95.) An ''agreeable'' book of travel in which the American journalist
retraces Samuel Johnson and James Boswell's 1773 tour of the western part of
Scotland.

JAPONISME. The Japanese Influence on Western Art in the 19th and 20th Centuries.
By Siegfried Wichmann. (Harmony. $75.) A lavishly illustrated ''definitive
chronicle'' of the impact of Japanese art and culture on Western art by the
pre-eminent art historian.

LATE INNINGS. A Baseball Companion. By Roger Angell. (Simon & Schuster. $17.50.)
New Yorker pieces on the all-American sport from 1977 to 1981 by a writer who is
''involved, unfettered and positive.''

MAN BITES MAN. Two Decades of Satiric Art. Edited by Steven Heller. (A & W.
$35.) ''A refreshingly personal selection of satiric art from the past two
decades'' by 11 American and 11 European cartoonists.

ME AGAIN. Uncollected Writings of Stevie Smith. Illustrated by herself. Edited
by Jack Barbera and William McBrien. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $15.95.) An
''intelligently and handsomely arranged collection'' of Stevie Smith's
previously uncollected works - stories, essays, reviews, poems, letters and a
radio play.

MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO EXCRUCIATINGLY CORRECT BEHAVIOR. By Judith Martin.
(Atheneum. $19.95.) The syndicated columnist addresses her subject from the
perspective that ''all problems of etiquette are earthshaking and all
earthshaking problems are matters of etiquette.''

THE MONKEY GRAMMARIAN. By Octavio Paz. Translated by Helen R.  Lane. (Seaver.
$14.95.) Lyrical and brooding meditations on the origins and power of language
and on the chancy business of wresting orderly thought from chaos, by Mexico's
leading poet.

A MOVING TARGET. By William Golding. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $12.95.) A
''distinctly mixed bag of 16 essays, lectures and reviews,'' of which the best
''are those that concern the one subject on which Mr. Golding is still clearly
the supreme authority: the writing of his own novels.''

NOBODY HERE BUT US CHICKENS. By Marvin Mudrick. (Ticknor & Fields.  $16.95)
Needling, inspiring, sometimes exasperating essays on literature, literary and
historical characters, language and lust by a learned, witty, outrageous thinker
and teacher.

PIECES AND PONTIFICATIONS. By Norman Mailer. (Little, Brown. $20.) ''Many of
(the) wild shots'' in this collection ''are interesting - on the libido and on
gluttony, on the character of style and the style of character, on the mystery
of electricity in personality.''

THE PLACE OF POETRY. Two Centuries of an Art in Crisis. By Christopher Clausen.
(Kentucky. $12.50.) A historical argument that poetry has lost its audience in
the last two centuries and has thus stopped being a moral and intellectual force
in cultural life.

THE PURPLE DECADES. A Reader. By Tom Wolfe. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $17.50.)
''Here's almost 20 years of Tom Wolfe's electric prose, 20 classic pieces. ...
Nothing new, but a sampling rich enough.''

THE RARE ART TRADITIONS. The History of Art Collecting and Its Linked Phenomena
Wherever These Have Appeared. By Joseph Alsop.  (Princeton. $59.95.) An essay on
the history of art collecting that is ''part history, part polemic and largely a
theoretical exercize.''

THE REALISTIC IMAGINATION. English Fiction from Frankenstein to Lady Chatterley.
By George Levine. (Chicago. $25.) A ''rich and provocative book'' setting out a
new theory of realism in the 19th and early 20th centuries. It ''will alter
significantly the study of the 19th-century novel.''

THE RED SMITH READER. Edited by Dave Anderson. (Random House.  $15.95.) A
collection of 130 columns taken from the 10,000 Walter W.  Smith wrote during
his lifetime. ''Red Smith was a good reporter, a brilliant phrase-maker, on
occasion a fierce moralist - and he was best at telling a story.''

REVERSE ANGLE. A Decade of American Films. By John Simon. (Potter.  $17.95.)
Film columns written between 1970 and 198l by the very particular critic. John
Simon approves of only 15 of the 245 films discussed, but our reviewer did not
''mind his telling me that what I thought I had enjoyed was actually third-rate,
because he illuminates so many things I failed to see.''

ROME. The Sweet Tempestuous Life. By Paul Hofmann. (Congdon & Lattes. $14.95.)
Pieces on history and life in Rome by the former chief of The New York Times's
bureau there. ''Like an ideal visit, it presents each impression and experience
tangled with a hundred others.''

RUNNING TIME. Films of the Cold War. By Nora Sayre. (Dial. $17.95.) An evocative
and witty study of the movies of ''worry and suspicion'' from the 1940's and
50's that reflect issues and concerns of the Cold War.

THE SECOND LIFE OF ART. Selected Essays. By Eugenio Montale. Edited and
translated by Jonathan Galassi. (Ecco. $17.50.) Essays of the Nobel
Prize-winning Italian poet that show ''the spirit that held its own quietly but
sturdily during the Mussolini years.''

SCIENCE OBSERVED. Essays Out of My Mind. By Jeremy Bernstein.  (Basic. $16.95.)
Seventeen pieces, mostly about scientists and the process of science, by the New
Yorker writer.

THE SECOND AMERICAN REVOLUTION. And Other Essays (1976-82). By Gore Vidal.
(Random House. $15.) Recent journalism, book reviews and essays, best read as
''a function of Vidal's personality.''

SLAVERY AND FREEDOM. By Willie Lee Rose. (Oxford. $17.95.) Collected essays,
some previously unpublished, by the eminent historian and ''masterly
practitioner of the ironic and compassionate approach to history.''

SOUND EFFECTS. Youth, Leisure, and the Politics of Rock 'n' Roll.  By Simon
Frith. (Pantheon. Cloth, $18.50. Paper, $8.95.) ''The most succinct and lively
account of the structure of the music business (in) any book now available,''
but also a study of how audiences and performers use the music in their personal
lives and in society.

THE STORY OF THE STORIES. The Chosen People and Its God. By Dan Jacobson.
(Harper & Row. $11.95.) A literary analysis of the Old Testament, its writers
and the manner in which it reveals the mentality of the Jewish people, by the
South African novelist.

TEACHING A STONE TO TALK. Expeditions and Encounters. By Annie Dillard. (Harper
& Row. $12.95.) The Pulitzer Prize-winning essayist of Tinker Creek, Va.,
ventures forth again, this time to the Galapagos Islands and elsewhere.

TERRORISTS AND NOVELISTS. By Diane Johnson. (Knopf. $14.50.) A collection of
reviews and essays that ''brings happiness'' to the reader with its candor of
judgment, its sharpness of insight and the sheer felicity of Diane Johnson's
language.

TRADITION. By Edward Shils. (Chicago. $20.) ''One of the most learned and
far-ranging minds in American sociology'' examines the idea of tradition and the
force of it in human affairs.

THE TUGMAN'S PASSAGE. By Edward Hoagland. (Random House. $12.50.) One of our
most distinguished essayists ranges widely over subjects urban and rural, male
and female.

THE UNIVERSITY AND THE PUBLIC INTEREST. By A. Bartlett Giamatti.  (Atheneum.
$12.95.) Thirteen occasional essays by the president of Yale University about
learning and values, generally in defense of the ''tolerant and skeptical goals
of liberal education.''

UNCIVIL LIBERTIES. By Calvin Trillin. (Ticknor & Fields. $13.95.) A collection
of columns from The Nation that shows Calvin Trillin thinking about world
affairs, national affairs and people.  ''Whimsical'' and ''wonderful.''

THE VILLAGE VOICE ANTHOLOGY (1956-1980). Twenty-five Years of Writing From The
Village Voice. Edited by Geoffrey Stokes. (Morrow.  $15.50) This selection from
the New York City weekly ''mostly succeeds'' - at least when it's ''funny,
snide, cruel or hyperbolic.''

VISIONS FROM SAN FRANCISCO BAY. By Czeslaw Milosz. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
$14.95.) Meditations on literature, politics and life in the United States by
the expatriate Polish poet and scholar who received the Nobel Prize in
Literature in 1980.

WHATEVER IS MOVING. By Howard Moss. (Little, Brown. $15.95.) A collection of
essays on poets, poetry and novelists. Howard Moss is ''polite but firm, coolly
urbane, never at a loss for words and almost always (treats) the writer under
consideration with admiration.'' THE WHEAT AND THE CHAFF. By Francois
Mitterrand. (Seaver/Lattes.  1978 -before Francois Mitterrand became President
of France -these ''brief and graceful essays'' on everything from politics and
literature to country walks ''reveal a strong, cultivated and manysided
personality, made confident by a deep sense of community with his country.''

WHERE THE SKY BEGAN. Land of the Tallgrass Prairie. By John Madson. (Houghton
Mifflin. $13.95.) ''A lovely little study'' of the Great Plains and its endless
prairie - ''its origins, its character and its impact on the men and women who
found it, used it, changed it.''

Fiction

ACCEPTABLE LOSSES. By Irwin Shaw. (Arbor House. $14.95.) A New York literary
agent is jolted from his routine by a life-threatening phone call in a novel
that strives to ''combine the suspense of a thriller with the intimacy of a
character study.''

AGAINST THE STREAM. By James Hanley. (Horizon. $12.95.) A story about a family
struggling over a young English boy whose father has died and whose upper-class
mother has long since abandoned him.

THE AGE OF WONDERS. By Aharon Appelfeld. Translated by Dalya Bilu.  (Godine.
$12.95.) The distinguished Israeli writer's second novel to be published in
English deals with the family of a Jewish writer who clings to his Austrian
homeland in the very ''teeth of the Final Solution.''

AH, BUT YOUR LAND IS BEAUTIFUL. By Alan Paton. (Scribners.  $12.95.) An
''exquisitely written'' novel about the South African Liberal Party movement and
its involvement in the 1950's ''Defiance Campaign.''

THE ANATOLIAN. By Elia Kazan. (Knopf. $15.95.) In this ''vigorous and
affecting'' sequel to ''America, America,'' Mr. Kazan sees his ''ambitious
Greek-Turkish immigrant Stavros Topouzoglou and his world of antagonists through
the decade ending in 1919.''

AT THE CENTER. By Norma Rosen. (Houghton Mifflin. $12.95.) A novel set in a
private abortion center that ''humanizes an issue which has been denatured too
long by adversarial irrelevancies.''

AUTUMN. By A.G. Mojtabai. (Houghton Mifflin. $9.95.) ''A short, quiet-voiced
tale'' that describes ''a few days in the life of a recently widowed 66-year-old
accountant.''

THE BAREFOOT BRIGADE. By Douglas C. Jones. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $15.50.) A
mesmerizing novel about ''some of the most haunting men in the history of the
American South - the dirt farm infantry of the Confederate Army.''

BEYOND THE PALE. And Other Stories. By William Trevor. (Viking.  $12.95.)
Collected stories by the Anglo-Irish writer who ''shares with Joyce ... that
austere Irish prose that quietly charms and that can be adapted to portray
various walks of life.''

A BIGAMIST'S DAUGHTER. By Alice McDermott. (Random House. $13.50.) A fine first
novel about a young woman working for a vanity press who becomes involved with a
would-be author.

A BLOODSMOOR ROMANCE. By Joyce Carol Oates. (Dutton. $16.95.) This vast
Victorian novel is ''a feminist romance with a lot of axes to grind, and it
grinds them wittily till their edges are polished to a sharp fineness.''

BODILY HARM. By Margaret Atwood. (Simon & Schuster. $14.50.) After her life in
Toronto is shattered by illness, the desertion of her lover and a death threat,
a journalist flees to a Caribbean island and finds herself involved in a
revolution. An ''eloquent, gnarled sermon'' on violence, sadism and death.

THE BOHEMIANS. John Reed and His Friends Who Shook the World. By Alan Cheuse.
(Apple-wood. $12.95.) A fictionalized account of Reed and the American
Bolsheviks that ''is alive with characters who dreamed great dreams as intensely
as they made spectacular fools of themselves.''

A BOY'S OWN STORY. By Edmund White. (Dutton. $13.95.) ''A wonderfully poised
fiction'' about a boy growing up as a homosexual in the 1950's.

BRAIDED LIVES. By Marge Piercy. (Summit. $15.50.) A novel about ''growing up
female in the 50's'' by a feminist writer who ''burns with anger and
conviction.''

A CHAIN OF VOICES. By Andre Brink. (Morrow. $15.50.) A ''powerful and
disturbing'' historical novel about a slave revolt in South Africa ''that goes
behind the present system of apartheid and works out the fatal pattern of
black-white relationships in the Cape Colony at a time when the Dutch settlers
were actual slaveholders.''

!CLICK SONG. By John A. Williams. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) The private and
public vicissitudes of a black novelist trying ''to establish himself as a
writer of distinction.''

COLLECTED STORIES. By V.S. Pritchett. (Random House. $20.) Stories, written over
a period of 50 years, in which the author steadily pursues a course of ''quiet
originality.''

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF ISAAC BASHEVIS SINGER. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
$19.95.) Forty-seven stories by the Nobel laureate in which the author's
''tenderness for ordinary folk, their superstitions, their folly, their
plainness'' is reflected in the ''phantasmagorical'' as well as the ''real
world.''

THE COLOR PURPLE. By Alice Walker. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  $11.95.) The
story of a ''poor, barely literate Southern black woman who struggles to escape
the brutality and degradation of her treatment by men'' is told through her
letters in what is, ''without doubt, Alice Walker's most impressive novel.''

THE CRYING HEART TATTOO. By David Martin. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $14.50.) An
ambitious, ''darkly idiosyncratic second novel'' that charts the course of a
''lifelong love affair'' between a smalltown Middle Westerner and an older
woman.

CRY TO HEAVEN. By Anne Rice. (Knopf. $15.95.) The wondrous careers of two
castrati in 18th-century Italy.  DAMBALLAH. By John Edgar Wideman. (Avon/Bard.
$2.95.) This collection of interrelated stories traces one black family from
Africa to the Northern United States. ''A remarkably vivid and coherent montage
of black life over a period of five generations.''

DANCING GIRLS. And Other Stories. By Margaret Atwood. (Simon & Schuster.
$14.50.) Fourteen stories, mostly written within the last decade, that ''combine
superb control and selectivity.'' ''A stunning collection.''

DEADEYE DICK. By Kurt Vonnegut. (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence.  $14.95.) This tale
of Rudolph Waltz, an Ohioan who becomes co-owner of a well-known hotel in Haiti,
is filled with cops, wild parents and teachers, misguided intellectuals, bizarre
episodes and hilarious accidents. ''A riot of randomness.''

THE DEAN'S DECEMBER. By Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row. $13.95.) The Nobel Prize
winner's complex new novel is set mostly in Bucharest, where the Dean's
mother-in-law lies dying, but there are detailed flashbacks to the turmoil he
has left in Chicago.

DISTANT RELATIONS. By Carlos Fuentes. Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $11.95.) The interaction between a Mexican father and
son and a French father and son of the same name who meet in a spectral Paris
mansion is the focus of this ''metaphysical ghost story.''

DUTCH SHEA, JR. By John Gregory Dunne. (Linden/ Simon & Schuster.  $15.95.)
After his daughter's death, a criminal lawyer searches the past for clues to the
unraveling of his life.

ETERNAL CURSE ON THE READER OF THESE PAGES. By Manuel Puig. (Random House.
$13.50.) Manuel Puig's first novel to be written in English and set in New York
is a fascinating series of conversations between two men that turns the reader
into ''a kind of blind voyeur listening to the twin soliloquies of two
characters bent on symbiotic disintegration.''

FAMOUS LAST WORDS. By Timothy Findley. (Delacorte/ Seymour Lawrence. $14.95.)
Ezra Pound's fictional Hugh Selwyn Mauberley is the posthumous narrator of a
wild detective-cum-picaresque novel filled with real historical figures.

FORSAKING ALL OTHERS. By Jimmy Breslin. (Simon & Schuster. $16.95.) This tale of
a doomed love affair between a young Hispanic man and an Italian-American woman
is set against the ''backdrop of a realistically viewed South Bronx.''

THE FROG WHO DARED TO CROAK. By Richard Sennet. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
$11.95.) ''A brief novel made up of the imagined jottings and memoirs of a
distinguished Hungarian Communist philosopher, Tibor Grau, whose fictitious
career bears a marked resemblance to that of the late Georg Lukacs.''

GEORGE MILLS. By Stanley Elkin. (Dutton. $15.95.) This five-part novel, as
exasperating and delightful as most of Stanley Elkin's novels are, spans 1,000
years of family history, from the first George Mills, who wandered around Europe
during the crusades, to the last, who works out his strange fate in St. Louis.

GOD'S GRACE. By Bernard Malamud. (Farrar, Strauss & Giroux.  $13.50.) ''A fable
by turns charming and foolish, topical and farfetched, provocative and innocent
... complete with a defensive Yahweh, an ironic Moses, Jesus, talking chimps and
perverse gorillas, biblical rites of sacrifice.''

GOODBYE, MICKEY MOUSE. By Len Deighton. (Knopf. $14.95.) A dandy new World War
II adventure novel about two pilots flying Mustangs in the European air war and
falling in love with two Englishwomen.

A GOOD MAN IN AFRICA. By William Boyd. (Morrow. $14.50.) The misadventures and
blunders of Morgan Leafy, a British civil servant stationed in Africa, are the
focus of this comic first novel, which is peppered with wry one-liners.

THE GOOD SON. By Craig Nova. (Delacorte/Seymour Lawrence. $15.95.) ''A big,
complex novel,'' about a struggle for power between a father and son, ''written
with consistent grace.''

GRACE ABOUNDING. By Maureen Howard. (Little, Brown. $13.95.) ''There is some sex
and quite a lot of sexual fantasy in the book, all of it experienced, fantasized
or remembered by women. To someone raised on books where men did all that, it's
like seeing the world under some hitherto unsuspected spectrum of light.
Fascinating, if slightly uncomfortable.''

HEADBIRTHS OR THE GERMANS ARE DYING OUT. By Gunter Grass.  Translated by Ralph
Manheim. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $9.95.) Gunter Grass, ''the bad boy of
German letters,'' is both anarchist and pedagogue in this melange of a novel -
''part fiction, part travelogue, part screenplay and part political pamphlet.''

HEADING WEST. By Doris Betts. (Knopf. $13.50.) A well-told tale of a Southern
spinster, a librarian who is kidnapped from a picnic, travels with her captor as
far as the Grand Canyon, escapes and then comes to terms with her life.

HONOUR & OTHER PEOPLE'S CHILDREN. Two Stories. By Helen Garner.  (Seaview.
$10.50.) Two stories by the author of ''Monkey Grip'' that deal with
contemporary life in Melbourne, a divorce in a traditional family and the
breakup of a ''group home'' or commune -''curiously American as well as
Australian.''

IMAGINARY CRIMES. By Sheila Ballantyne. (Viking. $13.95.) The author of ''Norma
Jean the Termite Queen'' returns with the story of a young girl's ''arduous and
unusual growing up'' in a novel that is ''at times heartbreaking, at times
inspiring.''

THE JOKE. By Milan Kundera. Translated by Michael Henry Heim.  (Harper & Row.
$14.95.) A new translation of the mid-60's novel by the Czech writer now in
exile in Paris. Milan Kundera ''strives to evoke the tone of life in a society
corroded by profound demoralization. ... No other writer has so keenly drawn a
Communist society in its phase of decadence.''

THE KILLING GROUND. By Mary Lee Settle. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  $14.95.) This
final installment of ''The Beulah Quintet'' brings Mary Lee Settle's haunting
novels of the West Virginia coal country up to the present. The novel's novelist
heroine examines the experiences of her ancestors - the protagonists of the
previous four books - and finds profound meaning in their apparently meaningless
lives.

LEAH AND LAZAR. By Elizabeth Swados. (Summit. $13.95.) After freeing herself
from the influence of an adored but self-destructive older brother, an artistic
young woman sets out to discover herself in and around New York City.

LEVITATION. Five Fictions. By Cynthia Ozick. (Knopf. $11.50.) New short work
from the author of ''The Pagan Rabbi and Other Stories.'' There are ''dazzling,
original and even beauteous'' stories here, but ''probability, necessity,
recognizable human feeling are replaced by the laws of what can only be called
mystical vision.''

A LIFETIME BURNING. By Ellen Douglas. (Random House. $13.95.) ''An intelligent,
humorous, competent, sensual woman'' who is 62 but not ready to enjoy her golden
years reveals herself and her world in a diary that is filled with suspense and
revelations about the heroine.

A LITTLE MORE THAN KIN. By Ernest Hebert. (Viking. $13.95.) A sequel of sorts to
''The Dogs of March,'' this novel also takes place in Darby, N.H. The decrepit
Jordan clan - walk-ons in the previous book - occupy center stage here and
sometimes the appalling center of human life itself.

THE LOSER. By George Konrad. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95.) The Hungarian
novelist George Konrad is a master of remembrance. The ingredients of his memory
are ''prisons, psychiatric hospitals, fear and remorse. And yet it is the secret
of Mr. Konrad's art that we experience these horrors, if not with Proustian
pleasure, at least with the same compulsive interest.''

THE MAKING OF THE REPRESENTATIVE FOR PLANET 8. Canopus in Argos: Archives. By
Doris Lessing. (Knopf. $11.95.) If the fourth in Doris Lessing's cycle of
''visionary novels'' is taken as a ''sort of ecological thriller,'' it is
''splendid.''

MALGUDI DAYS. By R.K. Narayan. (Viking. 14.95.) Set in the fictional Indian town
of Malgudi, this collection of stories is distinguished by R.K. Narayan's
''compassionate realism'' and sense of humor.

MANTISSA. By John Fowles. (Little, Brown. $13.95.) John Fowles's latest novel is
''a somewhat sluggishly played jeu d'esprit about sex, creativity and theories
of literature.''

A MEDITATION. By Juan Benet. Translated by Gregory Rabassa.  (Persea. $15.95.) A
nameless narrator's memories of the period before and after the Spanish Civil
War. The first English translation of the ''most imposing, challenging ...
novelist writing in Spanish.''

MICKELSSON'S GHOSTS. By John Gardner. (Knopf. $16.95.) ''A novel of sensibility
and ideas (yoked) to a mystery tale about Mormons bent on hiding seamy secrets
of the saints from hostile eyes.''

A MIDNIGHT CLEAR. By William Wharton. (Knopf. $12.95.) In December 1944 an
intelligence squad occupies a deserted chateau in the Ardennes, and its story
''gives us both a gripping tale of military action and a perhaps less successful
account of the human stakes in war.''

MONSIGNOR QUIXOTE. By Graham Greene. (Simon & Schuster. $12.95.) ''The
adventures of a humble (post-Vatican Council II) priest - one of God's holy
innocents - who, in a characteristic confusion of fact and fiction, believes
himself descended from Don Quixote.''

THE MOSQUITO COAST. By Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) An arrogant,
eccentric American inventor emigrates to Honduras in this ''remarkable comic
portrait of minds and cultures at cross purposes.''

A MOTHER AND TWO DAUGHTERS. By Gail Godwin. (Viking. $15.95.) A novel about a
mother, her middle-aged daughters and the crisis caused by their loss of a
husband and father.

MY OLD SWEETHEART. By Susanna Moore. (Houghton Mifflin. $12.95.) ''A first novel
of considerable skill,'' set mostly in Hawaii, about one of those ''elderly
little children you see taking care of mothers who have never grown up'' but who
themselves grow up into very interesting people.

THE NAMES. By Don DeLillo. (Knopf. $13.95.) ''A dense, brilliant, ultimately
rather elusive meditation on the relation of the halfmythological America to the
historical world,'' told through the travels, intrigues and destinies of modern
multinational executives.

A NEW WOMAN. By Janine Boissard. (Little, Brown. $11.95.) ''A woman's emotional
death, struggle and rebirth are all contained in the six-month period between
her husband's departure and their divorce.''

NIGHT THOUGHTS OF A CLASSICAL PHYSICIST. By Russell McCormach.  (Harvard. $15.)
In September 1918 an elderly theoretical physicist contemplates the intellectual
upheavals in science in the period since 1870. An ''artful experiment in writing
the history of science.''

19 PURCHASE STREET. By Gerald A. Browne. (Arbor House. $14.95.) The premise of
this ''inventive adventure story'' is that ''organized crime is not run by the
Mafia at all but by a consortium of socially prestigious Harvard and Yale
graduates who treat their consiglieri much as they do their gardeners.''

NOBODY'S ANGEL. By Thomas McGuane. (Random House. Cloth, $14.95.  Paper, $6.95.)
What stamps this tale of a love triangle in Montana ranch country as a Thomas
McGuane novel ''are the bizarre episodes he invents for his characters and the
wit with which he reports them.'' The ''best book so far'' from a ''thoroughly
American writer.''

NO PLACE ON EARTH. By Christa Wolf. Translated by Jan van Heurck.  (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux. $11.95.) An imagined meeting in 1804 between two real poets -
Heinrich von Kleist and Karoline von Gunderrode -brilliantly continues Christa
Wolf's search for essential human freedom.

OH WHAT A PARADISE IT SEEMS. By John Cheever. (Knopf. $10.) ''A very short and
often lovely novel ... on being old,'' in which the ordinary people who have
traditionally populated ''Cheever country'' return to the spotlight.

PANNA MARIA. By Jerome Charyn. (Arbor House. $17.50.) A tale of a house of
pleasure and ''the amatory, political and familial doings of the brothel's
Polish emigre occupants, the disreputable local leaders and their thuggish rank
and file.''

THE POLISH COMPLEX. By Tadeusz Konwicki. Translated by Richard Lourie. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux. $12.95.) The eminent Polish writer's novel about the line that
forms in front of a Warsaw jewelry store on the day before Christmas, written as
a tract and a comedy of manners.

THE PORTAGE TO SAN CRISTOBAL OF A.H. By George Steiner. (Simon & Schuster.
$13.50.) The critic's personal view of the Holocaust adds moral and polemical
weight to his novel about a gang of Jewish Nazihunters trying to wrest Adolf
Hitler from his Brazilian jungle hideaway in the 1970's.

PRIZZI'S HONOR. By Richard Condon. (Coward, McCann & Geoghegan.  $13.95.)
''Delightfully preposterous and perverse plot complications'' enhance this tale
of an attempted Mafia takeover of a bank. Richard Condon is an ''old pro at
mixing satire with suspense.''

RABBIS AND WIVES. By Chaim Grade. Translated by Harold Rabinowitz and Inna
Hecker Grade. (Knopf. $15.95.) Three vivid tales constitute the fifth book to be
published in English by the late Yiddish writer, who ''was attracted by the
inner world of the Lithuanian rabbinate, where religious imperatives inevitably
clashed with mortal desires.''

REGINA. By Leslie Epstein. (Coward, McCann. $13.95.) An ambitious novel set in
sweltering Manhattan, about an actress turned journalist who, in her 40's, is
becoming an actress again and confronting the many stresses in her life.

REQUIEM FOR NA'AMAN. By Benjamin Tammuz. Translated by Mildred Budny and Yehuda
Safran. (New American Library. $12.95.) This novel, ''a compact family saga,
spanning 80 years of Zionist history beginning in 1895, is instructive in part
for its depiction of the successive inner conflicts of the Zionist community,
even more for its reflection of the ambivalence and confusion that have often
marked the Israeli literary imagination.''

RICHARD A. By Sol Yurick. (Arbor House. $14.95.) ''An engrossing (and scary)
cerebro-political thriller'' about a computer genius's involvement with the
Central Iintelligence Agency in the early 1960's; a ''skillful assault from
somewhere on the apocalyptic left ... on le Carre turf.''

THE ROYAL GAME & OTHER STORIES. By Stefan Zweig. Translated by Jill Sutcliffe.
With an introduction by John Fowles. (Harmony.  $12.95.) A quintet of fictions,
by the Austrian-born writer who died in 1942, that are ''brilliant, unusual and
haunting enough to ensure that Stefan Zweig's time of oblivion is over for
good.''

SABBATICAL. A Romance. By John Barth. (Putnam's. $14.95.) A literary academic
and her husband, a former C.I.A. agent who's written an expose of the agency,
take a harrowing voyage of discovery. The novel ''drifts with what one of its
characters calls the narrative tide, it goes back, goes forward, stands still.''

THE SAFETY NET. By Heinrich Boll. Translated by Leila Vennewitz.(Knopf. $13.95.)
The German Nobel Prize winner turns to the question of political terrorism in
this philosophical novel about a newspaper publisher whose life is controlled by
the realistic fear of kidnapping.

SCREENPLAY. By MacDonald Harris. (Atheneum. $12.95.) The author of ''Herma''
returns with a young hero, uninterested in modern life in Los Angeles, who finds
a way back into thebright black-and-white world of the silent film.

THE SEA RUNNERS. By Ivan Doig. (Atheneum. $13.95.) This account of an 1852 canoe
trip by four men traveling over 1,000 miles of Pacfic coast from Alaska to
Washington ''goes beyond being 'about' survival and becomes, mile by terrible
mile, the experience itself.''

SHILOH AND OTHER STORIES. By Bobbie Ann Mason. (Harper & Row.  $12.95.) An
''impressive'' collection of 16 short stories dealing with ''loss and
deprivation, the disappointment of pathetically modest hopes,'' among
''working-class and farm people coping with their muted frustrations.''

SOULS AND BODIES. By David Lodge. (Morrow. $12.50.) This witty and ambitious
novel about the meaning and practice of Catholicism follows a dozen English
university students as they mature through the tumultuous 1960's and 70's.

SOUNDING THE TERRITORY. By Laurel Goldman. (Knopf. $13.50.) An ''admirably
touching'' first novel about a young man suffering mental problems who
periodically commits himself to Bellevue.

SOUTHERN DISCOMFORT. By Rita Mae Brown. (Harper & Row. $13.95.) A tale of
adultery, miscegenation and incest set in early 20th-century Alabama.

SPANKING THE MAID. By Robert Coover. (Grove. $10.95.) A narrative that ''is not
only exceedingly brief but very nearly flawless. The text consists of
permutations on a single event, a spanking.''

STORIES UP TO A POINT. By Bette Pesetsky. (Knopf. $9.50.) These very short
stories ''read like telegraphic dispatches from the battlefield of modern life.
... The news is all bad.'' The stories are very good.

SUMMER CROSSING. By Steve Tesich. (Random House. $14.95.) A first novel about a
young man growing up, falling in love, leaving his drab home and becoming a
writer.

THE SWAN VILLA. By Martin Walser. Translated by Leila Vennewitz.  (Holt,
Rinehart & Winston. $14.95.) A ''brief but brilliant novel'' about one of the
new breed of successful German businessmen, who discovers himself and the world
when his hopes collapse in economic difficulty.

TAKE FIVE. By D. Keith Mano. (Doubleday. $17.95.) A ''mammoth'' novel about the
demise of an ''outsized protagonist,'' film maker Simon Lynxx.

TAKING CARE. By Joy Williams. (Random House. $12.50.) A fine collection of
stories concerned with ''social disjunction and the discontinuity of
relationships.''

THE 13TH VALLEY. By John M. Del Vecchio. (Bantam Books. $15.95.) This classic
American war novel makes us ''feel what it was like to be in Vietnam.''

TO SEE YOU AGAIN. By Alice Adams. (Knopf. $13.50.) In her second collection of
stories, Alice Adams explores the ''feelings and impulses'' of mostly
well-educated, San Francisco Bay Area characters.

TRAVELS TO THE ENU. Story of a Shipwreck. By Jakov Lind. (St.  Martin's/Marek.
$11.95.) Survivors of the wreck of a veritable ship of fools land on an island
inhabited by human baboons who speak Cockney and burlesque all human faults.

AN UNSUITABLE ATTACHMENT. By Barbara Pym. (Dutton. $12.50.) ''A paragon of a
novel'' by the late English writer, about people whose habits and pretensions
are no longer ''appropriate to the present day.'' ''Witty, elegant,'' it
suggests ''beyond its miniature exactness the vast panorama of a vanished
civilization.''

VIRGINIE. Her Two Lives. By John Hawkes. (Harper & Row. $13.95.) This is ''an
ambitious enterprise, an eclectic anthology of erotica'' in which the ''many
sources and influences'' assembled sometimes lack cohesion. It would, however,
''be swinish to complain.''

WATCHFIRES. By Louis Auchincloss. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) At the outbreak of
the Civil War, a lawyer who is having an affair with his sister-in-law placates
his wife by contributing to her effort to assist escaped slaves.

WATER DANCER. By Jenifer Levin. (Poseidon. $15.95.) An ambitious first novel
about a long-distance swimmer and the physical and emotional problems she faces.

WATER MUSIC. By T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Little, Brown. $15.95.) A very clever
book with two heros, one genteel, one vulgar, and two plots, both
''picaresque,'' about the explorer Mungo Park and a streetwise fellow called Ned
Rise.

THE WEDDING GUEST. By David Wiltse. (Delacorte. $15.95.) A ''splendid'' first
novel about a menacing villain in pursuit of the son of a United States
intelligence operative who has stumbled onto a plot involving the late Shah of
Iran and a former President called ''The Man.''

A WEEKEND WITH CLAUDE. By Beryl Bainbridge. (Braziller. $10.95.) A woman's
friends try to convince a young geologist that he is the father of her unborn
child in this revised edition of a novel published earlier in England.

WHITE HORSES. By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam's. $12.95.) There is an ''almost
seamless transition from the real to the unreal'' in this haunting novel about
the ''dispersion and disintegration'' of a northern California family.

THE WINTER PEOPLE. By John Ehle. (Harper & Row. $13.95.) Set in the North
Carolina mountain region during the 1930's, this tale of love, murder and
vengeance is ''drenched in local wit and custom.''

THE WOMEN OF BREWSTER PLACE. By Gloria Naylor. (Viking. $13.95.) ''Set in one of
those vintage urban housing developments,'' Gloria Naylor's novel takes us into
a world of women who ''make their stand together, fighting a hostile world with
love and humor.''

History

AMERICAN ASSASSINS. The Darker Side of Politics. By James W.  Clarke.
(Princeton. $18.50.) The personal stories, as told within their historical
context, of 15 people who assassinated - or attempted to assassinate - prominent
figures from President Andrew Jackson to Martin Luther King Jr.

AMERICA HELD HOSTAGE. The Secret Negotiations. By Pierre Salinger.(Doubleday.
$16.95.) An insider's true ''fast-paced adventure story'' about the efforts in
Paris of a left-wing French lawyer and an expatriate Argentine to negotiate
release of the hostages in the American Embassy in Iran.

THE ARAB-ISRAELI WARS. War and Peace in the Middle East. By Chaim Herzog.
(Random House. $20.) The retired major general and diplomat casts the history of
Israel in terms of its military engagements. The account is personal and
inclusive.

''BENEVOLENT ASSIMILATION.'' The American Conquest of the Philippines,
1899-1903. By Stuart Creighton Miller. (Yale. $25.) The ''most thorough,
balanced and well-written study to date of America's imperial adventure in the
western Pacific,'' by a young historian.

BITTER FRUIT. The Untold Story of the American Coup in Guatemala.  By Stephen
Schlesinger and Stephen Kinzer. (Doubleday. $16.95.) A ''fast-paced and
well-documented'' account of the C.I.A.-sponsored 1954 coup.

THE BOOK OF THE CITY OF LADIES. By Christine de Pizan. (Persea.  $16.95.) The
first translation in four centuries of an early 15thcentury classic, a spirited
defense of women in an ''astonishing, original work'' of allegory notable for
its ''distinct and oddly modern feminism.''

THE BRANDEIS/FRANKFURTER CONNECTION. The Secret Political Activities of Two
Supreme Court Justices. By Bruce Allen Murphy.  (Oxford. $18.95.) A ''valuable
and fascinating'' study of the extrajudicial activities, such as advancement of
political causes and covert intervention in national affairs, of two of the
Supreme Court's most celebrated Justices.

CHINA'S INTELLECTUALS. Advice and Dissent. By Merle Goldman.  (Harvard. $22.) A
skillful account of modern debates among leading Chinese writers, philosophers,
historians, journalists and scientists about society, human values and the
future of China.

THE CONGO CABLES. The Cold War in Africa - From Eisenhower to Kennedy. By
Madeleine G. Kalb. (Macmillan. $19.95.) Detailed diplomatic history of the vast
and tangled efforts by the United States to prevent the Soviet Union from
gaining influence in the emerging African nations in the 50's and 60's.

THE END OF THE WORLD. A History. By Otto Friedrich. (Coward, McCann & Geoghegan.
$19.95.) A ''graceful, mordant'' study of cataclysmic events in history that
seemed to signal the end of everything.

THE ENDLESS WAR. Fifty Years of Struggle in Vietnam. By James Pinckney Harrison.
(Free Press/Macmillan. $17.95.) Drawing on the speeches and party documents of
the Vietnamese Communist leaders, as well as French and American scholarship,
Mr. Harrison shows the ''incredible perseverance and resilience of the
Vietnamese Communists'' over more than 50 years.

ENTERTAINING SATAN. Witchcraft and the Culture of Early New England. By John
Putnam Demos. (Oxford. $25.) The interweaving of rigorous social history and
''artful narrative'' about accused witches (and their accusers) in 17th-century
New England exposes some underlying structures and values of American society.

FIRE IN AMERICA. A Cultural History of Wildland and Rural Fire. By Stephen J.
Pyne. (Princeton. $35.) ''The biggest, most ambitious and fact-filled book yet
about woodland, brush and prairie fires. ...  Reading it is like back-packing
through the nation's forests in the company of a modern-day Thoreau.''

FROM THE CONGO TO SOWETO. U.S. Foreign Policy Toward Africa Since 1960. By Henry
F. Jackson. (Morrow. $13.95.) Mr. Jackson, a scholar and journalist, argues that
America's African strategy - marked by anti-Sovietism, Eurocentrism, and
''pervasive indifference except at times of crisis'' - has eroded American
influence throughout Africa for 25 years.

THE GERMANS. By Gordon A. Craig. (Putnam's. $15.95.) A ''literate, eminently
readable'' and unconventional history of German life and culture over the past
several centuries.

GOD'S PLAYGROUND. A History of Poland. By Norman Davies. (Columbia. 2 Vols.
$60.) This massive and complete history, ''superbly readable, rich in detail,''
is ''not only the best book on Poland in the English language; it is the book on
Poland.''

HEARTS AND MINDS. The Anatomy of Racism from Roosevelt to Reagan.  By Harry S.
Ashmore. (McGraw-Hill. $15.95.) ''A valuable historical analysis of the last
half-century of America's struggle with the racial issue'' by the former editor
of The Arkansas Gazette.

A HISTORY OF THE GUYANESE WORKING PEOPLE, 1881-1905. By Walter Rodney. (Johns
Hopkins. Cloth, $26.50. Paper, $6.95.) The last book by the young Guyanese
patriot, politician and socialist who was killed by a bomb in 1980, Rodney's
analysis ''exposes Guyanese planter attitudes, and makes clear why they have
changed so little over time.''

A HISTORY OF VENICE. By John Julius Norwich. (Knopf. $22.95.) ''A thousand years
of prodigious, intricate, sometimes unbelievable events'' in one ''living
book.''

THE HOLOCAUST AND THE HISTORIANS. By Lucy S. Dawidowicz. (Harvard.$15.) A
''shrewd and generally fair'' analysis of how European and American historians
and commentators have dealt with the Holocaust, or failed to.

THE HOUSE OF SAUD. The Rise and Rule of the Most Powerful Dynasty in the Arab
World. By David Holden and Richard Johns. (Holt. $19.95.) This modern history of
Saudi Arabia's ruling dynasty, from the capture of Riyadh in 1902 to the siege
of Mecca in 1979, includes the ''best and fullest journalistic account of Arabia
during the past 15 years.''

THE KENNEDY IMPRISONMENT. A Meditation on Power. By Garry Wills.
(Atlantic-Little, Brown. $14.95.) An ''energetic attempt'' to show that the
Kennedy family has for 40 years ''imprisoned'' itself through its worship of
image and political power.

KOREA. The Untold Story of the War. By Joseph C. Goulden. (Times.  $22.50.) A
''breezy'' anecdotal history of the American involvement in Korea, based on
highly classified documents released through the Freedom of Information Act.

THE LEFT BANK. Writers, Artists and Politics From the Popular Front to the Cold
War. By Herbert R. Lottman. (Houghton Mifflin. $15.95.) ''A guided tour of the
1930's and 1940's as seen from the Sixth Arrondissement'' by the biographer of
Albert Camus.

NOTES OF A REVOLUTIONARY. By Andrei Amalrik. (Knopf. $16.95.) The book Amalrik
was working on when he died in 1980 - ''a cultural history of a Soviet decade in
which forces of democratization and dissent set in motion by Nikita Khrushchev's
reforms came into conflict with a new leadership determined to restore the reign
of Stalinism.''

THE RULING RACE. A History of American Slaveholders. By James Oakes. (Knopf.
$16.95.) This ''outstanding'' re-examination of slavery is ''more effective as a
work of revision'' of the scholarship of Eugene Genovese than as an alternative
portrait of the planter class.

SIX ARMIES IN NORMANDY. From D-Day to the Liberation of Paris. June 6th-August
25th, 1944. By John Keegan. (Viking. $17.95.) ''Here is a coherent, lucid view
of a vastly complex operation, brilliantly written by a military historian who
has a fine eye for the telling detail that can bring alive a battle or a staff
conference.''

STRONG-MINDED WOMEN. And Other Lost Voices from Nineteenth-Century England. By
Janet Horowitz Murray. (Pantheon. Cloth, $22.50. Paper, $11.95.) ''Fascinating,
detailed accounts'' of the lives of Victorian Englishwomen, constructed from
parliamentary testimony, private letters, books and other reports.

THE STRUCTURES OF EVERYDAY LIFE. The Limits of the Possible.  Volume I.
Civilization and Capitalism 15th-18th Century. By Fernand Braudel. (Harper &
Row. $30.) This first volume of Mr. Braudel's large economic history of Europe
contains his ''ingenious exploration'' of the ''often invisible realm of
material life.''

THIS WAS HARLEM. A Cultural Portrait, 1900-50. By Jervis Anderson.  (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux. $17.95.) A history of Harlem from its ''brash and vibrant
cultural youth and its political and cultural maturity, on to its frustrated,
sometimes violent middle age.''

THE VINEYARD OF LIBERTY. The American Experiment. By James MacGregor Burns.
(Knopf. $22.95.) A history of the Republic from 1787 to 1863 that is ''episodic,
even cinematic in style,'' and remarkable for its emphasis on the wide range of
people who created the nation.

VOICES OF PROTEST. Huey Long, Father Coughlin, and the Great Depression. By Alan
Brinkley. (Knopf. $18.50.) A ''fascinating yarn peopled with rogues'' that
''helps rescue Long and Coughlin from history's sideshow and forces us to
acknowledge their influence on the Roosevelt Administration.''

WALL-TO-WALL AMERICA. A Cultural Hisotry of Post-Office Murals in the Great
Depression. By Karal Ann Marling. (Minnesota. Cloth, $35.  Paper, $14.95.) A
''joyous and sometimes irreverent account'' of the construction of l,205
courthouse and post-office murals built around the United States with WPA funds
in the 1930's.

WATER AND POWER. The Conflict Over Los Angeles' Water Supply in the Owens
Valley. By William L. Kahrl. (California. $24.95.) A thoughtful history of the
famous California water fight that amounts to ''a class on how to write history
clearly, convincingly, with an eye on the bigger picture and, most of all, with
deep common sense.''

WOMEN, RACE & CLASS. By Angela Y. Davis. (Random House. $13.50.) A historical
study of how the three themes of the title became entangled in the growth of
American society, given resonance by Miss Davis's insights into contemporary
concerns.

THE WORLD RUSHED IN. The California Gold Rush Experience. By J.S.  Holliday.
(Simon & Schuster. $16.95.) A ''meticulous reconstruction of the California
stampede,'' told through entries in the diary of New York farmer William Swain,
who joined the Gold Rush at its beginning. Excerpts from other chronicles of the
time give depth to Swain's engaging personal tale.

THE WPA GUIDE TO NEW YORK CITY. The Federal Writers' Project Guide to the 1930's
New York. With a new introduction by William H. Whyte.  (Pantheon. Cloth, $20.
Paper, $8.95.) A handsome reissue of the legendary guidebook in which
''metropolitan street wisdom mixes with cosmopolitan democracy.''

Nuclear Issues

BEYOND THE COLD WAR. A New Approach to the Arms Race and Nuclear Annihilation.
By E.P. Thompson. (Pantheon. Cloth, $15. Paper, $5.95.) The British social
historian advocates a ''nuclear-free Europe not just because the thousands of
nuclear weapons in Europe make war in only one theater a growing possiblity, but
because the weapons of extermination symbolize Europe's dependence on the
superpowers.''

THE CULT OF THE ATOM. The Secret Papers of the Atomic Energy Commission. By
Daniel Ford. (Simon & Schuster. $13.95.) After exploring the files of the
A.E.C., the former director of the Union of Concerned Scientists concludes that
the history of nuclear power in America is marked by manipulation of scientific
evidence and official laxness about safety.

THE NUCLEAR DELUSION. Soviet-American Relations in the Atomic Age.  By George F.
Kennan. (Pantheon. $13.95.) This collection of ''elegant speeches, policy papers
and essays,'' composed over the last 32 years by the eminent American diplomat
and historian, depicts our Government's nuclear weapons policy as ''unwise and
unconscionable.''

NUCLEAR WAR. What's in It for You? By Ground Zero. (Pocket. Paper, $2.95.) From
the weaponry to the effects of nuclear war: A grassroots handbook written by a
nonpartisan educational group.

STRATEGIES OF CONTAINMENT. A Critical Appraisal of Postwar American National
Security Policy. By John Lewis Gaddis. (Oxford.  $25.) The author analyzes
America's ''containment'' policy toward Russia since World War II and
demonstrates that detente is only the most recent manifestation of that
long-term strategy.

WITH ENOUGH SHOVELS. Reagan, Bush and Nuclear War. By Robert Scheer. (Random
House. $14.95.) The national correspondent of The Los Angeles Times examines the
ways in which the Reagan Administration plans ''for waging and winning a nuclear
war with the Soviet Union.''

Poetry

THE CHINESE INSOMNIACS. New Poems. By Josephine Jacobsen.  (Pennsylvania.
$9.95.) These ''characteristically understated poems attempt to calibrate in
exquisite, polished and unfailingly intelligent language the wonders and horrors
of the interior landscape.''

THE COUNTRY BETWEEN US. By Carolyn Forche. (Harper & Row. $11.50.) A book of
mostly political poems about El Salvador. ''The cumulative power of the volume
is considerable.''

THE FORTUNATE TRAVELLER. By Derek Walcott. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  l.95.)
Derek Walcott ''writes high, forcing his themes to rise to the occasions of his
rhetoric. ... There are some gorgeous poems.''

HUNDREDS OF FIREFLIES. By Brad Leithauser. (Knopf. $11.50.) Some of these poems
''transport the reader to realms of suggestiveness involving time, nature and
mystery that could never be encompassed by cleverness, sheer skill or mere
observation.''

THE LAST LUNAR BAEDEKER. By Mina Loy. Edited and introduced by Roger Conover.
With a note by Jonathan Williams. (Jargon Society.$25.) The first publication of
more than a third of the poems by the late Mina Loy, who won the praise of Ezra
Pound and T.S. Eliot.

LIFE SUPPORTS. New and Collected Poems. By William Bronk. (North Point. $20.)
''The quality of our experience is unmistakable in these abstract poems, which
nevertheless are more concrete than the 'objects' of reality.''

NEWS FROM THE GLACIER. Selected Poems 1960-1980. By John Haines.  (Wesleyan.
$15.) ''Wherever these poems turn for their topics, they turn artfully,'' giving
a highly individual view of the life of human beings and many other creatures
against the awesome, primitive backdrop of Alaskan wilderness and mountains.

OUR GROUND TIME HERE WILL BE BRIEF. New and Selected Poems. By Maxine Kumin.
(Viking. $16.95.) Selections from six previous volumes and 29 new poems that,
taken together, give us ''20 years' solid work.''

RECOVERIES. A Poem. By Theodore Weiss. (Macmillan. $11.95.) A 2,000-line poem,
''a grand conception,'' about civilization - creation, process, decay, human
values - spoken by a figure in a Renaissance church fresco.

SELECTED POEMS. By Galway Kinnell. (Houghton Mifflin. $12.50.) This volume is
''a full scale dossier for those who consider Galway Kinnell, at 55, one of the
true master poets of his generation and a writer whose career exemplifies some
of what is best in contemporary poetry.''

THIS JOURNEY. By James Wright. (Random House. $10.50.) Poems that explore ''the
terrible harshness and beauty of nature, but with a luminous depth and
intensity.'' The last volume completed by James Wright, who died two years ago
at 52.

A WILD PATIENCE HAS TAKEN ME THIS FAR. Poems 1978-1981. By Adrienne Rich.
(Norton. $4.95.) ''We are in the presence here of a major American poet whose
voice at midcentury in her own life is increasingly marked by moral passion.''

Science & Social Science

THE ART OF STARVATION. A Story of Anorexia and Survival. By Sheila MacLeod.
(Schocken. $12.95.) The British novelist recounts her struggle with the
starvation syndrome in a book that is also ''an elegant essay about what it
means to grow from girlhood to adult womanhood.''

BEYOND THE IVORY TOWER. Social Responsibilities of the Modern University. By
Derek Bok. (Harvard. $15.95.) The president of Harvard ''brings a keenly
analytical mind'' to the problem of renegotiating the relationship between
universities and society.

BLAMING TECHNOLOGY. The Irrational Search for Scapegoats. By Samuel C. Florman.
(St. Martin's. $12.95.) A spirited polemic in defense of the humanity of
technological creativity against ''the pernicious myths of technological
determinism and of the autocracy of a technological elite.''

THE COSMIC CODE. Quantum Physics as the Language of Nature. By Heinz R. Pagels.
(Simon & Schuster. $17.50.) A ''marvelously effective'' explanation of the
fundamental ideas of theoretical physics.

THE GROWTH OF BIOLOGICAL THOUGHT. Diversity, Evolution and Inheritance. By Ernst
Mayr. (Belknap/Harvard. $30.) This first of two ambitious volumes on the
background and development of modern biology focuses on evolution.

IN A DIFFERENT VOICE. Psychological Theory and Women's Development. By Carol
Gilligan. (Harvard. $15.) A ''consistently provocative'' feminist reassessment
of theories of moral development.

IS THERE NO PLACE ON EARTH FOR ME? By Susan Sheehan. (Houghton Mifflin. $14.95.)
A ''moving, coherent'' study of mental illness and its treatment, focusing on a
diagnosed and deteriorating schizophrenic and her experiences at Creedmoor
Psychiatric Center.

THE MIND'S I. Fantasies and Reflections on Self and Soul. Composed and arranged
by Douglas R. Hofstadter and Daniel C. Dennett. (Basic.  $15.50.) A collection
of fiction, essays and dialogues exploring mind and consciousness in the light
of new scientific discoveries and philosophical analysis.

THE NEW CLASS WAR. Reagan's Attack on the Welfare State and its Consequences. By
Frances Fox Piven and Richard A. Cloward. (Pantheon. $11.50.) Two well-known
sociologists argue that the welfare state will survive the Reagan revolution
because it has become inextricably enmeshed with middle-class culture.

THE NEW EVOLUTIONARY TIMETABLE. Fossils, Genes and the Origin of Species. By
Steven M. Stanley. (Basic. $16.75.) A readable and illuminating statement of the
revisionist theory of evolution called punctuationalism. Its proponents think
that species evolve episodically, not continuously.

ON LEARNING TO READ. The Child's Fascination With Meaning. By Bruno Bettelheim
and Karen Zelan. (Knopf. $13.95.) A rigorous examination of how children learn
to read and why, with an extensive critical survey of current primers and
methods.

PASSING THE TIME IN BALLYMENONE. Culture and History of an Ulster Community. By
Henry Glassie. (Pennsylvania. $29.95.) This manyfaceted study of the customs,
folk tales and beliefs of a small community in Northern Ireland points to a new
way of writing history: It ''will now allow us to re-create such communities
from the inside out rather than merely to represent them from the outside in.''

PHILOSOPHY IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY. By A.J. Ayer. (Random House.  $22.50.) The
former Oxford don, philosophic heir to Bertrand Russell and John Stuart Mill,
emphasizes ''the pragmatism of William James and the analytic movement as it
developed out of the doctrines of the Vienna Circle.''

THE RISE AND DECLINE OF NATIONS. Economic Growth, Stagflation, and Social
Rigidities. By Mancur Olson. (Yale. $14.95.) An ''elegant, readable book'' that
''sets out to explain why economies succumb to the 'British disease,' the kind
of stagnation and demoralization that is now sweeping Europe and North
America.''

SCIENCE IN TRADITIONAL CHINA. A Comparative Perspective. By Joseph Needham.
(Harvard. $12.50.) A more accessible version of part of his immense ''Science
and Civilization in China'' by a ''freewheeling, amusing, constantly alert and
rarely dogmatic'' scholar.

SUICIDE IN AMERICA. By Herbert Hendin. (Norton. $16.95.) A psychiatric and
demographic study in which ''Dr. Hendin advocates flexibility in treating the
suicidal patient, while reiterating his staunch belief that suicide should not
be construed as a 'right.' ''

The following books were published this year by New York Times staff writers and
grew out of material that appeared first in the newspaper.

CHINA: Alive in the Bitter Sea. By Fox Butterfield. (Times Books.  $19.95.) An
account of changing life in China in the late 1970's, by the first Times
correspondent in Peking in 30 years.

CHRISSIE. By Chris Evert Lloyd with Neil Amdur. (Simon & Schuster.  $15.50.) An
autobiography.  A FEAST MADE FOR LAUGHTER. By Craig Claiborne. (Doubleday.
$17.95.) An autobiography, plus a list of the writer's favorite cookbooks and
recipes.

FIVE O'CLOCK COMES EARLY. By Bob Welch and George Vecsey. (William Morrow & Co.
$11.50.) An account of the young Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher's battle with
alcoholism.

FRENCH STYLE. By Suzanne Slesin and Stafford Cliff. (Clarkson Potter. $35.) A
stunning book on French domestic design.  JOE DI MAGGIO: An Informal Biography.
By George DeGregorio. (Stein and Day. $14.95.) The life of the baseball player.
THE NEW YORK TIMES GUIDE TO PERSONAL HEALTH. By Jane Brody. (Times Books.
$19.95.) A compendium based on the weekly Personal Health column.

THE NEW YORK TIMES HOME BOOK OF MODERN DESIGN. Styles, Problems & Solutions. By
Suzanne Slesin. (Times Books. $35.) A compendium based on material from the Home
and Magazine sections.

PIERRE FRANEY'S KITCHEN. By Pierre Franey and Richard Flaste.  (Times Books.
$16.95.) A photo and text description and evaluation of basic kitchen equipment.

ROME. The Sweet Tempestuous Life. By Paul Hofmann. (Congdon & Lattes. $14.95.)
The former chief of The Times bureau there describes the Eternal City today.

SOMEBODY IS LYING. By Myron Farber (Doubleday. $17.95.) An account of the murder
trial of Dr. Mario E. Jascalevich (Dr. X.) and of the reporter's own courtroom
and jailhouse experiences.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 5, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Q.'SPEAK TO YURI?' REAGAN: 'UM, DA.'

BYLINE: By Bernard Kalb

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Remember the ''missile gap'' crisis of the early 60's and the fears it produced
here at home about America being No.  2? Well, Yuri V. Andropov's emergence as
general secretary of the Communist Party now confronts us with a crisis of a
different sort, unique in Soviet-American relations.

Mr. Andropov, we're told, speaks English; Ronald Reagan, we know, cannot speak
Russian. In short, a linguistic gap - sudden, unexpected, ominous.

In a world of realpolitik, the dangers are obvious. Above and beyond the impact
of linguistic inferiority on America's post-Vietnam psyche, the Kremlin will
exploit the Andropov advantage on a global scale. No country will be safe from
Soviet linguistic bullying. The Western allies, already anxious about being
targeted by Soviet SS-20's, will be prodded toward neutralism, leaving NATO's
future much in doubt. The developing nations will be driven to reassess their
alliances. A world destabilized.

Obviously this gap is intolerable and calls for immediate counteraction by Mr.
Reagan himself. But can he master the Russian language and the Cyrillic alphabet
on a crash basis in, say, two weeks? Democrats may smile. Republicans may be
unavailable for comment. But such a linguistic breakthrough is certainly
possible - provided, of course, Mr. Reagan does not squander his time on such
irrelevancies as the Federal budget, unemployment, defense.

Nor is this the only option available to the Administration in creating a
strategy to overcome the gap. The President must: 1. Immediately enter
subscriptions to Pravda and Izvestia, and prominently display these newspapers
on the Oval Office coffee table - in full view of visiting foreign V.I.P.'s. The
word will filter back to the Kremlin.

2. Open his next news conference with ''Dobriy vecher'' - ''Good evening'' - and
casually pepper his remarks with da's and nyet's. The K.G.B. always tunes in.

3. Observe, in informal discussions with visiting heads of state, that he has
lately taken to reading Dostoevsky, Gogol and Turgenev in the original, and
perhaps recite a memorized passage or two of Tolstoy's ''Voyna i Mir'' - ''War
and Peace.'' For that, the K.G.B.  would wake up Mr. Andropov in the middle of
the night.

Further, Mr. Andropov's reputed command of English and his fondness for things
Western must be turned against him. But how? By the White House's discreetly
leaking the disinformation that at last the C.I.A. has planted a mole in the
Kremlin. This ploy alone would plunge the K.G.B. into a witch hunt on an
unprecedented scale, thereby neutralizing at least 42 Soviet armored divisions.

The only glint of comfort in the crisis is that not all Kremlinologists agree
that Yuri and English are on speaking terms.  But one very disconcerting fact
has surfaced: When Vice President Bush and Secretary Shultz held their first
meeting with Mr. Andropov immediately after Leonid I. Brezhnev's funeral, at one
point the new leader nodded before receiving a Russian translation of a comment
by Mr. Shultz. Nodded! Mr. Andropov nodded! Some United States intelligence
circles still are not sure whether the nod meant yes, no, or was simply a case
of a twitching nerve. But our worst-case wargamers already have concluded that
the nod was the real thing, not just linguistic oneupsmanship.

There is no reason to panic, though. The Andropov nod can be offset -quickly.
The President, whenever he hears as much as a syllable of Russian, must nod,
too. Indeed, he should immediately start stockpiling nods. This retaliatory
posture, operational at once (in contrast to the MX ''dense pack'' missiles),
would create mass confusion in the Central Committee and Politburo and might
even force a reassessment about launching a linguistic offensive.

This is no time for the usual diplomatic pussyfooting. Mr. Reagan must urgently
make it clear that the United States will not allow the Soviet Union to violate
the SLT (Strategic Language Treaty), which specifically stipulates: ''One
Leader, One Language.'' True, no negotiations have yet begun on the SLT - in
fact, there is no such thing as an SLT - but this should not prevent the
Administration from accusing Moscow of cheating in advance.

Whether such an overall strategy would serve as a deterrent and cancel the
Andropov advantage is not at all certain. But one thing is: Our nation cannot
tolerate inferiority of any kind. America is a superpower. In our dealings with
the other superpower, we can settle for nothing less than linguistic parity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Bernard Kalb is State Department correspondent for NBC News.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Veteran in Stabbing Case Paroled on Stress Plea

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 169 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Dec. 5


A Vietnam veteran convicted of trying to kill a motorist has been granted parole
on the basis of war-related stress.

Colorado parole officials noted ''post-traumatic stress syndrome'' in
authorizing the release of the veteran, Dan Taylor, from prison.  Mr. Taylor,
who could be released as early as Friday, had served five years of a 10-@ to
20-year sentence for attempted first-degree murder and aggravated assault.

Mr. Taylor, who served in Vietnam with an Army reconnaissance unit, was
hitchhiking to Colorado in 1977 when he got a ride near Fort Morgan. According
to testimony, the driver of the car made homosexual advances, and Mr. Taylor
stabbed him 28 times.

The parole board referred to Army records reporting that Mr. Taylor found the
mutilated corpse of a war buddy, who had been missing for several days, nailed
to a tree by the hands.

The Army records indicated that Mr. Taylor might have begun suffering from
stress syndrome after that.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Dierdre Carmody and Laurie Johnston

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 212 words


Parachute-Cloth Art For an Airport Anniversary

Kennedy International Airport has a new, if temporary, art object, giving
holiday travelers from overseas something new to look at: a 100-by-50-foot
''soft sculpture'' of red nylon parachute cloth. On view until Jan. 15, it is
newly installed for the 25th anniversary celebration of the International
Arrivals Building.

To stretch the 900 yards of fabric in patterns, Francis Hines, a
painter-turned-sculptor, enlisted ''eight friends who are great pullers, with
patience.''

Mr. Hines, whose West Village loft studio overlooks the Hudson, did a fabric
sculpture for the Port Authority Bus Terminal a year ago.  He has gauze-wrapped
an abandoned Lower East Side tenement (3,500 yards), the Washington Square arch
(8,000 yards) and a chunk of the West Side Highway downtown during demolition.

As part of the 25th anniversary, the Federal Aviation Administration renamed its
building at Kennedy in memory of Maj.  Robert Michael Fitzgerald, a Marine Corps
pilot killed in Vietnam. He was a graduate of Regis High School in Manhattan and
New York University.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
WARNING FOR AFRICA

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Dec. 6


Despite a peevish signal of breakdown by Foreign Minister Claude Cheysson of
France some weeks ago, the Western group working on Namibia still holds
together.

It is probably the best example of allied cooperation on a tough issue now
going, when the West is bickering about everything else from press releases to
butter to how to face the Russians. The trouble is that it isn't going anywhere,
and time is running out.

The U.S., Canada, Britain, France and West Germany have been negotiating for
years as the ''contact group'' between South Africa and neighboring black
countries to establish an independent state of Namibia on the vast, sparsely
populated territory of South-West Africa. A German colony before World War I,
South-West Africa was put under South African trusteeship by a League of Nations
mandate, which ran out long ago. A generation after decolonization in most of
Africa, it is a vestige of colonial empire that rankles deeply on the continent.

Furthermore, patient, persistent diplomacy has almost solved the argument, so a
collapse now would make resentments all the more bitter.

But after rosy predictions early this year, collapse is looming.  The U.S. will
be blamed. The issue is the demand that Angola promise to expel Cuban troops in
conjunction with Namibian independence. The suspicion among many American
experts as well as European officials is that by supporting the demand, the U.S.
is just giving South Africa another excuse to hold out.

There have been many signs that Angola would like to get rid of the 20,000 Cuban
troops who are an expense and an irritant, but not as a condition for their
neighbor's right to statehood and majority rule.  And the Marxist regime wants
first to be sure South Africa won't be able to support continuing guerrilla war
against Luanda, a war the U.S. does not discourage.

There is general agreement among Western diplomats that the deadlock can't be
broken without U.S. pressure on South Africa.  America's partners don't oppose
the Reagan Administration's view that ''constructive engagement'' might persuade
Pretoria better than hostility and sanctions, which none of them want to risk or
believe can succeed. But they've come to think the U.S. is really trying to
force a coalition government on Angola, rather than press for a Namibian
settlement.

The end of February is now the likely deadline for the ''contact group,'' with a
unilateral declaration of Namibian independence under South Africa's aegis to
follow if nothing is arranged.  This would copy Rhodesia's attempt to break
loose from Britain without a settlement in 1970, and would surely bring another
long, bloody struggle with Soviet support. It is a formula to increase Soviet
influence in southern Africa when the tide could be turned.  Nor would allied
unity hold.

The dilemma of course is South Africa's; it wants to forestall attacks on its
system of apartheid in every possible way. In a courageous speech in
Johannesburg last fall the former World Bank president, Robert McNamara, said
bluntly that without real change South Africa would ''be as great a threat to
the peace of the world in the 1990's as the Middle East is today.''

Mr. McNamara said the American people would not support the South African
Government ''if it is confronted by militant opposition from those who condemn
apartheid - even if the withholding of U.S. support carries with it the risk
that South Africa will fall within the Soviet sphere of influence.''

He suggested an ingenious way to make the message clear before it is too late.
South Africa, he noted, could retaliate by withholding exports of chromium,
manganese, vanadium and platinum, which are essential to Western industry and
defense without much cost to itself. So he proposed Western stockpiling and
contingency planning now to show that the ''mineral weapon'' wouldn't work.

The beauty of the plan is that it isn't punitive, couldn't be circumvented as
sanctions can, wouldn't worry the Pentagon and Western business, yet would
provide a warning South Africa could not ignore. A Senate Foreign Relations
Committee report recommended such a move last October.

Mr. McNamara is a man who learned great lessons from his own mistakes. He came
from the automobile industry to the Pentagon under President Kennedy, to learn
in the Vietnam War that better technology isn't enough to win and that more
efficiency in a wrong cause isn't wisdom. At the World Bank he learned that
people must be motivated and helped to help themselves.

A Namibian solution would only be a step toward easing the terrible problems of
southern Africa. But it would be a great relief and bring time for South Africa
to face painful changes ahead.  Failure, after coming so near, would assure
future explosions.  Announcement of a stockpile plan now would show U.S.
determination for an agreement, foresight, and the power still to use influence
for justice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ARMS-CUT PLANS: WITHERING CROSSFIRE;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


In the fiscal year ending in September, the Reagan Administration has sought
authority to spend $21 billion on two aircraft carriers, the MX missile system,
B-1B bombers, Trident submarines and cruise missiles. Yet, if Congress
eliminated these requests, actual outlay savings would be only $3.5 billion,
according to the Congressional Budget Office. This points up the fundamental
trap facing Congress as it grapples with the military budget to reduce this
year's estimated Federal deficit of $175 billion.

To chop the Pentagon's portion of this, Congress has the choice of cutting
either military readiness or modernization, or some of both.  White House and
Pentagon officials continue to insist that President Reagan will stand by his
requests and that the blood of any cuts will be on Congressional hands.

If Congress wants to make a dent in actual outlays this year and next, there is
little choice but to cut back on training, spare parts, ammunition, fuel and the
like. With such trims, Congressional experts expect a savings of $5 billion to
$8 billion, no more, in the Reagan request of $215 billion in outlays for the
fiscal year 1983.

If Congress is more worried about the growth in future outlays, it would have to
cut budget authority or permission to spend in the future on big-ticket items
like the MX. Congress has never before eliminated major weapons programs. Thus
far, Congressional committees are making reductions of about $25 billion in the
Reagan Administration budget request of $258 billion, mostly by bookkeeping
postponements.

According to the Office of Management and Budget, military spending will jump
from $213 billion this fiscal year to $365 billion in the fiscal year 1987. For
five years, beginning this year and ending in 1987, the Administration will ask
for authority to spend $1,700 billion and actually spend $1,500 billion.

Thus, Congress faces the problem of dealing with a large Pentagon budget and an
immense Federal deficit now and a far larger Pentagon budget and uncertain
deficit in the future.

Legislators are seeking to skirt the pitfalls of slashing military readiness and
fighting modernization and putting the monkey back on the Administration.

Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska who is chairman of the Appropriations
Subcommittee on Defense, calls for a reduction in plans to expand the number of
tactical aircraft and ships. He has not projected savings from this and has not
been able to get any help from the Pentagon in seeing how much might be saved.

Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin who is a member of the Armed
Services Committee, is about to unveil a plan for dealing with what he calls
''the procurement bulge.'' The plan would mandate an arbitrary ceiling of a 10
percent increase in procurement funds after inflation for this year and for
unexpended funds in the last two years, as against the Reagan average of about
12.5 percent a year.

Senator Ernest Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina and ranking member of the
Budget Committee, proposes going further and setting an overall arbitrary limit
of 3 percent growth in Pentagon spending.  This compares with 5 percent for the
Carter Administration and 7 percent for Mr. Reagan. The responsibility for
cutting specific accounts within the ceiling would fall on the Adminstration.

Some older hands on Capitol Hill who have been through Pentagon budget cycles
say all of the old disputes on cutting are coming to the fore again.

Past efforts by liberals to target and defeat major weapons systems have always
failed. Past efforts by more moderate legislators to seek arbitrary cuts have
not fared much better.

On the big items of the 1970's, the antiballistic missile system and the B-1
bomber, for example, Presidents repeatedly used two strong cards against cuts.
One was that the weapon was a bargaining chip in arms control talks with Moscow.
Not many legislators could resist this. Those who could had to contend with the
fact that eliminating the weapons meant losing jobs and factories in their
districts.

Again today, prime contractors and subcontractors for the MX and the B-1B bomber
are in most Congressional districts. It is standard Pentagon procedure to spread
the wealth where weapons species may be imperiled.

On efforts to cut military spending across the board, those who sought big cuts
were disappointed. They argued that military spending had to be cut to collar
inflation caused by years of financing the Vietnam War without raising taxes,
and that long-neglected domestic priorities had to be attended to. But from 1971
to 1981, the largest single cut Congress made in Pentagon outlays was about 6
percent. In most years, reductions in outlays averaged only about $2.5 billion,
despite the fact that the public mood in the early 1970's was seen to be
anti-Pentagon.

Administration officials and legislators now see the public mood as shifting.
But it is not clear whether the mood is more antideficit and pro-domestic
programs than anti-Pentagon. The consensus, including many liberals, remains
that the United States needs to increase military spending. The issue for most
is by how much.

Another factor is most Democratic Presidential hopefuls have been careful not to
take anti-defense positions.  The prevailing view among Administration officials
and legislators is that Pentagon outlays will not be cut significantly or
sensibly unless Congress and the Adminstration work together on the enterprise.
The other part of the prevailing view is that they won't.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 8, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
U.S. Reported to Oppose Fast Cleanup of Dioxin

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 181 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 7


Officials at the Environmental Protection Agency have decided against ordering
an emergency cleanup of suburban St. Louis residential areas contaminated with
dioxins, sources at the agency said tonight.

It could not be learned whether residents of the two contaminated sites in
Imperial, Mo., would be relocated while agency officials carried out what they
called a ''planned removal'' of contaminated soil. Sources said no timetable was
set for the planned removal.

The sources said Rita Lavelle, the agency's assistant administrator for solid
waste and emergency response, based the decision on test results from more than
350 soil samples from the area contaminated for the last eight years with
dioxin, a toxic contaminant of the Vietnam-era defoliant Agent Orange that is
believed to be one of the most dangerous chemical made.

Sources said many of the samples still show high levels of dioxin contamination.
The chemical is considered dangerous at detectable levels in the range of a few
parts per trillion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 8, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Hayden Takes Coast Office

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 65 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif., Dec. 7


Tom Hayden, the Chicago 7 defendant who led street protests in the 1960's
against the Vietnam War, has taken office as a State Assemblyman. The
42-year-old Democrat, representing a Santa Monica district, took the oath Monday
for his first elected office from Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. in opening day
ceremonies for California's 1983-84 Legislature.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 8, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

LANGUAGE BARRIER IS THWARTING YOUNG VIETNAMESE IMMIGRANTS IN ELMHURST

BYLINE: By DENA KLEIMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1560 words


She stays up half the night copying over the notes she took in class, hoping the
repetition alone will help her absorb the English.  She keeps long lists of
vocabulary words and has not missed a day of school since she began. She gets
all her assignments done early - including the report on ''Death of a
Salesman,'' but after reading the play at least four times, she is still not
sure who the salesman is. And Khan Duong, who is 20 years old, is failing at
Newtown High School.  There are few at Newtown, in Elmhurst, Queens, who know
about Miss Duong - how she is already in charge of a household of five, that in
addition to school she works stuffing Chinese-style steam buns in a factory and
practices the piano two hours a day instead of eating lunch.

Few know about her arrival here -how she and her cousins set off in a small boat
three years ago from Vietnam, leaving their parents behind, -and that today they
live on their own. Most at school only know that Miss Duong, who gave herself
the name ''Matina'' because she thought it sounded American, is having trouble
with English.

The Root of Many Problems

Yet even those who have been in her class 40 minutes a day, five days a week, do
not understand the scope of the problems linked to her troubles learning English
- her fear of getting lost on the subway, the loneliness of being unable to make
friends, the frustration of missing jokes.

Hers is not a unique story for Newtown High School, or for anywhere else in
Elmhurst, the city's most ethnically diverse neighborhood, where the struggle to
understand English is often among the most baffling challenges to newcomers to
this country. What makes her story and that of her cousins different, however,
is that they are so young and are facing this challenge entirely on their own.

''Nobody teach you,'' said Miss Duong. ''Find out by yourself.'' Miss Duong and
her cousins live in a cramped but tidy two-bedroom apartment. Three of the
cousins sleep on mattresses on the floor. The living room serves as
entertainment center, dining room and study hall, organized so that each of the
cousins has a desk facing away from the television set.

Long Journey, Changed Lives

It is quite different from the homes they lived in north of Saigon, children of
well-to-do parents with businesses and live-in help.  There was little in their
childhood to prepare them for their journey to America, which included 45 days
on a ship without a chair or a bed, and often no water, sitting in a tiny space
and seeing women in the throes of childbirth alongside those who were dying.
There was little, too, in their past to prepare them for their lives here.

''I die already,'' Miss Duong said. ''Now I am reborn again.'' The five cousins,
who range in age from 12 to 22, spend much of their time together. Since they
are afraid to go outside at night, they remain indoors even on weekends. Because
money is tight, they rarely get to Manhattan and have been to a movie only once
in three years. Ashamed of their English, they do not talk to their neighbors.

''We don't know anyone,'' said Miss Duong, who believes she and her cousins are
among the few foreigners around. The irony is that almost everyone else in the
building and many in her school are newcomers to this country, too.

All Five Contribute

Lac Hua, 22, the eldest of the cousins, earns the money to pay the bulk of the
family's expenses - including the $453 a month they pay for rent - by driving a
truck. All five contribute for food, including Vinh Hua, 12, and his sister
Thuong Hua, 19, who receive public assistance.

Since Vinh, who came here at the age of 9, is the only one who does not hold
even a part-time job, he is also responsible for dusting the floor, changing the
water in the fish tank and doing the wash.

Spend an evening with this young family, and one is moved by their energy and
sense of structure. Miss Duong and Miss Hua do the cooking. Vinh washes the
dishes. Ky Trung, 17, the fifth cousin, scrubs the pots. They sit in a circle
and have dinner together as a family - American or Vietnamese specialties
ranging from spaghetti to intricately spiced rice, but always with chopsticks,
even when the menu features ''Shake and Bake'' chicken.

Then at about 9 o'clock, the activity comes to a halt and it is time for study
until 1 in the morning.  '' 'Invisible,' I don't know what that means,'' Miss
Duong said the other night, picking up her assignment: the prologue to
''Invisible Man'' by Ralph Ellison. She reached for a dictionary, but found no
help. She asked Miss Hua, who is also a senior at Newtown and is doing better
than Miss Duong. But Miss Hua shrugged her shoulders.

School Time Running Out

''I study but still get low mark,'' said Miss Duong, who has already been at the
high school three years and is afraid that unless her English improves soon she
may be denied a diploma.

Under state law, students are entitled to a free public education until the age
of 21. While she would be eligible for alternative academic programs, this may
be the last year she can graduate from a regular high school.

''If I miss now, then what?'' said Miss Duong, adding that in Vietnam she
received high marks.  Matthew M. Mandery, the principal at Newtown High, said
that Miss Duong is an intelligent, eager student whose ability in subjects other
than English is equal to that of other high school students.  While individual
teachers have tried over the years to help her with English, he said, the school
is simply not equipped to provide personal tutors.

''I don't know what it's all about,'' she said the other day, close to tears,
looking over an English examination for which she had studied half the night and
on which she had received a 40.

It was a test on ''topic sentences.'' In the first section she was to improve
sentences given by the teacher by making them more specific, and in the second
part she was to craft sentences around a particular word.

'Having a Job Is Her Lucky'

In the first part, for example, given the sentence, ''She felt happy and
carefree,'' Miss Duong changed it to ''Having a job is her lucky.'' Given ''Five
men robbed the corner bank,'' She changed it to ''It took all the money gone
always.'' And given ''At last the birthday presents have arrived,'' she changed
it to ''George Washington's birthday is on March 17.''

For the second part, composing a sentence around a word, Miss Duong used the
word ''clock'' to write ''My clock is getting troubles.'' For ''speed,'' she
wrote ''Mr. Smith drive over speed.'' For ''deciding,'' she wrote ''She was
deciding to college.''

Miss Duong says there is only one thing she can imagine doing with her life -
becoming a pianist. Practicing is the only activity, she said, that gives her
pleasure - and she does it religiously for two hours at the end of the school
day.

She has had no piano teacher since she left Vietnam, so she teaches herself,
borrowing music from a classmate and practicing Bach and Mozart on one of the
upright pianos in the school's practice rooms.

''I always imagine I be piano teacher,'' said Miss Duong. The trouble is she has
no piano at home, and once she finishes school, she will have no place to
practice.

New Links With Family

Miss Duong has not seen her mother or father since she left Vietnam. Until two
months ago, she had not heard from them for more than a year and had become
concerned about their well-being.

She has recently learned, however, that her parents and three brothers have
reached Frankfurt. She wonders if she will be able to save money to visit them,
Her cousins do not know if they will ever have that possibility.

''I miss my mother,'' said Miss Hua, whose mother is Miss Duong's sister.  Miss
Hua said she writes to her mother from time to time - the letters take weeks to
arrive. But it is hard to capture what she has seen, what life in New York is
really like.

Her letters only hint at how difficult life has been, how precarious her
progress at school, how she has changed her first name and now answers almost
exclusively to ''Jennifer.'' And that is the least of it.

Brother Is Found Dead

What she has never told her mother is that she and her brother, Vinh, went off
one day last year to the beach and that when they returned, they discovered
their 15-year-old brother, Hung, dead on the living-room sofa of a blood clot in
his brain.

When she writes to her mother, Miss Hua manufactures stories about Hung. She has
said that he is on a trip to Philadelphia, doing well at school, working at a
new job.

''I will tell her when I see her,'' said Miss Hua, who hopes one day that she
will be able to send for her mother. ''When she sees we are O.K.....''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Khan Duong with friends

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 8, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

G.B. KISTIAKOWSKY IS DEAD AT 82; BOMB PIONEER SOUGHT NUCLEAR BAN

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 492 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Dec. 7


Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky, who worked on the developing the first atomic bomb
and later became a leading advocate of banning nuclear weapons, died today at
home at the age of 82, Harvard University announced.

Dr. Kistiakowsky, the Abbott and James Lawrence Professor of Chemistry at
Harvard, had been ill with cancer, but no cause of death was announced.

After witnessing the first nuclear bomb explosion at Alamagordo, N.M., on July
16, 1945, he was quoted as saying: ''I am sure that at the end of the world - in
the last millisecond of the Earth's existence - the last human will see what we
saw.''

Science Adviser to Eisenhower

He served as science adviser to President Eisenhower from July 1959 to the end
of the President's term, in 1961. He served on the advisory board to the United
States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency from 1962 to 1969 but quit as a
foreign policy adviser in 1967 in a dispute with the Administration of President
Johnson over the Vietnam War.

He was chairman of the Council for a Livable World, a Washington and
Boston-based group seeking to reduce the danger of nuclear war through arms
control.

Dr. Kistiakowsky was sharply critical of President Reagan's foreign policy,
saying that the President ''has this one idea fixed: that we must stand up to
the Soviet Union.''

Dr. Kistiakowski was born Nov. 18, 1900, in Kiev in the Ukraine.  His father was
a law professor.  After education in private schools, he became a soldier in the
anti-Communist White Russian Army after the Leninist revolution. He fled the
Soviet Union and studied at the University of Berlin, where he earned his Ph.D.
He came to the United States in the 1926 and was naturalized in 1933.

He joined Harvard in 1930, after four years at Princeton University, and became
professor of chemistry in 1938. He was chairman of the department from 1947 to
1950 and became professor emeritus in 1971.

He became a division chief in the National Defense Research Committee in World
War II. James B. Conant, a president of Harvard who was also a chemist,
persuaded him to become chief of the explosives division at Los Alamos, N.M.,
during the development of the atom bomb in 1944-46.

Designed Atom Bomb Detonation

Dr. Kistiakowsky designed the arrangement of conventional explosives needed to
detonate the atom bomb. For his work, he received the President's Medal of
Merit. He once showed the medal to officials in his hometown of Lincoln, Mass.,
after they questioned his qualifications to dynamite tree stumps on his
property.

He is survived by his wife, Elaine, and a daughter, Vera Fischer, by a former
wife, Hildegard Moebius, from whom he was divorced in 1942.

Services will be private, according to friends of the family.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dr. George Kistiakowsky

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 9, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. RAISES ISSUE OF ETHIOPIAN TOXIC ARMS IN U.N.

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 8


The United States called today for an investigation of reports that chemical
warfare was waged this year in Ethiopia, whose Soviet-aided armed forces have
been fighting Eritrean rebels.

Speaking in the General Assembly's Political and Security Committee during a
debate on chemical and bacteriological weapons, Kenneth L. Adelman of the United
States said the reports were ''as yet unproven.''

But he called them ''disturbing harbingers of possible repetition elsewhere of
the pattern we see in Afghanistan and Southeast Asia.'' He said they were ''the
first indication that use of these noxious weapons may have spread into Africa
as well.''

Later, the committee voted, 63 to 20 with 31 abstentions, for a resolution that
would have the General Assembly declare that there was ''circumstantial
evidence'' suggesting that chemical weapons might have been used against
insurgents in Southern Asia. The draft was backed by Western and many
third-world countries and was opposed by the Soviet Union and its allies.

The motion in effect endorsed a report issued by four United Nations specialists
on Monday after they had conducted an investigation at the urging of the United
States into charges that chemical weapons had been used in Afghanistan by the
Soviet Union and in Cambodia and Laos by Vietnamese troops. The report said that
while the group of experts could not state that the allegations had been
''proven, nevertheless it could not disregard circumstantial evidence suggestive
of the possible use of some sort of toxic chemical substances in some
instances.''

Officials in Washington said Mr. Adelman's speech today marked the first time
that the United States had officially cited allegations that chemical weapons
had been used in Ethiopia. Telephone calls to diplomats in the Ethiopian mission
were not returned.

Previous American discussions of chemical warfare included a charge by Secretary
of State George P. shultz on Nov. 29 that the Soviet Union and its allies were
continuing such activities in Laos, Cambodia and Afghanistan.

Mr. Adelman, the American delegate, said in his speech: ''There are reports of
chemical warfare in Ethiopia at Turukruk near the Sudanese border on Feb. 15
and, more recently, in an attack 37 survivors of which were found by a
Western-trained doctor to exhibit persuasive symptoms of nerve gas. We believe
these allegations, as yet unproven, deserve investigion.''

Neither the precise location of Turukruk nor the site of the second incident was
specified.  The officials in Washington said that, ever since 1980, the United
States had been looking into reports charging that Ethiopia had been engaging in
chemical warfare against the rebels who are fighting for Eritrean independence.

The Eritrean rebels said earlier this year that Ethiopian forces had used
chemical weapons. It was not clear whether the reports cited by Mr. Adelman
concerning the Turukruk incident had come from the rebels or from other sources
as well.

One official in Washington said it was not clear what delivery mechanism was
used in the two reported incidents, but a diplomat here who is familiar with the
area said Soviet-made artillery shells containing nerve gas had been involved.

The Eritrean Popular Liberation Front, one of Eritrean rebel groups, has
contended in the past that the Ethiopian forces have fired artillery shells
containing nerve gas.

During today's debate, Vladimir V. Shustov of the Soviet Union said the United
States had been the first nation to use toxic agents on a mass scale, in
Vietnam.

Maligna Saignavong of Laos said there was still evidence of American use of
Agent Orange and other chemical agents in Southeast Asia.

Vo Anh Tuan of Vietnam said congenital malformations had been observed as a
result of the use of chemical agents during the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 9, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 845 words


Udall: A Matter of Health

N ow that Senator Edward M.  Kennedy has left a liberal vacancy in the 1984
Presidential field, Representative Morris K. Udall of Arizona, who is 60 years
old and has Parkinson's disease, is considering whether to make what almost
surely would be his last bid for the Democratic Presidential nomination that he
lost to Jimmy Carter six years ago.

Many of his old campaign troops, still infected with the spirit of '76, are
waiting for the word and hoping it comes. Their memories of New Hampshire and
other snow-covered battlegrounds have taken on something of a romantic glaze,
with one Democratic Congressman saying, ''A Udall candidacy would give us a
chance to atone for our sins in '76.''

Mr. Udall's decision, according to one of his political advisers, will turn on
an assessment of his health. To satisfy himself that he is physically up to the
ordeal of a long campaign and to settle the health question as a political
issue, Mr. Udall will submit to an examination by three or four leading
specialists on Parkinson's disease later this month. If they confirm what his
personal physician has been telling him, that he can expect at least 15 years of
normal living, the Congressman will gorge himself on briefing books on national
issues over the holidays and probably announce his candidacy early next year. It
the health issue then arises, doubters will be referred to the medical reports.

Earlier this year, Mr. Udall, even then dreaming of another chance, committed
himself to a heavy schedule of campaign appearances for other Democratic
Congressional candidates. His purpose, aides acknowledge, was to test his
stamina. ''He was at his best in the morning and into the afternoon,'' said one
political strategist already in the Udall camp. By early evening, he showed
signs of fatigue, and by 10 P.M., he was in bed.

Even as they wait for the expert opinion of the doctors, Mr.  Udall's advisers
have made one key political decision about 1984: Their man, if he runs, will
skip the widely scattered Iowa precinct caucuses and concentrate instead on what
they view as the manageable and politically important New Hampshire primary, the
nation's first, which comes seven days later.
A Touch of Harvard

T he Western accent of the Reagan Administration is about to be tempered a bit
by an infusion of Ivy League education at the highest ranks of the executive
branch. Starting today, part of the White House becomes a classroom where
professors from Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government will
hold the first of six seminars to sharpen the managerial skills and political
senses of more than 200 Administration officials who have signed up for the
sessions.

Jonathan Moore, director of the Kennedy School's Institute of Politics, said
this collaboration between the White House and academia was highly unusual, as
far as he could determine. The idea for the seminars was conceived two years ago
when Mr. Moore, a former Government official, was advising Edwin Meese 3d,
counselor to the President, on transition matters.

The seminars, according to a memorandum written in language that both students
and teachers can appreciate, will use case studies to focus on the ''context of
public management, managing agency operations in a political context and
managing the political environment.''

Although there is nothing cheap about a Harvard education, the Administration
figures it is getting a bargain. The seminars will cost about $85,000, which
comes to about $425 a student.
Memorial Mud Problem

P eople here are again talking about a quagmire in connection with Vietnam, but
this time it is the squishy sod and oozing mud around the recently dedicated
Vietnam war memorial on the Mall. Bob Doubek of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Fund said there has been a problem of standing water around the memorial since
the topsoil and sod were put down four weeks before the dedication last month.

''It's not a drainage problem,'' he said. ''It's more of a surface permeability
problem. It was dry all summer. I'm surprised it has held up as well as it has,
considering that 150,000 people walked on it the week of the dedication.''

The National Park Service is ripping up the mushy sod to determine why the water
refuses to seep into the ground. Part of the problem, Mr. Doubek suggested,
could be the plastic mesh that was placed between the top soil and the sod to
strengthen the root structure of the grass.

Meanwhile, after a heavy rain the other day, volunteers assisting visitors in
locating the names of the dead spent part of their time scrubbing splattered mud
from the memorial's black marble walls.  Phil Gailey Warren Weaver Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 10, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Forgotten Americans

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


A sign in a Veterans Administration Hospital reads, ''The Price of Freedom Is
Visible Here,'' and the U.S.O. has not forgotten the men and women who have
fought for the nation. The friendly smile of a volunteer and the red, white and
blue U.S.O. banner make the Vietnam veterans in the 12 V.A. hospitals in the
metropolitan area as well as the servicemen from World War I and World War II
feel that their sacrifices are appreciated.

Tax-deductible gifts may be sent to the U.S.O. of Metropolitan New York, 110
East 42d Street, Suite 1812, New York, N.Y. 10017.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CLOUT OF THE 'NEW' BOB DOLE

BYLINE: By Timothy B. Clark

SECTION: Section 6; Page 65, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6615 words


When I first got to know Bob Dole,'' says George McGovern, ''he was tough and
mean.'' That was back in the early 1970's, when Senator Robert J. Dole was a
most acerbic Republican Party chairman and Senator McGovern was a most liberal
Democratic candidate for President. Today, the two men count each other as
friends. ''He has changed,'' says McGovern - not only on the personal and
psychological levels, he adds, but in his ''approach to Government policy.''

The transformation of Bob Dole suggested by this unlikely friendship - the
one-time political gunslinger turned into a defender of the poor, the hard-line
conservative turned toward mainstream Republicanism - has taken on special
significance of late. For the Senator from Kansas has become one of the most
powerful and effective politicians in Washington. His political means and ends
are shaping the key legislation of the day.

Earlier this year, as chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, he almost
single-handedly engineered a huge tax increase in the face of a recalcitrant
President and Congress - and managed to sell it as a reform measure aimed at
collecting money from tax cheats and from little-taxed businesses.

In the months ahead, with a Federal budget deficit that could approach $200
billion, the 59-year-old Senator and his committee will be chief among those to
determine whose ox will be gored if Congress decides to further raise taxes or
cut spending. Next month, he and his committee will be holding hearings on two
of the hottest issues before Congress. They will have to find answers to Social
Security's financing problems - cutting benefits, increasing taxes or both. And
they will seek to balance domestic needs against the principles of free trade as
a world in recession scrambles for international business.

Dole's post usually receives little public notice, even though the committee's
purview includes programs that will spend $435 billion in this fiscal year and
every detail of the tax code, from levies on gasoline and liquor to corporate
depreciation allowances to personal tax deductions. Tax action is traditionally
in the Ways and Means Committee of the House of Representatives, where revenue
measures normally originate. But with the House held by the Democrats, it has
fallen to the Republican-controlled Senate to confront the practical
consequences of the President's pledge to ''get the Government off our backs.''
And Bob Dole dominates the revenue machinery of the Senate. More than Howard H.
Baker Jr., the majority leader - more than anyone except perhaps the President
himself -Dole has initiated, manipulated and controlled the measures that
constitute the fiscal posture of the United States Government. Indeed, Dole's
performance in the job, coupled with the changes in his personal and political
style, have made him one of a handful of Republican members of Congress who can
alter the direction of Administration policy.

All of which has proven to be something of a double-edged sword for Senator
Dole, who has Presidential ambitions he does not bother to hide. On the one
hand, the role of tax raiser and budget cutter is not calculated to increase a
candidate's political support. On the other hand, his responsibilities and
visibility have been much enhanced.

Senator Dole spent the month of October on a brutal schedule of appearances in
21 states, campaigning for Republican candidates. But the election results spell
trouble for the Finance Committee chairman. On Social Security particularly, he
faces the prospect of writing legislation next year even less popular than the
tax in-creases and budget cuts of 1982, and there will be fewer Republicans in
Congress to give him a helping hand.

Bob Dole's political roots are never far below the surface, and they are
Populist roots. His recent attacks, for example, on pathologists who make a
killing on Medicare, or lawyers and doctors who manipulate tax returns to
provide themselves opulent retirement plans -followed rapidly by his pleadings
for ''the guy who's struggling to get along on food stamps'' -are echoes of the
Populist revolt that swept the Kansas plains nearly a century ago. During the
depression of the 1890's, the state produced the likes of ''Sockless Jerry''
Simpson, who spent three terms in Congress as an implacable foe of Wall Street.
And even after Populism faded, men like Alfred M. Landon, Republican
Presidential nominee in 1936, could be heard plugging for the ''little fellow''
in the grip of the ''interests.''

Dole grew up in Russell, a town of 5,500 people surrounded by endless plains of
wheat, and it was a shoulder-to-the-wheel, nofrills childhood for Bob, his
brother and two sisters. His father, Doran, who died in 1975, managed a grain
elevator; his mother, Bina, who is now 79, sold sewing machines; Bob and his
brother worked at odd jobs, washing cars, digging pipe trenches.

At high school, Bob Dole was captain of the basketball team and he went on to
premedical studies at the University of Kansas. He quit in 1943 to enter the
Army, where he rose to the rank of captain. Twice wounded and twice decorated in
World War II, he was put out of action when he led an infantry charge on a
German machine-gun nest in Italy. His right shoulder was shattered, and he lost
a kidney; doctors at first held little hope for his survival, then predicted he
would never walk again. Dole spent 39 months hospitalized. His friends in
Russell raised funds for special operations, and he stubbornly refused to accept
physical dependency. He squeezed rubber balls constantly to strengthen his
crippled hands, and exercised with home-built gadgets to build up weakened legs
and nearly paralyzed arms.

Dole married Phyllis Holden, a physical therapist, soon after he was discharged
from the hospital in 1948. ''He never had planned to get married,'' she told an
interviewer in 1976. ''He felt so lacking.'' She also observed that much of what
Dole had achieved since the war had been an effort to prove that he could do it
in spite of his handicap. His education, for example: Unable to take lecture
notes because his right hand was permanently crippled, Dole recorded the
lectures and taught himself to write with his left hand, enabling him to
transcribe them. He earned both a bachelor's and a law degree from Washburn
University in Topeka, Kan.

At the age of 27, while still in law school, Dole was elected to the Kansas
Legislature. Two years later, in 1952, he was elected to the first of four terms
as Russell County Attorney and then, in 1960, he ran successfully for a seat in
the House of Representatives. As a campaigner, Dole cut a handsome figure - and
he still does. He stands 6 feet, 1 1/2 inches, and weighs 175 pounds. His dark
eyes are intense, yet they often convey the spirit of a boy who has done
something mischievous.

During his eight years in the House, Dole and most of his Republican colleagues
found themselves in constant and fruitless opposition to the spending programs
advocated by Presidents Kennedy and Johnson. Dole voted against the first of the
big antipoverty programs, in 1964, and against aid to impoverished Appalachia,
subsidies for urban mass-transportation projects and Medicare.  Americans for
Democratic Action gave him a zero approval rating four times during his stay in
the House. His record on civil rights was mixed. For example, he voted for the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965, but against the 1966
bill to ban discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.

It was after Dole's election to the Senate in 1968 that he began to attract
national notice, particularly as a staunch defender of Richard M. Nixon. He
backed his President's policies on Vietnam all the way, and when the Senate
plunged into seven weeks of debate over an amendment to cut off money for
military activities in Cambodia, Dole led the opposition, winning admiration for
his clever tactics if not always for his rhetoric.

Dole's devotion to ''my President,'' as he so often identified him, was
epitomized by his tough defense of the two Nixon nominees to the Supreme Court
who failed to pass muster in the Senate, Judges Clement F. Haynsworth Jr. and G.
Harrold Carswell. He flayed Democrats who were concerned about Carswell's record
on racial issues; Carswell had made a speech supporting white supremacy,
participated in the conversion of a municipal golf course to private ownership
to avoid desegregation and was reported to have behaved with hostility toward
civil-rights workers and lawyers who appeared in his courtroom. In a memorable
moment just before the final vote on Carswell, confronted by uncertainty within
his own party's ranks, Dole strode up and down the center aisle, pointing at
individual Senators and proclaiming: ''I would remind my Republican friends ...
that Richard Nixon was elected President in November 1968, and that with that
election came the right and duty to nominate Justices of the Supreme Court.'' He
then delivered a thinly veiled threat of political retribution. He said he hoped
the President would leave the seat vacant if Carswell was rejected, and take the
case to the American people. ''It may be easier,'' he said, ''to change the
Senate than the United States Supreme Court.''

In reward for this kind of loyalty, Nixon had Bob Dole installed as Republican
national chairman in January 1971; he served in the post for two years. It was
during this period that Dole's attacks on George McGovern for his antiwar stand
escalated markedly as McGovern sought and won the Democratic nomination for the
Presidency. McGovern recalls Dole's labels very well: ''advocate of centralized
power,'' ''left-leaning big spender,'' ''tool of organized labor.'' McGovern
added, ''There was the strong implication that those of us who opposed Nixon's
war policies were giving aid and comfort to the enemy.''

The Nixon campaign was controlled by the White House and operated by the
Committee to Re-elect the President, with Dole and the Republican National
Committee operating on the fringes. He was not privy to Watergate and he chose
not to believe the allegations of illegality and White House cover-ups, actually
drafting a resolution that sought to stop the Senate investigation of the White
House.

Eventually, though, Dole faced the music. George McGovern dates some of the
changes in Dole to that period - a ''first step,'' as he puts it. Says Dole: ''I
was very disillusioned with the White House, the arrogant people who worked
there. We went through purgatory for a while as a party. That, combined with a
very close race for the Senate in 1974, made me think I'd better take a look at
where I was going.'' here was room for improvement. During his first four years
in the Senate, Bob Dole won few popularity contests, with his colleagues or with
his staff. Turnover was high among his aides. Those who knew him spoke of his
''meanness,'' his sarcastic put-downs of other people.

Some of these attributes surfaced dramatically in his 1974 campaign for
re-election to the Senate, a rough battle against a two-term House Democrat,
William R. Roy, a doctor-lawyer from Topeka. Roy built up a comfortable lead by
emphasizing Dole's connections with Nixon and Nixon's connections with
Watergate. Dole exploited his opponent's admission that he had performed a
number of abortions over the years. Dole called Roy an ''abortionist'' who
favored ''abortion on demand,'' though Roy insisted he viewed the operation as
morally repugnant and only occasionally necessary to safeguard the woman's
health. Dole won re-election by a 2 percent margin.

Less than two years later, Dole was on the stump again,this time as Gerald
Ford's running mate. He traveled 65,000 miles through 44 states. ''I'm a one-man
road show,'' he joked. ''President Ford just winds me up and says 'go.' ''

His campaign style, though, was his own. He made much of the feelings of
''lust'' to which Jimmy Carter had admitted in an interview for Playboy
magazine, leaving audiences with the impression that Carter favored lewd
behavior. Then Dole went on to blame the Democrats for all the American wars of
the 20th century. In a debate with Senator Walter F. Mondale, his counterpart on
the Democratic ticket, Dole commented: ''I figured up the other day, if we added
all the killed and wounded in all Democrat wars in this century, it would be
about 1.6 million Americans, enough to fill the city of Detroit.'' The remark
haunted him for the rest of the campaign and added to his reputation as an
unscrupulous partisan.

The Republicans lost the election by a whisker. It was a sobering experience for
Dole. Vice-Presidential candidates are chosen with the idea that they will pull
voters toward the national ticket, but election-day polls suggested that Dole
might actually have cost Ford votes -maybe even enough to deny him election.
Friends of Ford said as much to reporters.  As the 1970's progressed, evidence
of change appeared in Senator Dole. As early as 1974, for example, he voted
against the Republican Administration's plan to slash the antipoverty program -
a program he had opposed at the time of its inception 10 years earlier. That
turnaround may have reflected a new awareness of poverty gained through service
on the Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs, of which McGovern was
chairman. He started as a doubter, both of McGovern and of the committee. Dole
recalls: ''I may have thought McGovern was going too far'' in publicizing hunger
in America, ''looking down the road at some Presidential contest.'' As Dole
concentrated more on the committee's work after the 1972 election, he became
impressed with the case that had been built for Federal foodassistance programs.

Together, McGovern and Dole pushed the Government deeper and deeper into the
nutrition business. There was legislation nearly every year in the 1970's -
fights over expanding food stamps or establishing new programs of school
breakfasts and nutrition supplements for pregnant women and infants. The budget
of the Food and Nutrition Service of the Agriculture Department, which
administers the feeding programs, has now grown to $15 billion, and the agency
estimates that some 38 million people receive nutrition subsidies.

''I've said publicly, and much to the disgust of some of my conservative
friends, that McGovern did a good job in that area,'' Dole says today. The
statement suggests another lesson McGovern taught him - how to work with a
Democrat of distinctly different philosophical outlook. Dole and McGovern were a
team not only on nutrition issues, but also on other issues in the Agriculture
Committee, becoming in the last half of the 1970's the dominant influence on
expensive support programs for Middle Western corn and wheat crops.

The ''new'' Bob Dole continued to surprise. In 1978, he voted with the Democrats
to give people earning from $10,000 to $30,000 larger tax cuts, a move opposed
by the majority of his party. That same year he provided the key vote needed to
gain Senate approval of a proposed constitutional amendment that would give the
District of Columbia voting representation in the House and Senate - once again
a move many Republicans opposed. Dole also won favor among liberals by proposing
a program of catastrophic health insurance to provide families with Government
protection against financial ruin because of extended, expensive illness.

In early 1978, Dole was the featured speaker at an Atlanta meeting of people
interested in recruiting more black candidates to run under the G.O.P. banner.
Applauding the effort, he said that ''Republicans need to make the extra effort
to erase the lingering image of our party as the cadre of the elite, the
wealthy, the insensitive. ...  Our job now is to demonstrate (our) concern to
blacks and others who doubt (our) sincerity.''

Dole's friends and admirers, when asked to explain the change in him, often
point to his personal life - specifically, to his marriage in 1975 to Elizabeth
Hanford, a lawyer 13 years his junior, who was serving as a Republican member of
the Federal Trade Commission. (He obtained a divorce from Phyllis Dole in 1972
after 24 years of marriage and one daughter.)

Elizabeth Dole holds a Phi Beta Kappa key from Duke University and a law degree
and master's in education from Harvard. She is a warm and open person who has
helped chisel some of the rough edges from Dole's personality. Some say she is
politically more liberal than her husband, and that this is reflected in his
increasing advocacy of measures to protect the disadvantaged and in his
exhortations to the Republican Party to broaden its base of support.

Mrs. Dole, herself, denies such influence. The most she will allow is that her
views and those of her husband are mostly ''compatible.'' An Assistant to the
President for Public Liaison, she is a Washington power in her own right. But
she is a Reagan operative, and Dole is determinedly his own man. Only
occasionally do they work in tandem, as when the President came around on Dole's
tax measure this year - Elizabeth Dole helped line up business support for the
legislation.

Dole's physical handicap is another significant factor in his makeup. McGovern
remembers seeing Dole fall in the Senate subway one day, his crippled right arm
unable to break the impact. The pain was obvious and, said McGovern, ''it was a
pitiful sight; he really was handicapped.'' Dole is virtually unable to use his
right hand or arm; he must allow himself one hour to dress each morning. His
concern for others who are handicapped is manifest. He has employed signlanguage
interpreters to enable deaf people to understand his speeches. He gave almost
half of the $66,850 he earned in speaking fees last year to charities for
crippled children, the blind, the retarded and other handicapped people. He has
used his influence in Congress to secure tax breaks and other benefits for the
handicapped.  Says McGovern: ''The handicapped, the children and the elderly, he
puts them all in the same category. The poor and malnourished, too.  Anyone who
has some special situation, Dole cannot resist.'' Elizabeth Dole adds: ''I see
in him concern and sensitivity for people who have suffered adversity no matter
what the source of their problems.''

As for the Senator himself, though he insists he is still a budget cutter, he
allows that ''now that we Republicans have some responsibility, we have to be
very careful before we just go along with people taking off after programs and
saying there is no need for them.'' It was not long after his 1976 debacle that
Bob Dole started building to-ward a run for the Presidency in 1980, and he
looked about for ways to gain some credentials as a foreign-policy expert.  The
defeat of Senator James L. Buckley of New York opened a Republican spot on the
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the United States body that
supervises compliance with the Helsinki accords on human rights. Dole sought the
vacancy, and quickly became one of the most active and conscientious members of
the commission; he now serves as its co-chairman.

Dole also took a leading role in opposing the Panama Canal treaties that were
before the Senate for ratification in 1978. He advocated two amendments to the
treaties, one assuring American defense rights after the year 2000, the other
guaranteeing priority passage for American ships in time of war.

On May 14, 1979, Bob Dole announced his candidacy for the Republican
Presidential nomination. But it was not a well-organized effort, and Dole's
public recognition was not in the same league with that of Reagan and Bush.
What's more, as the new ranking minority member of the Finance Committee, he had
to be on hand for the Senate's prolonged consideration of legislation to tax
windfall profits of oil companies, leaving him little time to chase the
front-runners. He never attracted much of a following and withdrew after
receiving an embarrassing 608 votes in the New Hampshire primary.

Yet Election Day 1980 had its consolations for Dole. He easily won a third term
in the Senate, and enough other Republicans were elected to give the G.O.P.
control of the Senate for the first time in 26 years. He would be chairman of
the Finance Committee, and he knew immediately, as he said later, that this
would mean that he could, ''in effect, direct what may happen in tax policy.''
Two weeks after the election, he told an interviewer: ''It seems to me that
we've got an opportunity here, and that's what it is, an opportunity. It's not a
lifetime lease. If we can demonstrate in the next couple of years that we're not
turning our backs on the poor and still adopt some changes that reduce the
growth of Federal spending and get inflation down, then we're going to be a
force to be reckoned with.''

But Dole was worried about the Reagan economic program, fearing that huge tax
cuts unmatched by spending reductions would create unmanageable budget deficits.
He kept his doubts muffled and watched uneasily as the Administration and House
Democrats engaged in a bidding match that added billions of dollars in tax
reductions.  Finally, Dole himself entered the lists with a measure to keep
taxpayers from being pushed into higher brackets by inflation. It was a major
piece of tax reform, but it was likely to cost the Federal Government billions
of dollars in tax revenues over the next decade.  President Reagan achieved
wonders with Congress in 1981, but Dole saw storm warnings ahead. ''The year of
testing,'' he predicted, would be 1982. ''That's when things are going to get
tough.'' Discontent with the impact of Reaganomics - in Congress, on Wall Street
and elsewhere -began to surface almost immediately after the 1981 tax bill was
enacted.

But it wasn't until last February, when the Administration unveiled its budget
for fiscal 1983, that the pot really began to boil. No one believed the
Administration's claim that deficits could be kept just below the feared $100
billion mark. For weeks, negotiations between the White House and Congress
stumbled along in search of some formula to cut spending and raise taxes that
would be acceptable to the President. Finally the Democratic leadership in the
House tried to put through its own budget resolution.

When the House failed in its first attempt, Bob Dole declared that he and his
Finance Committee had no intention of standing by. ''If the House doesn't act,
there's no reason we shouldn't,'' he said.  ''Our responsibility, since we are
in the majority, is to lead. We can't wait for the House.''

In fact, Dole had not been waiting for the House, the Senate, the Administration
or anyone else in advocating changes he thought were needed in the tax code. In
January he suggested a ''minimum tax'' to insure that companies pay at least 15
percent of profits - and he suggested that a similar tax should be applied to
rich individuals, as well. In March, he introduced legislation aimed at
improving Federal tax collections by greatly increasing reporting requirements
from companies paying out dividends, capital gains and interest, and by beefing
up the Internal Revenue Service's enforcement capabilities. Then he announced,
during a speech in Wichita, that he wanted to modify or repeal the so-called
leasing rule, which allows companies to sell tax breaks they can't use to other
companies. He said the change would be retroactive to the date of the speech - a
piece of news that stopped many a leasing negotiation dead in its tracks. Among
the constituencies adversely affected by the proposals offered by Dole and the
young lawyers on the staff of his Finance Committee were the insurance industry,
large defense contractors and professionals who incorporate themselves in order
to establish fulsome retirement incomes. Even pathologists were threatened as
Dole sought to trim the huge fees they were billing to Medicare. (''A
pathologist in Kansas offered to give me a free autopsy,'' the Senator said.
''The trouble is, he wants to do it now.'')

The Dole approach guaranteed that he would have to fight many battles to reach
his goal of increasing Federal receipts by almost $100 billion over the next
three years, and many doubted that he could succeed with his package of
revenue-raising ''cats and dogs.'' Said Representative Barber B. Conable Jr.,
Republican of New York: ''It's hard to shepherd such a herd over all the
obstacles. I didn't think he could do it.''

For one thing, Dole's plans for new and larger taxes clearly held little appeal
for the President. They particularly angered two groups of Reagan supporters,
supply-side theorists and corporate managers.

The supply-side theorists, those who insisted that the previous year's tax cuts
would eventually bring the economy to good health, opposed Dole on principle.
Corporate leaders, as represented by their trade associations and lobbyists,
came running to protest Dole's proposals to increase business taxes. But the
Washington lobbyists who get paid upward of $200 an hour for providing access to
the likes of Bob Dole and other key tax policymakers found themselves shut out.
He ridiculed them as the ''truly greedy,'' a play on the President's pledge not
to hurt the ''truly needy,'' and he went so far as to criticize them by name.
When Charls E. Walker, a former Deputy Secretary of the Treasury, suggested
postponing individual income-tax reductions to trim the deficit, Dole took him
to task: ''The Charlie Walkers of this world say, 'Don't worry about the
individuals, defer their tax cuts and take care of business.' ''

Of course, Dole was playing to a larger audience, trying to convince the public
that he and the Republican Party stood for equitable tax and spending programs.
Yet if Dole was to succeed, he had to cope with the close-in political realities
of the situation.  For one thing, he could not afford to alienate Ronald Reagan,
and in fact Dole eventually succeeded in convincing the President to join
forces. For another, Dole would have to tread carefully within the 20-person
Finance Committee, particularly with those 10 members who were running for
re-election.

It wasn't easy. At one point early in July, a majority of the committee voted
against one of the linchpins of Dole's measure - a requirement that banks and
companies withhold taxes when paying out interest and dividends. Dole recessed
the panel immediately and called a caucus of the Republicans.

He was angry that two of the Republicans had taken him by surprise by voting
against withholding, which he hoped would produce more than $10 billion in
revenues. But Dole controlled his anger and listened as Senator John H. Chafee,
of Rhode Island, who had indicated his opposition weeks before and thus was not
a Dole target, set forth his arguments. When Chafee concluded by announcing that
thousands of campaign brochures advertising his views on withholding had been
printed, Dole interrupted. ''Have you distributed any yet?'' he asked with a
grin. ''We'll pay to have them reprinted.'' The line got a laugh and broke the
tension. Before the caucus was over, Dole had shepherded the two straying
Republican votes back into the fold.

Chafee analyzes Dole's success as chairman in these terms: ''First, he goes out
of his way to keep his fellow committee members informed about what is going on,
in frequent small meetings in his office and in a room off the Senate floor.

''Second, although he knew what he wanted in the tax bill, he made sure that all
options were laid out, so no one would feel he was running a steamroller
operation.'' Dole's staff prepared a list of 34 possible revenue-raising ''cats
and dogs,'' and carefully gathered the views of the Finance Committee
Republicans on all of them. Dole paid close attention to the particular
interests of committee members so that he could trade small favors in return for
votes on larger tax increases. He also was willing to compromise when faced by
substantial opposition. Senator David F. Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota,
for example, at one point lined up a dozen committee supporters for a proposal
to make only minor changes in the taxleasing provisions of the 1981 tax law,
while Dole was still pushing for their total repeal. Dole agreed to soften his
stand on leasing and Durenberger, one of the two Republicans who unexpectedly
had opposed Dole on the withholding issue, was persuaded to change his mind.

Chafee also says that Dole ''keeps deep in his hip pocket something that will
win the cause for him when it seems to be going the other way.'' An example that
astonished other senators - ''as smooth a legislative operation as any I've
seen,'' says Chafee -came in the early hours of the morning of July 23, as the
Senate was blearily concluding its marathon final session on the tax
legislation.

Dole had included in the Finance Committee bill a provision designed to improve
the collection of taxes on the tips received by waiters and waitresses. The
Internal Revenue Service estimates that only 16 percent of tip income is
reported. So the Finance Committee voted to require restaurant owners to
estimate for the I.R.S. a portion of the tip income of its employees. The
national association representing restaurant owners, upset over the added
bookkeeping the measure would require, lobbied strongly against the provision,
and its view prevailed on the Senate floor. Dole's bill was stripped of more
than $2 billion in anticipated revenues.

While lobbyists for the restaurant owners slept securely that July morning, Dole
was at work. Under the rules of the Senate, he could not offer an amendment that
had not been considered by the Finance Committee, but - to the astonishment of
Senate veterans - he did obtain a ruling from the parliamentarian that the
committee itself could advance an amendment. Dole quickly polled committee
members on a proposal to curtail the deductibility of business entertainment, a
variation of the Democrats' ''three-martini-lunch'' reform last seen in the
Carter Administration, and it passed the Senate easily. (''If you can't take the
income out of the restaurants,'' says Dole sardonically, ''then you can just
take the customers out of them.'') In the final version of the tax bill, the
tip-reporting requirement he had sought to begin with was restored, and the
three-martini-lunch provision was dropped.

Early in August, Dole persuaded Reagan to take an active role in pushing the tax
measure through the House, and by Aug. 19 it had been approved by both houses
and sent to the President. Dole believes that its bow in the direction of
controlling deficits contributed to the stock-market boom in early fall and to
falling interest rates. He also claims it accomplished the political purpose he
sought, to cope with the Democrats' charge that the Republican program was
unfair. He claimed - optimistically, as it turned out - that the Democratic
claim ''has been erased since the President's strong support of the tax bill.''

The comment was vintage Dole, demonstrating the style that enabled him to
engineer the huge tax increase despite President Reagan's distaste for taxes.
The President never had to concede that the Administration had changed
directions on tax policy. Dole named the bill the Tax Equity and Fiscal
Responsibility Act of 1982 and he sold it to Mr. Reagan as a measure to close
tax loopholes, rather than as a tax increase.

What gave the approach special elan was that, to a degree, it was true. In the
Senate, for example, Ted Kennedy announced that he would vote for the conference
report on the bill because it contained many tax reforms he had advocated for
years. He and eight other Democrats helped provide the five-vote margin by which
the bill passed.

Dole's ability to find compromise positions, with his President and with the
Democratic opposition, is pointed to by his admirers as an important element of
the ''new'' Dole.

He walked that tightrope, for example, when the Finance Committee dealt with
Administration proposals for cuts in Medicare, Medicaid and welfare programs. He
managed to scale back those trims, especially in the health area, where he has
become one of the Senate's most knowledgeable members. Regarding Medicaid, for
example, the Administration was promoting the idea that the low-income
beneficiaries of the program should be required to make a small payment each
time they visited a doctor, on the theory that this would discourage unnecessary
visits and cut costs. But the Children's Defense Fund, with Dole's help, battled
successfully to exempt pregnant women and children, arguing that preventive
health care was particularly important for them. As for Medicaid, Dole accepted
just over $2 billion of the Administration's proposed $8 billion in reduced
outlays over the next three years.

When the Voting Rights Act was up for extension, the Justice Department wanted a
bill that would require that ''intent'' to discriminate must be proved as a
condition of Federal intervention in voting-rights cases. Dole, who is a power
on the generally conservative Senate Judiciary Committee, disagreed, and he
managed to collect enough votes to get his version of the measure out of
committee. He conceived his position as a ''compromise'' that the Administration
could accept, and the White House ended up doing just that. ''Once he makes a
commitment, he makes a very strong personal effort,'' says Ralph G. Neas,
executive director of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights.

All of which is not to say that the Bob Dole of the 1980's bears no resemblance
to the 70's version. When the Senator himself is asked, he likes to quote a
friend, the New York pollster Tully Plesser: ''Dole hasn't changed. He's been
noticed.''

Then Dole goes on: ''Was it marriage to Elizabeth Hanford, was it the 1976
election, was it becoming chairman of the Finance Committee or just getting
older? I mean, I don't know that I've changed all that much. Maybe a kind of
maturing process. But I am still basically conservative.''

That held true on the agenda of ''social issues'' that reached the Senate floor
late in the 1982 session. He voted for prayer in the schools, against busing to
achieve school integration and against abortion. He also approved changes in
welfare that critics say have discouraged recipients from looking for work.

Yet the predictable, unbending conservatism of Dole's past is no longer
uppermost. At the least, he has become more pragmatic and conciliatory and more
concerned with the needs of the nation's disadvantaged. The once-clear image of
the man has become blurred.  When the 98th Congress convenes next month, there
is no doubt that Bob Dole will have another opportunity to make his mark. As
Chafee says, the Finance Committee will again be ''the principal act in the
circus.'' Social Security and international trade are on the committee's agenda
for January. Action on proposals for further trims in domestic spending, and
possibly for a new round of tax increases, could come later.

As was true of the tax bill this year, none of these issues offers an easy
chance to gain political credit. Social Security, for example. Benefit checks
for more than 30 million retirees will be delayed beginning next July unless
Congress passes legislation allowing the old-age trust fund to continue
borrowing from sister funds. And such an extension would simply buy time for a
few months, doing nothing to produce the $150 billion to $200 billion the system
needs to remain solvent in the 1980's.

In August, flush with his tax-bill success, Dole urged President Reagan to call
a special, postelection session of Congress devoted to solving the retirement
system's financing problems. Dole felt that a solution, devised by the Finance
Committee and approved by Congress in 1982, would make for another gaudy feather
in his cap, and he thought that result was possible if the November elections
produced a Democratic gain of only about 15 seats in the House.

But the Democrats won 26 new seats, and chances evaporated that the House
Democratic leadership would agree to treat Social Security in the lame-duck
session. The Democrats' use of the Social Security issue during the election -
many accused their Republican opponents of backing plans to cut benefits - also
killed any chance that Dole could somehow forge a quick bipartisan consensus on
the issue. ''It was a very, very bitter experience for many of us,'' says
Senator Chafee, who was barely re-elected in Rhode Island.

Two days after the election, Dole showed that he had not lost his knack for
partisan battle. He called a press conference to denounce the Democrats' use of
the Social Security issue, and to indicate that Republicans should not be in a
hurry to suggest ways of making up Social Security's revenue shortfall. He
explained: ''Once the American people understand the Democrats don't have any
ideas, that they don't want to do anything, then we can come in and save the
system in a responsible way.''

On Jan. 25, another important set of hearings are scheduled to begin in the
Finance Committee - a post-mortem on the meeting of 88 countries' trade
ministers that concluded in Geneva on Nov. 29. Held under the auspices of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the meeting did not produce everything
the United States delegation had hoped for; the European governments, for
example, refused to stop subsidizing their agricultural exports. Dole was in
Geneva for some of the ministers' meetings, and his assessment of the results
will be important in determining how Congress will react to the fact that other
nations are continuing to enact legislation to protect their domestic
industries. There are proposals, for example, backed by American labor, to
require that all cars sold in the United States be manufactured with a specified
percentage of domestically produced parts. As Dole perceives it, his committee
will be spending its time ''trying to figure some way to ward off
protectionism.''

The hearings will give him a different stage on which to perform, and Dole seems
more interested in the trade issue than in more action on budget cutting and tax
increases. In that, he reflects a general lack of appetite in Congress for any
further unpopular trims in programs or services or for another round of tax
increases.

Meanwhile, Dole continues to reflect on his chances of getting the top job in
his profession, and he is realistic about the obstacles in his path. He would
seek the 1984 Republican nomination, he says, only if Reagan does not, but he
believes the President ''should run and probably will run'' for re-election.

If he were to enter the fray, he would have to attract much more of a national
following than he has in past attempts for national office. Some politicians see
the Finance Committee as an unlikely base from which to accomplish that goal,
arguing that its job of cutting spending and raising taxes is not designed to
win friends.  Senator Chafee, among others, disagees with that analysis. The
impressions Dole has made in his many appearances in the national media of late,
says Chafee, will be remembered by the public much more than any specific
legislation he might have sponsored. Robert M. Teeter, a major G.O.P. pollster,
says Dole is a hot property for television today for three reasons: ''He's in an
important position, he's candid and he's witty.''

Dole says that he is ''at least kind of staying alive'' as a possible candidate,
but the likelihood for the near term is that he will stick to the Finance
Committee. It seems not a bad second choice.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Bob Dole, Bob Dole and his wife, Bob Dole in
the Senate

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN DEFENSE OF THE FOREIGN SERVICE

BYLINE: By Malcolm Toon; Malcolm Toon, who has served as United States
Ambassador to Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Israel and the Soviet Union, retired
from the Foreign Service in 1980.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 68, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5631 words


Somewhere in the annals of American diplomacy, it is recorded that one of our
early Presidents once remarked to his Secretary of State that since he had heard
nothing from his Minister to Spain for over a year, he assumed that our
relations with the country must be on an even keel and that the Minister was,
therefore, doing a good job.  Those were the halcyon days of diplomacy, when an
ambassador relied on the clipper ship for delivery of his instructions - and
when, before the advent of the jet and electronic ages, Presidents and their
Secretaries of State relied on the judgment and abilities of their envoys in
defending the national interest abroad.

It isn't quite like that now. Yet despite shuttle diplomacy and summitry and
instant communications, the ambassador's role remains an important one, and any
country with important interests abroad - such as the United States - requires
high quality in its foreign representation. The ambassador may be an endangered
species, but he need not be obsolete or even obsolescent, provided he is
professionally qualified, respected by the leaders of both the sending and the
receiving state, and given a significant role - at least in the tactical
implementation of foreign policy, if not in its design and direction, where even
the best of ambassadors can be only tangentially involved. In short, the
ambassador, if the institution he represents is to survive as a useful adjunct
of national policy, must be good, and he must be used.

This has not always been true of our ambassadors, and it is not true of too many
of the people who fill our top foreign diplomatic posts today. Because of our
practice of assigning a high proportion of our diplomatic missions to friends
and supporters of an incumbent President, we continue to flog our friends abroad
- and adversaries as well - with undistinguished appointees. In the process, our
image is tarnished, and our sensitivity to changes in a foreign nation's mood
and attitude is diminished. One consequence is to weaken our ability to
formulate and implement rational foreign policies designed to advance rather
than impede the national interest. And, worse, at times we look inept, bumbling
and even ridiculous. As a concerned American citizen, I feel strongly that the
United States of America cannot afford to look silly anywhere, anytime, on any
issue.  It has been said - obviously by Administration spokesmen - that I have
been intemperate in my criticism of some of President Reagan's diplomatic
appointments. I disagree, of course. In fact, I consider Mr. Reagan's record in
this respect to be about average - worse than some, better than others. But this
can offer little comfort to those concerned by the lack of professionalism in
the handling of our foreign policy.

In two respects, I would fault the President's performance. For the first time,
at least in my recollection, an Administration has politicized the lower ranks
of the diplomatic service; outsiders have been appointed as Deputy Assistant
Secretaries, deputy chiefs of mission, and even as consuls general. And second,
while Mr. Reagan has honored some of his campaign pledges (not always in the
national interest, I might add, and here I have in mind his lifting of the grain
embargo imposed on Moscow by President Carter in retaliation for the invasion of
Afghanistan), he has ignored others - including, most prominently, his
insistence on a high degree of proficiency in our diplomatic establishment, here
and abroad.

There is a reason, of course, why we have a system of choosing ambassadors that
is strange to most of our friends abroad and almost unique among nation-states,
and that is our singular historical experience. As Senator Charles McC. Mathias
Jr., the Maryland Republican, wrote last April in the Foreign Service Journal,
we decided to make a clean break with most of the institutions of British
tyranny when we achieved our independence, and one of the first to go was the
European diplomatic practice. Our young Republic ''viewed European courts as
nests of intrigue, and it distrusted diplomats who spent years abroad subject to
foreign influences. ...  The first American diplomats were consciously chosen
from the mainstream of American life and ... returned to other careers following
their diplomatic service.'' It is noteworthy that some of our early Presidents -
both of the Adamses, Jefferson, Monroe and Van Buren -put in stints as American
envoys. With such outstanding statesmen serving as our principal diplomats
abroad, it is understandable that in the formative years of the Republic a
legacy was built up, providing strong support for the thesis that a professional
diplomatic service was neither needed nor desired.  This - along with an
increasing tendency to favor the President's friends and political allies for
the choice assignments - remained the pattern of the diplomatic appointment
process throughout the 19th century. Some of the appointees were outstanding;
most were mediocre, and more than a few were real turkeys. President Ulysses S.
Grant sent his brother-in-law to Denmark, his secretary's uncle to Belgium and a
military crony to Spain; all were notoriously undistinguished.

Gradually, our initial national prejudice against professional diplomats eroded;
the process was helped by the high incidence of corruption and incompetence
among our mission chiefs in the 19th and early 20th centuries. And we as a
nation began to see advantage in a career service based on merit. The result of
this change in the national mood was the passage of the Foreign Service Act of
1924, which established the career diplomatic service and placed emphasis in
ambassadorial appointments on ability to perform rather than on contributions to
political party coffers. The percentage of career diplomats as chiefs of mission
- i.e., those is charge of our diplomatic establishments, whatever their rank -
gradually increased, attaining an average of 70 percent in the post-World War II
period.

But the spoils system has by no means been eradicated. The current roster of
ambassadors abroad makes that uncomfortably clear. The spectacle of John Gavin,
a movie actor, embellishing the Mexico City post and John J. Louis Jr., the
scion of a furniture-polish dynasty, representing us in London only highlights a
tolerance for unqualified appointees that remains embedded in our politics.

Some would say - and in fact have so expressed themselves, rather indelicately,
in my view - that as a former career diplomat I am subjective in my attitude. I
can't quarrel with this charge; certainly one who has spent most of his adult
years in the Foreign Service must inevitably have his judgment and outlook
colored by his experience. While I may legitimately be accused of career bias,
others who agree with my complaint cannot be so charged.  For example, in his
recent article on the subject, Senator Mathias pointed out that of 14 new
ambassadors appointed to the capitals of the Western alliance, 10 were political
appointees; that the same is true of 14 of the 18 ambassadors named to member
states of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; that a
political ambassador has just been named to Ireland, and that only one of four
new ambassadors in the Caribbean area is a career diplomat. The Senator, who has
sponsored a bill to limit political appointments to 15 percent of the number of
ambassadors serving at any one time, adds that while some of the current
political appointees will no doubt make excellent ambassadors, ''it is hard to
understand why there is so little room for career officers in these areas.''

It is equally hard to understand why career professionalism is being
short-changed in other sensitive areas. A random sampling of views expressed to
me by foreigners friendly to the United States will reinforce the point.

A Finnish diplomat on superpower representation in Helsinki: ''It seems that
your practice is to send us envoys whom we can't help but like but seldom
respect, whereas the Soviet Ambassador traditionally has been an authoritative
spokesman for his Government but personally obnoxious.''

Yitzhak Rabin, the former Israeli Prime Minister, at my farewell reception in
Tel Aviv, before my successor as Ambassador to Israel had been named: ''Tell
Washington to send us another professional - one who can report accurately and
objectively on our views and who is informed on and can articulate Washington's
concerns.''

A Canadian commentator, when I spoke recently in Toronto: ''If you Americans
insist on lecturing us Canadians about the true nature of the Soviet threat, you
should at least get your facts straight.  Yugoslavia and Albania are not in the
Soviet camp.''

What I have said so far, it seems to me, adds up to the following: We must
strengthen our representation abroad if we are to be seen as serious in our
approach to foreign affairs. This does not mean that only professionals should
man our embassies abroad. It does mean that our ambassadors, whether career or
political, should be highly qualified, with a good understanding of the
countries to which they are assigned, an informed appreciation of their own
country's policies, and an ability to communicate - meaning a high degree of
literacy and some linguistic competence. We must abandon our national mystique
that anyone can be a good ambassador, if only he shares the ideology of an
incumbent President, has demonstrated his loyalty by contributions to the
party's coffers and understands - as a former admiral friend of mine once put it
- ''people'' problems.

The story about the admiral is worth telling. When serving as Ambassador to
Czechoslovakia, I, as an old Navy hand, was invited to sail with the Sixth
Fleet. Before joining the carriers, I dined with a senior admiral in Naples who,
after dinner, informed me that he faced retirement, would seek another career,
since he was still ''young and vigorous,'' and thought he'd like to be an
ambassador. I asked him why he thought he was qualified for the job. His answer
was that ambassadors dealt primarily with ''people problems,'' and he had been
concerned with such problems his entire naval career.

I told the admiral that I, too, was contemplating retirement, was reasonably
energetic and felt that I should seek a second career. I thought I could qualify
for a naval command. The admiral blew his stack, and it helped little to calm
him down when I explained that because of my five years in the Navy, with ample
command and combat experience, I felt I was more qualified to take over a naval
command than he was to take over an embassy.

The sequel to the story is that the following year he was appointed Ambassador
to an important country in southern Europe, and I have yet to take over the
Sixth Fleet.

DIPLOMATIC TALENT

In 1979, testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee while still
Ambassador to the Soviet Union, I said in a rather heated exchange with the
ranking Republican member, Charles H. Percy of Illinois, that the country's
interests would best be served by having all our missions manned by career
ambassadors. On questioning, I admitted that, given the nature of our political
system and the traditional modus operandi of our Presidents, this was
unrealistic, and a more plausible goal would be to insure that all chiefs of
mission, whether drawn from the career service or from the outside, be well
qualified; that we should strive to appoint more David Bruces and fewer -
preferably none - of those who are not able to name the Prime Minister of the
country of their assignment or who are astonished to learn that there are two
Koreas.

A tight limitation on the use of outsiders is basically why the leading
countries of the world have strong diplomatic services; most rely heavily on the
career principle, and only a handful of small, relatively unimportant countries
follow our ''spoils system.'' Why must we continue to be the odd man out? Now,
more than ever, our country, as the leader and protector of the free world, has
a crying need to be represented abroad by the best talent available. Now that we
find ourselves in a world where we cannot impose our will on others; where we
cannot revert to isolationism, even though most of us would be happy to rid
ourselves of the mantle of world leadership; where, without the overwhelming
military and economic power we once had, our options are limited, skillful
diplomacy is more than ever the linchpin of our safety and that of the free
world.

We cannot do the job with second-raters; we need the perceptive abilities, the
negotiating skills and the communications arts that are the hallmarks of the
seasoned, experienced professional. They may also, of course, be the attributes
of the occasional outsider whose experience extends beyond the manufacture of
ladies' garments or the raising of Idaho potatoes and whose talents are not
confined simply to a working knowledge of the English language.

Moreover, a change in our traditional way of doing diplomatic business is
essential to the preservation of a strong, effective diplomatic service. Without
a reasonable prospect of reaching the top of the career ladder, without some
assurance that he or she, as a professional, will have the opportunity to make a
significant contribution to policy formulation and implementation - in a word,
without confidence that professionals will not be barred from positions of
responsibility by an Administration's penchant for cronyism - the career
officer, demoralized and deprived of hope, will throw in the towel, while those
who might otherwise aspire to a foreign-service career will seek other avenues
of professional endeavor. In testifying last spring on the Mathias bill,
Theodore L. Eliot Jr., the Dean of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy in
Medford, Mass., which has trained scores of Foreign Service officers, said he
was ''acutely aware of how many officers we have lost or potential officers we
were never able to recruit because of the perception and often the fact that
ambassadorial posts for which they did or might train were closed off for
political reasons.''

So, for two basic reasons, we must modify the way we appoint our envoys: to
insure that our ambassadors are top-drawer, and to attract and retain in the
Foreign Service the best and brightest of our young people. While we cannot
realistically expect any President to agree to a complete exclusion of his
friends and supporters, surely we have the right to expect a President to be
more judicious in his selection of envoys.

Surely we have a right to expect the President to be as mindful of the need to
have the best available talent in diplomacy as, for example, in the judiciary.
Presidents since Dwight D. Eisenhower have followed the practice of seeking the
judgment of the American Bar Association on the qualifications of nominees for
Federal judgeships. This precedent of review by a panel of distinguished lawyers
may be the way out of the impasse caused by our Presidents' reluctance to say no
to their pals, the Senate's traditional aversion to faulting a President on the
quality of his ambassadorial choices, and the unlikelihood of getting the Senate
to approve a numerical limitation on political appointments to diplomatic posts.

In fact, just such a proposal for a review panel was made by two former
ambassadors in their testimony on the Mathias bill. As framed by one of them,
John Wills Tuthill, a former Ambassador to Brazil, the proposal envisaged the
creation of a bipartisan review board, composed of persons who have
distinguished themselves in the field of foreign affairs.

In considering this proposal, we should dispose of a canard about our
professionals that has been spread more widely and noisily by adherents of
President Reagan than by any previous Administration in our time. I am talking
about the assertion that political appointees are more reliable implementers of
a President's policies because their loyalty is assured.

This charge takes two forms. One is the allegation that an entrenched elite of
career diplomats in the State Department often works at cross purposes with the
White House, seeking to frustrate a President's policies when it is out of
sympathy with them. The reply to that is simple. A Foreign Service officer has
an intellectual obligation to fight within the inner councils of government for
policies he believes to be right, even if his recommendations go counter to the
Administration's views. But once the President makes a policy decision, all
Foreign Service officers must comply. If they feel they can't, they must resign.
In my experience, noncompliance with settled Administration policy is rare.

There is also the broader and more sinister implication that Foreign Service
officers who allegedly exploit their position to sabotage a President's policy
are disloyal to country as well as to an incumbent Administration. This smacks
of neo-McCarthyism, and, in my view, a return to the evil practices of that
wretched period in our history would pose a real threat to the well-being and
integrity of our Republic.

The claim that politicos are more reliable than professionals is not only
self-serving, it is unfair, unfounded in fact and an insult to the Foreign
Service. The career Foreign Service officer is professionally committed to
President and country. As Charles S.  Whitehouse, former president of the
American Foreign Service Association, said in defending the service against
these scurrilous allegations of disloyalty: ''The commitment to a career of
national service and the self-discipline which is required from the beginning
permeates our professional ethic and infuses a spirit of loyalty to the nation
and to its leaders.''

SUMMITRY

The first step in enhancing the effectiveness of our diplomacy is, as I have
suggested above, to insure a higher degree of professionalism in our diplomatic
personnel. Equally important is an improved procedural method in our diplomacy,
so as to reduce erratic changes in course, convince our friends of our constancy
and reliability and improve mutual understanding between ourselves and our chief
adversaries - thus reducing the risk of dangerous confrontation through
miscalculation. Here again, the key to improvement is greater reliance on our
professional diplomats.

From World War II until now, our diplomatic modus operandi has featured several
approaches. These include summitry, shuttle or personal diplomacy, and the
traditional, time-honored practice of intercourse among governments through
ambassadors. Some of these techniques have worked well, others have led to
policy disasters, but all will, in varying degrees and in one form or another,
continue to be instruments of American foreign policy, regardless of the
personal predilections or work habits and style of an incumbent President.
Because, in my long diplomatic career, I have been associated in various ways
with all of these techniques of diplomacy, I might, without exceeding the bounds
of modesty, offer some thoughts on how these techniques have worked in the past
and how they might be improved.

I have never regarded meetings at the summit as a satisfactory way of conducting
diplomacy, and certainly those in which I have played a role did little to
improve mutual understanding. Summit meetings within the Western alliance have
become institutionalized; while we must, therefore, put up with them, we can, it
seems to me, avoid the sorts of misunderstandings that have plagued us in the
past by better preparation and by involving lower-ranking officials in the
formulation of policies, in the discussions at the summit and in the follow-up
to the top leaders' decisions.

We must recognize that in recent years there has been a decline in our allies'
confidence in the competence and effectiveness of the President and his key
advisers. Vietnam eroded confidence in the Johnson Administration; our friends
in Europe thought the war was a mistake and our participation in that war
inconsistent with a rational assessment of our national interests. President
Nixon was faulted for his handling of Vietnam and was discredited because of
Watergate. President Carter was seen as having a limited grasp of foreign
affairs, and his Administration was thought to be confused on broad strategy.
President Reagan has appeared erratic, insensitive to allied concerns, and
reckless and lacking balance in his attitude toward the Soviet Union. This loss
of respect, combined with a sensed inability to influence our policies and
behavior, has undermined our allies' willingness to follow the leadership of the
United States. The result has been disarray within the alliance and increased
tension among its members.

We must ponder ways of coping with such disaffection, which can only result in a
weakened posture of the alliance vis-a-vis the Soviet threat. One way is to
insure that professionals in the State Department - the Assistant Secretaries
and their deputies and the desk officers -have an opportunity to be involved in
policy making.  Our allies would then know that by working with these
professionals they could be assured of having ther views heard before our
policies are frozen. Our embassies abroad and our allies' missions in Washington
would be enhanced as channels for dialogue as policies are being formulated. If
the professionals are excluded from the process, the consultation mechanism
fails and our allies become frustrated, resistant and, in the end, unsupportive.
I cannot believe that if this approach had been followed in the preparations for
the recent Western summit in Versailles and in the follow-up arrangements, we
would have found ourselves in such disarray over the issue of economic sanctions
against the Soviet Union and the Soviet gas pipeline to Western Europe.

Summitry with our chief adversary, the Soviet Union, is a totally different
proposition. The opportunity for a dialogue on substantive issues is restricted
by sharp philosophical differences, by the language barrier and by the distrust
inherent in our relationship.  Even with a more vigorous, better informed and
possibly more pragmatic leader - as I assume we have in Yuri V. Andropov - these
inhibitions against a free-flowing dialogue will obtain. It was not just Leo nid
I. Brezhnev's infirmities -producing, inter alia, slurred diction and an
incredibly short attention span - that precluded the sort of give-and-take
discussion that eager American summiteers have sought and have never attained;
it was the intellectual, ideological and cultural gap between our two societies
that was and remains the real bar to effective dialogue at the top.

For all these reasons, summitry with the Russians should be confined for the
most part to the signing of previously negotiated agreements -viz., the
strategic-arms limitation treaty signed in Vienna in 1979 - and should not be
regarded as an effective mechanism for carrying on important diplomatic business
between our two countries. The caveat that war is much too serious a business to
leave to generals applies as well to leaving foreign policy to heads of
government.

PERSONAL AND SHUTTLE DIPLOMACY

Despite the common belief, personal diplomacy is not an invention of Henry
Kissinger, and it did not fade with the good doctor's departure from official
political life. Shuttle diplomacy, however, was relatively unknown before Mr.
Kissinger, and the technique of moving among capitals in an effort to arrive at
a compromise of conflicting views of parties who refuse to or cannot face each
other across a negotiating table has been practiced by former Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr.; Philip C. Habib, the special Middle East envoy, and
others, though without the Kissinger flair and certainly with less success.

While shuttle diplomacy can be a useful instrument of diplomacy in special
circumstances - when hostilities seem imminent, for instance - it should be
eschewed as normal practice. Not only is it an imperfect, imprecise way of
communicating conflicting views but it is a device calculated to exhaust most of
its practitioners, and certainly their staffs. I can recall an all-night session
with the Israelis during Mr. Kissinger's shuttling between Jerusalem and Cairo
as Secretary of State in 1975. The late Yigal Allon, then Israel's Foreign
Minister, noted the nodding heads at the table and remarked ruefully to me:
''This is not a civilized or safe way to do business. One of us, in our
exhaustion, will make a mistake we all will live to regret.''

Mr. Kissinger, I must admit, seldom gave the impression of flagging under the
killing schedule, and his wits and his wit, unlike those of his interlocutors,
remained alert and unimpaired. I remember one particularly difficult all-night
session with members of the Israeli Cabinet. At dawn, the Prime Minister, Mr.
Rabin, proposed that he, Mr. Allon and Shimon Peres, then Israel's Defense
Minister, meet alone with Mr. Kissinger. Mr. Peres remarked that this would mean
three against one, to which Mr. Kissinger retorted that if Under Secretary
Joseph J. Sisco - his chief aide on the trip, and the perennial foil for his
parries - joined him, it would be four against one.

As with summitry, personal diplomacy, whether of the shuttle or of the more
sedentary variety, can be a disaster if those who are charged with follow-up
responsibilities are not included in the principal's entourage, or at least
fully informed of the proceedings. While it can be argued that the pruning of
aides in attendance enhances the intimacy and, therefore, the productiveness of
personal diplomacy at the ministerial level, the ambassador should never be
excluded from such discussions. Whatever his abilities or his personal status
with the host government, an ambassador cannot remain an effective
representative if he is snubbed by his Secretary of State or President and thus
shown to lack the confidence of his superiors. This never happened to me as
Ambassador, but a predecessor of mine in Moscow was so treated and, thereafter,
Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko would scarcely give him the time of day.

Moreover, exclusion of professionals from discussions at a high political level
can often lead to serious mis-understandings, especially if the focus is on
complex issues - for example, strategic-arms limitation talks. While former
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance may have been justified in his view in the
spring of 1979 that one-on-one negotiations with the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly
F. Dobrynin, offered the best chance of resolving the remaining thorny issues in
the SALT II talks, it is undeniable that this approach resulted in
misunderstandings over the Kremlin's position that had to be unraveled in
Moscow.

I think, on balance, a Secretary of State should remain above the fray and leave
actual negotiations to qualified subordinates. His responsibilities are so
formidable that he should not permit himself to be bogged down in exhaustive and
exhausting discussions of technical details. I am happy to note that this is the
pattern of conduct that Secretary of State George P. Shultz apparently intends
to follow.

USING THE AMBASSADOR

In accordance with a practice begun by the Kennedy Administration, every
ambassador going abroad carries a letter signed by the President, delineating
his responsibilities and defining the limits of his authority more or less as
follows: LAST JUMP The ambassador is to act as the President's personal
representative to the government to which he is accredited.  He is to exercise
full responsibility for the direction, coordination and supervision of all
United States Government officers and employees in that country, except those
under a military command or under another chief of mission (for example in
Brussels, where we have three ambassadors), or on the staff of an international
organization.  He is to oversee the operation of all United States Government
programs and activities in the country, other than military activities carried
out under an independent military command.  He is to keep himself fully informed
of what is going on in the country of his accreditation, report to the Secretary
of State and the President with directness and candor on developments within
that country and recommend policies and courses of action to deal with those
developments.

In carrying out his responsibilities, he must abide by the highest standards of
professional and personal conduct in furtherance of our broader mission of
protecting and advancing our interests.

By the President's authority, then, the ambassador is the boss in the country of
his assignment, speaks for his Government on all matters of public concern, and
is the authoritative source of information on the attitudes and policies of the
country to which he is accredited. How well has this concept held up? In most
cases, not well, I'm afraid, primarily because, in its relations with its
missions overseas, Washington frequently ignores the President's letter of
instructions. As I said at the outset of this essay, the ambassador must be
good, but he also must be used. And when he is not used properly, the national
interest suffers.

Let me speak to the point from my own experience. When, early in the Carter
Administration, I learned, mostly from the press, that Washington was preparing
its position on strategic-arms limitations for discussion with the Russians, I
cabled Mr. Vance that it might be useful for me, as the Ambassador in Moscow, to
return to Washington to participate in the formulation of our policy.

I was in limbo at the time. Some 50 of President Ford's interim appointees - my
name among them - had been withdrawn by President Carter from Senate
consideration, pending his own review of the list, and some of the people from
Plains, Ga., had recommended that I be replaced by someone with less of a
hard-line reputation. Mr. Vance felt it would be awkward for me to be in
Washington while Mr. Carter was pondering the question, and he suggested that I
meet him in Brussels, where he planned to brief the NATO Council on his way to
Moscow.

I had no choice but to comply, and I journeyed to Brussels to meet the new
Secretary of State. Mr. Vance asked me what I thought of our new strategic-arms
proposals; I said I would be in a better position to reply if I knew what they
were. He then briefed me on their contents, and when I told him they would be
rejected out-of-hand by the Russians, Mr. Vance at first was incredulous, then
discomfited and finally downcast. I was right -anyone with limited prescience
and some knowledge of Soviet attitudes could have made the same prognosis - and
real negotiations on SALT II were stymied for months.

Failure to consult ambassadors on their estimates of local reaction can
frustrate, if not damage, the national interest. Equally, failure to inform the
ambassador of Washington's moves affecting the country of his accreditation
often leads to embarrassment and, worse, misunderstanding. Mr. Gromyko was
incredulous when asked by one of my predecessors in Moscow about the current
state of play in earlier SALT negotiations. ''Do you mean Washington has not
informed you?'' the Foreign Minister asked. Finally, we should speak to foreign
governments through our ambassadors abroad.

It is, perhaps, understandable, but not tolerable, that Secretaries of State
since President Kennedy's day have succumbed to the wiles of Ambassador
Dobrynin, who has been representing his Government in Washington for 20 years
now, and have chosen to communicate with the Soviet Union through him rather
than through their own man in Moscow. The result is that many important
exchanges with Mr. Dobrynin have been inadequately recorded in Washington and
sometimes not at all, while a full record, with Mr. Dobrynin's own gloss on it,
is on file in Moscow.

I am convinced that if Washington insists on speaking to Moscow through Mr.
Dobrynin - or his successor - misunderstandings of the kind that upset the final
phases of the SALT II talks will continue to plague our relationship with the
Kremlin. I would vastly prefer dealing with Moscow - or any capital, for that
matter -through our man on the scene. At the very least, we should double-track
everything through our missions abroad. And if our man abroad is well qualified
-and the thrust of this essay is that he should be - our primary lines of
communication with a foreign government, friendly or adversarial, should be
through him, and the channel through that government's ambassador in Washington
should be secondary.

Most of what I have been saying in this article bears on a vivid recollection I
have of Mr. Vance's visit to Moscow in March 1977.  When we met in the Kremlin
with Mr. Gromyko, I noted the composition of our two delegations. Mr. Gromyko
was flanked by seasoned experts, all but one fluent in English, all but one with
at least 20 years' experience in dealing with the United States, and all with
broad negotiating background in arms-control issues. I then took a look at our
team. In stark contrast, I was the only one who spoke the language and who knew
something of the adversary we faced.

My hope is that the asymmetry symbolized by that lineup will be offset in the
months and years ahead. This can be accomplished, however, only by using our
professional talent to the maximum - above all, by drawing upon the experience
and expertise offered by the American Foreign Service. Whenever we face the
Russians across the negotiating table, or even on operational matters, we are
confronted with complete professionals. Our national security demands no less
from our side.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of John Adams presenting his credentials to King
George III

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HIGH MOUNTAINS AND FAR PLACES

BYLINE: By D.J.R. BRUCKNER; D.J.R. Bruckner is an editor of The New York Times
Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2813 words


THE appeal of books about extraordinary adventures or travels into strange
places and times lies in the suspicion that some realities cannot be known or at
least not revealed. There might be a discovery of himself too deep for the
adventurer to disclose. We suspect he may have stepped over the margin of escape
and become part of a lost civilization or a world we had never imagined.
Strangeness alone is not enough; the best accounts of travel and adventure leave
you with an odd sense of loss and longing. In part that comes from the common
experience - that going does not necessarily mean we get anywhere. We are
fascinated by the few who have taken a leap and landed in an enchanted place.

QUEST FOR ADVENTURE By Chris Bonington.  Illustrated. 448 pp. New York: Clarkson
N. Potter/Crown Publishers. $30.

For readers to whom adventure means defying death, Chris Bonington tells 21
stories of people climbing mountains, crossing deserts alone, sailing around the
world in boats not much bigger than tubs.  Many of these people took pictures of
themselves defying death, and the book is full of them. There is one of the
author clinging to the perpendicular ice face of Annapurna that makes one
shiver. A wellknown climber, Mr. Bonington is also a good reporter. He conducted
many interviews and did a lot of research for this book.  His writing is
masterly, assured and urbane and his tales have great emotional power.

Naturally, he writes best about climbers, for instance, about Reinhold Messner
who, two years ago, alone and without an oxygen tank, climbed to the top of
Mount Everest from the China side in three days. (None of the 25 previous
successful Everest climbs had been made by a party of fewer than 30, in less
than a month, or without oxygen.) Elsewhere in the Himalayas, Mr. Messner had
climbed the slightly shorter Nanga Parbat alone a few years before and, in 1975,
he and Peter Habeler had climbed the northwest face of Hidden Peak in the first
two-man conquest of any mountain over 26,000 feet high. You do not do such
things without paying; like most climbers, Mr. Messner has a longer history of
failures than triumphs. On one climb his younger brother, Gunther, was crushed
in an ice avalanche.  At least when you climb alone, you face fate alone. In
1958, having failed several times to climb with friends the southwest face of
Petit Dru, the most difficult ascent in the western Alps, Walter Bonatti went to
the top alone, filled with envy for ''all men who did not feel, as I did, the
need to confront such trials in order to prove themselves.'' Right!

A couple of the best stories in the Bonington volume are tales of the sea, among
them the 65-year-old Francis Chichester's solo circumnavigation of the globe in
1966-67 and the weird events of the Golden Globe race around the world sponsored
in 1968 by the Sunday Times of London. That race involved heroism, wreckage,
personal disaster and one attempt at a magnificent fraud that ended in suicide.
But it also gave us a fine demonstration of savoir-vivre when Bernard
Moitessier, having sailed right around the earth ahead of his competitors,
sailed on halfway around again to a haven on a Pacific isle, instead of
returning to England to collect the prize, because he thought it demeaning to
sail for money when he could do it for the greater reward of being alone.

Mr. Bonington has a Grand Guignol sense of humor. His tale of Maurice Herzog's
ascent of Annapurna in 1950 - a climb that led to the conquest of the other
great Himalaya peaks by others in the next three decades but from which Mr.
Herzog descended fingerless - begins: ''One's first visit to the Himalaya is
always immensely exciting.'' Take his word for that.

It is appropriate for Mr. Bonington to produce a book of this sort: He says his
passion for climbing began when, as a boy, he opened a book and saw photographs
of mountains in Scotland. They led him anon to the Himalayas.

JOURNEY INTO CHINA Edited by Kenneth C. Danforth and Mary B. Dickinson.
Illustrated. 518 pp. Washington, D. C. 20036: The National Geographic Society.
Cloth, $19.95.  Deluxe leather-bound edition $29.95.

Nowadays, if you want to venture into the lofty Himalayan world, the fashionable
way is through China, itself an adventure, as you will see in ''Journey Into
China.'' You might expect a survey this large and luxurious - 14 maps,
Chinese-designed endpapers and hundreds of shockingly bright color photographs -
to be impressive and little more. But the society commissioned first-rate
journalists and scholars to write personal accounts of their journeys into all
regions of China, and they have produced travelogues of a high order.

The pictures are essential since so much of China strains belief. A lot of
nature there seems unnatural -like the stone forest in Yunnan just above Laos
and Vietnam, a plain of soaring limestone needles created, the locals say, when
one of the eight Chinese immortals shattered a mountain to make a labyrinth
where lovers could be alone, or those often-photographed soaring eroded peaks
rising above the river Li like teeth.

On the other hand, some real temples are part of nature. Carved into a cave near
Luoyang is a towering Buddha of Creation surrounded by demigods and worthies.
Elsewhere is a 230-foot serenely ancient Buddha one foot of which could
accommodate a company of infantry on bivouac. The Chinese have long had an odd
relationship with earth and stone: 7,500 lifesize clay soldiers and horses
fashioned to guard the remains of the emperor Qin Shi Huangdi were buried under
fields for millennia by his jealous successors; and there is a huge menagerie of
contented stone animals couchant throughout the Forest of Confucius in Qufu.
Confucius himself climbed the 5,000-foot Mount Tai for inspiration, and it is
pleasant to see in these pictures that the citizens of the Communist state still
climb thousands of ancient stairs up the Broad Way to the South Gate of Heaven
on this holy mountain, and some still pile large square stones in the crooks of
trees as lapidary votive offerings.

There are enough Chinese to do everything imaginable and the pictures in this
book suggest they are bent on testing the limits - with an obvious enjoyment of
their own unity and power. Drilling oil, building massive dams or bridges,
wind-surfing on lakes that have been sacred for 4,000 years or admiring one
another on a beach developed for the privileged 100 years ago by European
imperialists, these golden people appear rarely joyous and dignified. No wonder
the wintry Russians worry about such a race.

THE ROOF OF THE WORLD By Zhang Mingtao and Other Members of the
Multidisciplinary Research Team of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, Chinese Academy of
Sciences.  Illustrated. 227 pp. New York and Peking: Harry N. Abrams and Foreign
Languages Press. $50.

The shapes and colors of temples and even the design of clothing seem a sublime
celebration of something mystical that descends from the peaks of the fabulous
Tibetan plateau. The National Geographic Society's ''Journey Into China'' has
some glorious color pictures of Tibetan temples, but in telling the natural
story of the plateau itself, the Chinese have done a better job. ''The Roof Of
The World'' has not only extraordinarily revealing pictures of natural life in
the Himalayas, but a text that is superb popular writing about the earth
sciences by Zhang Mingtao, a scientist who has been researching the plateau for
a decade as part of a team sent there by the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

The plateau covers well over 1.5 million square miles. At its center are 11 of
the world's 14 tallest mountains. The floor of the plateau is just above the
peak of Kilimanjaro, the highest mountain in Africa. Studying fossils,
magnetism, rock layers and other evidence, the Chinese team concludes that the
region was once two separate land masses 4,000 miles apart that were pushed
together - and up - in the movement of continental plates millions of years ago.

It is a relatively young outcropping, only 40 million years old, and the earth's
crust under these mountains is shallower than it is around the rest of the
globe, so the region is quite lively -shaken by frequent earthquakes and
eruptions, and spouting immense geysers that leave behind giant mineral columns
(seracs) like arms thrust into the sky out of lakes of extremely hot water.
Glaciers growing and cascading through the mountains pour water into the
valleys, forming several of the largest river systems on the planet. The
mountain walls so decisively affect the movements of winds, including trade
winds, that some valleys are warm, lush, subtropical agricultural lands.

Of course, Mr. Zhang stresses agricultural development, new mineral industries,
the breeding of stronger animal herds -cows, goats, yaks. One could hardly
expect him to expatiate on ancient Tibetan culture, which has been suppressed
since the Chinese annexed the country. But once in a while there is a tone of
reverence in his prose as he mentions the religious names Tibetans give the
mountains. And your eye will catch a splendid photograph of the Potala Palace at
Lhasa, the seat of religion and rule for 1,200 years, a palace rooted in the
bottom of a mountain that assumes the shape of the rock as it rises in steps and
tiers up the hillside until it crowns the whole top with its great square halls
and towers roofed in sloping tiles.  This immense house raised up for the
servants of heaven fits into earth so perfectly that even a two-dimensional
glimpse of it leaves you wondering whether there have not been conversations in
its galleries among beings we cannot see or hear.

MONUMENTS OF THE INCAS By John Hemming.  Photographs by Edward Ranney.  228 pp.
Boston: New York Graphic Society/ Little, Brown & Co. $45.

Perhaps only in Peru can you see mountain buildings as impressive as those in
Asia - in the towns, temples and forts the Incas built 500 years ago in a
mountain empire stretching from Quito in Ecuador on the north to south of La
Paz, Bolivia. ''Monuments of the Incas,'' with text by John Hemming and
photographs by Edward Ranney, is a magnificent survey of the Inca remains.

Mr. Hemming is well known for his elegant, graceful writing about South American
Indian civilizations and in this book he gives a fairly complete account of the
Inca buildings and culture in an impressively concise text. Mr. Ranney's black
and white pictures show not only the detail of the stonework but the setting and
scale of these vast buildings high in the mountains. Precisely because they are
architectural photographs, mostly without people in them, they have a haunting
quality; one imagines the Incas among them.

There is something haunting about the whole Inca enterprise. The Incas were not
the largest nation on their continent. Virtually the entire empire sprang from
the reign of the ruler the Spanish called Pacha-cuti Inca (all the kings took
the name Inca) who began his rule in 1438, and all the monuments had been built
by the time the Spaniards began their conquest in 1532. The fall of the Incas
was brought about by a nation not so very different. Spain was by no means the
largest nation in Europe (France was more than twice as populous in 1500), but
through the 16th century it dominated Europe and created in America the greatest
empire outside China. In some accounts that the Spanish priests wrote of their
angry arguments with Incas, there is a confidence of understanding among
aristocrats.  These two imperial races that rose to power roughly at the same
time and in total ignorance of one another seem almost to have been fated to
collide.

What is most remarkable about the Incas is their restraint. Other Latin American
civilizations left behind elaborate artwork and decoration. The esthetic sense
of the Incas is expressed entirely in their architecture and stone masonry,
which are simply perfect. Of course, they were not impervious to other arts. The
ransom the Incan king Atahualpa offered Pizarro after the conquistador had taken
him captive included roomsful of gold and silver figures, but there is sound
evidence that the true art of this people was in stone and they borrowed all the
other arts from other nations.

From the Spanish accounts we know the Incans' civilization was complex,
sophisticated and efficient. They had a mystical sense of the land and called
the mountains holy. There is a photograph of the Sacred Rock at Machu Picchu,
perfectly echoing the shape of the mountain behind it, that speaks volumes about
their view of the world. As in so many religions, the spirits of the land and
water were connected with the sun, moon and stars, and with dead ancestors. The
power of Inca architecture lies in its uncanny ability to convey suggestions of
many of these beliefs to an entirely untutored onlooker.

But the reader will not leave the Hemming-Ranney book untutored.  Their
sympathetic understanding not only of the Incas, but of the structures and
customs of other cultures they compare them with, makes their book a civilized
introduction to a great lost nation.

QUETZALCOATL In Myth, Archeology and Art.  By Jose Lopez Portillo, Demetrio Sodi
and Fernando Diaz Infante.  247 pp. New York: Continuum. $100.

If the Spaniards who conquered Peru were stunned by the power of the Inca
civilization, those who conquered Mexico at the same time were very nearly
overwhelmed by the richness of the native culture.  There are few imaginative
works in any language that can so effectively carry one into a totally new world
as the reports sent home by the priests who accompanied the Spanish armies to
Mexico. Of course, some aspects of those cultures were horrifying - there were
human sacrifices, to cite one - but there was great beauty as well.  And the
ancient cultures have an extraordinary staying power; there is no way of
understanding modern Mexico without knowing something of them. That is not easy:
There were many kingdoms and civilizations spanning several millennia; beliefs
and ideas passed from one to another, merged and finally united with Spanish
Catholicism in a unique synthesis. Probably the two keys that best open the door
into this world for someone who has less than several lifetimes to study are the
cult of the Virgin of Guadalupe and the legend of the plumed snake god-man
Quetzalcoatl.

''Quetzalcoatl: In Myth, Archeology and Art'' offers a historical, psychological
and literary survey of the cults of Quetzalcoatl and the civilizations those
cults took root in. This elaborate edition of a book that appeared in simpler
form in 1976 is filled with illustrations of mesoamerican art, including color
reproductions of the famous codices - large painted pages of figures - that
Indian priests used and that are now preserved in Mexico, Spain and the Vatican.
In this book the codices are covered by transparent overlays containing the
names of the figures appearing in them so that you suddenly see a great
literature of religion and philosophy in the hieroglyphs.

Mr. Sodi's historical introduction is comprehensible and sound.  Mr. Diaz
Infante's psychological interpretations of the complex myth of the bird-serpent
god Quetzalcoatl that merged eventually with myths about the man (or several
men) Quetzalcoatl is more controversial but not without scholarly foundation.
Since there are still something like 200 languages with ancient roots spoken in
Mexico, his interpretation of the myths is necessarily limited to a few dominant
cultures.

Perhaps the most arresting section of the book is an imaginative re-creation of
the Quetzalcoatl story in a text by Mr. Lopez Portillo, the former President of
Mexico. It is a tale of the god-man arriving from the sea tied to a cross on a
boat, bringing a system of new human values and compassion to an ancient and
sometimes cruel world. After a lifetime of ethical teaching, imperial rule,
suffering and defeat, Quetzalcoatl departs tied to a cross on a boat. In
bringing together certain fragments of the myth, Mr. Lopez Portillo has created
a story of real dramatic power. His version is idiosyncratic, to be sure, and it
has some obvious and current political purposes; but it is characteristic of
myths of the Toltecs, Mayans and Mixtecs that they require a personal
interpretation. The former president is doing what many another poet and scholar
has done with these stories and he does it in an interesting way.

The volume is not a guide to Mexico, or even a scholarly historical guide to the
old Mexican cultures, but it has an evocative power that might lead some readers
to go and look for themselves. If they do, they will begin to see at least some
of the lost cultures that produced the incredible wealth of pre-Columbian art,
temples and pyramids extending from the Yucatan down into Central America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of pre-Columbian heads

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRACTICAL TRAVELER: RUNNING INTO TROUBLE ABROAD

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section 10; Page 3, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1387 words


M illions of Americans travel abroad every year and a minority of them - a
minority that comes to thousands of people - run into trouble of some sort or
another and go to the nearest United States embassy or consulate for help.

Most of the problems are mundane: a lost passport, stolen traveler's checks, an
injury or an illness. Frequently, however, the problems are more complicated
and, according to John Caulfield, a spokesman for the State Department's Bureau
of Consular Affairs, they are most likely to occur in countries whose cultures
or political systems are most unlike those in the United States, such as certain
locations in Asia or in Communist countries.

Travel in the Soviet Union, for example, can be vexing for Americans who fail to
recognize that standards of conduct are different. ''It is the Soviet Union; it
is not the U.S.,'' Mr.  Caulfield says. ''Things will be done differently.''

For example, an American may think nothing of photographing a beautiful bridge,
an immense dam or, in cinema verite, a crowded slum. In such circumstances in
the Soviet Union, the American tourist can get into trouble. ''U.S. citizens
have had film confiscated, been temporarily detained or interrogated, and have
even been asked to leave the U.S.S.R. because of violations, usually
unwittingly, of Soviet regulations on photography,'' the State Department
representative cautioned.

Similarly, a typical American tourist may think nothing of taking a ''souvenir''
from a hotel, such as an ashtray or a towel, but that would be considered a
serious offense in the Soviet Union (and in many other countries, as well).

It is puzzling to Mr. Caulfield and others why so many Americans continue to try
to smuggle drugs, especially through the Soviet Union and other Eastern bloc
countries, where surveillance is known to be particularly high.

About all a United States embassy or consulate can do in cases like that is to
notify the American's relatives and assure that the arrested people get legal
counsel appropriate to the country where the offense occurred.

Most problems tackled by the consulates do not involve arrests.  ''We get
letters every day with complaints, and we get thousands of requests for
assistance,'' Mr. Caulfield says. Some of the typical problems involve the
following:

Dual citizenship: The United States does not recognize this, but many other
countries do, with some of them maintaining that their nationality can never be
ended. If, for example, an American who was born in Hungary returns there to
visit relatives, he or she may find that Hungary considers the traveler both an
American and a Hungarian. In that case, Hungarian nationality could subject the
traveler to the draft or other laws, or similar unpleasantness.

Therefore, the State Department recommends that the traveler use only a United
States passport with a visa stamped in it beforehand by the foreign government,
a recognition of the validity of the American passport. Such a traveler
confronted by dual-nationality assertions is advised to notify the United States
embassy or consulate as soon as possible.

Antiques: The State Department says that most Eastern European countries,
notably the Soviet Union, do not allow antiques and the like to be taken out of
the country. It suggests that such souvenirs be purchased only in special
tourist stores, never from someone who approaches the tourist on the street with
an offer to sell an antique, a samovar or an icon. The object may very likely be
a fake and, even if it is real, it may be confiscated by the Russian Government
and the traveler may be detained.

Sales: Many American travelers are approached on Russian streets and asked to
sell their clothing, which is popular in the Soviet Union and hard to come by.
Such sales are illegal, the State Department says, and should be avoided. By the
same token, black market currency exchanges are to be avoided: The rubles may be
counterfeit, the exchange rate may be unfavorable instead of a bargain, and
there is always the risk of a knock on the head.  Besides, many governments
require that tourists show receipts for currency exchanges, something hard to
ask for in a dark alley.

T he countries with the most American tourists - Mexico, Canada and those in
Western Europe - have the most tourist problems, simply because of the number of
people involved. The less-visited countries have fewer but more complicated
problems.

Probably the most complicated place for Americans just now is Libya, since
United States passports are not valid there and Washington has advised Americans
not to travel there, making it the only country now in that category. Someone
who got in trouble in Libya would have no place to turn to for assistance. While
it is not illegal for Americans to travel to Cuba, Iran, Vietnam and Albania,
very few do so, and little or no assistance is available to those who do.

There are many things that an embassy or consulate can do to assist a traveler
in difficulty. If a passport is lost or stolen, a duplicate can usually be
issued within a day. If it is a non-Englishspeaking country, there will be lists
of English-speaking doctors and lawyers available to help. The embassies and
consulates are not there to help American tourists make hotel reservations or
select restaurants, however.

One tourist from Manhattan's Lower East Side recently wrote to Senator Alfonse
M. D'Amato to praise the staff of the United States Consulate in Genoa, Italy,
for coming to her aid when her purse was snatched. The consulate employees took
her to an English-speaking doctor for treatment and then helped her file her
report with the police. In addition, they got her passport reissued quickly and
helped her book a room back in the hotel that she had checked out of before her
purse was snatched.

Another New Yorker, Norman Lieberman of Brooklyn, was not fortunate enough to
have been near a consulate when he ran into trouble in the Soviet Union, but his
difficulties serve to illustrate some of the potential problems faced there by
American tourists. Mr. Lieberman was detained by the K.G.B., the Soviet security
and intelligence organization, after he took photos of an outdoor market in
Odessa in the Ukraine.

''I had read the brochure put out by the tour agency and I understood that I
should not take pictures of railroad yards,'' Mr.  Lieberman said. ''But I
hardly thought that an open-air market in Odessa would be objectionable.''

On reflection, Mr. Lieberman believes he made two mistakes: going out without
the Soviet Intourist guide, which supposedly is permissible, and then taking so
many pictures, 17 exposures, perhaps, that some K.G.B. agents became suspicious.
''And I was well dressed, so I stood out,'' Mr. Lieberman says.

To add insult to his injury - being hustled off to a K.G.B.  station, questioned
and having to give up his film - Mr. Lieberman says he apparently was the
subject of an attempted shakedown by one of the K.G.B. agents, who followed him
into his cab and said in English, ''Nikon ... present ... me,'' but Mr.
Lieberman held on to his camera.

The State Department's Bureau of Consular Affairs has published a free pamphlet
for American tourists to the Soviet Union, ''Tips for Travelers to the
U.S.S.R.'' It can be obtained by writing, preferably on a postcard, to the
Passport Service, State Department, Room 386, 1425 K Street N.W., Washington,
D.C. 20524.

Other pamphlets in the ''Tips for Travelers'' series cover the Caribbean, China,
Cuba, Eastern Europe, Greece and Mexico, and they can be obtained at the same
address.

The Bureau of Consular Affairs has other free brochures with helpful advice -
''Your Trip Abroad,'' ''Travel Tips for Senior Citizens'' and ''Travel Warning
on Drugs Abroad.'' They can be obtained by sending a postcard to the bureau at
the State Department, Room 6811, Washington, D.C. 20520.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawings

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS;
ALTERING THE WAY THE HOUSE OPERATES

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 16, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1238 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12


The rules of the House of Representatives always represent a balancing act: the
rights of the minority versus the rights of the majority; free discussion versus
efficiency; individual independence versus party discipline.

Now the Democrats in the House are proposing a series of rules changes that
could significantly alter these equations in favor of the majority, efficiency
and discipline. In their view, the whole way that Congress does business has to
be streamlined, and their changes would make it more difficult for members to
delay the House, or force it to vote on embarrassing or extraneous issues.

''The fact is, the House is not working very well,'' said Representative Gillis
W. Long of Louisiana, chairman of the Democratic caucus, which adopted the rules
changes last week. ''We do some of the same things over and over again. And that
limits our ability to get to matters of pressing importance.''

G.O.P. Vows to Fight Changes

But the Republicans have vowed to fight the proposed rules when they are
considered by the House when the new Congress assembles next month. An unusual
statement by the Republican party leadership in the House calls the changes ''an
exercise in political expediency that will concentrate more power in the hands
of the Speaker and further erode the democratic process in the House.''

Representative Long concedes that the Speaker's power will expand.  He explains:
''No question, when you try to make the institution operate more efficiently you
give someone more discretion or power.''

The drive to strengthen the House leadership was set off primarily by the
success of right-wing single-issue groups that have forced Congress in recent
years to vote repeatedly on such issues as abortion, school busing and school
prayer. To many legislators, these are no-win issues they would rather avoid,
and the Democrats' victories in last month's election emboldened them to seek
solutions.

One solution would change the way that Congress allocates money.  Under current
procedures, the first step is passage of an authorization bill, legislation that
defines where money can be spent by various Government agencies. The second step
is an appropriations bill, which decides how much can be spent.

They Use Them as Vehicles

In recent years, a growing number of legislators have used these appropriations
bills as legislative vehicles. To take one example, the House adopted an
amendment Thursday that would forbid the Justice Department to use any of its
appropriated funds to pursue desegregation cases that might result in school
busing. The Reagan Administration has no intention of pursuing such cases
anyway, but similar riders in the Carter years significantly inhibited the
Justice Department.

Probably the best known of these riders has been the Hyde Amendment, which
blocks the use of Medicaid funds to finance abortions for poor women. In the
Vietnam War, critics of the war used riders on appropriations bills to slow
down, and eventually terminate, the war effort.

Under the rules suggested by the Democrats, riders on appropriations bill would
no longer be permitted. The only exception would be if a majority of the House
voted to open the bill for such amendments.

Of course, any sort of amendment would still be in order on the original
authorizing bill. And any change in the House rules would not affect the Senate,
which has a tradition of unlimited debate and amendment on any legislation.

Lott Sees 'Effort to Strangle'

Still, the change would be significant. Supporters say it is essential for ''a
more orderly process,'' in the words of Representative Martin Frost, the Texas
Democrat who headed a committee that drafted the proposed rules.

But critics like Representative Trent Lott of Mississippi, the Republican whip,
call it an attempt to ''strangle the opportunity for dissent.''

Mr. Lott recalled the use of riders in the Vietnam era and said: ''Liberals
resent it when it is used for a conservative issue, but favor it for a liberal
issue. It all depends on whose ox is being gored.''

Mr. Frost concedes that this is a ''valid argument'' and emphasizes: ''This
provision cuts both ways, left and right.  Everyone should understand that.''

The second major rules shift involves constitutional amendments.  Now, if a
proposed amendment is buried at the committee level by a hostile chairman, a
majority of the House can force a floor vote on the proposal by signing what is
called a discharge petition. Actual passage of the amendment, however, requires
two-thirds of the House.

Fright at Close Call

This situation unfolded last summer when the House leadership tried to block an
amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget. Supporters persuaded a majority
of the House to sign a discharge petition and the amendment reached the floor.
Eventually it failed to get a twothirds vote and did not pass, but Democratic
leaders were ''scared to death'' by their close call, according to one lawmaker.

As a result, the new rule would require the discharge petition to cover
two-thirds of the House, or 290 signatures, an increase of 72.  The net result
would be to make it much easier for House leaders to thwart amendments, and
Representative Peter W. Rodino Jr., the New Jersey Democrat who chairs the
Judiciary Committee, makes no apologies.

''We're only insuring that the Constitution is not tampered with,'' he said.
Some of the strongest opposition to this particular change, however, comes from
Democrats such as Representative Don Edwards of California, perhaps the leading
champion of civil liberties in the House. Mr. Edwards acknowledges that he has
tried to bottle up proposed constitutional amendments he did not like, including
the balanced budget concept. But he also feels that the discharge petition is a
''safety valve, a very democratic procedure'' that should remain unchanged.

Knife Cuts Both Ways

The discharge petition, like the appropriations rider, has been a liberal tool
in other eras. And Representative Edwards points out that before this fall, the
last amendment to reach the floor by the discharge route was the proposed equal
rights amendment.

Some of the other proposed changes are procedural. The Speaker of the House, for
instance, would be allowed to waive certain votes that are regularly demanded by
the minority as a way of delaying the session and informing their members of the
daily schedule.

Other changes are openly political. One would make it easier for either party to
strip a member of his or her committee assignments, should that member switch
parties in midsession. Another would bar Democrats from aiding Republicans in
election campaigns for Federal office.

The Republicans concede that they have little hope of blocking the rules
changes, but they warn that some day, they might be in the majority. And should
that day come, asserted Mr. Lott, the Democrats should expect ''no quarter.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 14, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JERSEY'S LEGISLATURE VOTES TO RAISE LEGAL DRINKING AGE FROM 19 TO 21

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1373 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, Dec. 13


The New Jersey Assembly gave final legislative approval tonight to a bill
raising the legal drinking age from 19 to 21, effective Jan. 1. Governor Kean
has said he would sign the bill, which passed on a vote of 48 to 26, seven more
than needed.

The higher legal drinking age will not affect those who will be 19 years old by
Jan. 1. Sponsors of the new law believe it should not take away a right that
those now 19 or 20 years old already enjoy.

Both New York and Connecticut raised their drinking age to 19 from 18 earlier
this year. In the past, when the drinking age differed in the three states,
people too young to get liquor in their own state frequently crossed into the
neighboring states to take advantage of the lower drinking age.

New Jersey abandoned the 21-year standard in 1973, reducing the drinking age to
18, the same as in New York at that time. New Jersey raised the legal age to 19
in 1979. Connecticut went to 19 from 18 last July 1 and New York followed on
Dec. 4.

Change Designed to Save Lives

Assemblyman Martin A. Herman, Democrat of Woodbury, who moved the bill in its
final debate, said he was convinced after participating in public hearings
across the state that raising the drinking age would save 40 lives a year and
reduce juvenile crime in the state.

With Attorney General Irwin I. Kimmelman and the State Police Superintendent,
Col. Clinton L. Pagano Sr., sitting beside him, Mr.  Herman said: ''The eyes and
ears of the nation are literally on the State of New Jersey this evening. The
President of the United States has announced his belief that all states should
go to 21 because of the issues involved.''

The debate attracted hundreds of people to the halls of the Legislature, with
students and dozens of tavern and restaurant owners wearing buttons that said
''19 is enough'' and members of education and church-affiliated organizations
wearing ''21 now'' buttons.

An attempt to amend the bill on the floor this evening to delay its effect until
New York raised its legal age to 21 was defeated.  Mr. Herman said that it had
been argued during the years of the Vietnam War that ''if a young man was old
enough to fight he was old enough to drink.'' But he added, ''It's time we vote
to restore some balance and sensitivity to the issue.''

Using a chart prepared by the state police, Mr. Herman argued that the incidence
of driving while drinking among the 18- to-21-year-old age group ''rose
astronomically'' after the drinking age was lowered to 18, despite arguments at
the time that removing the temptation for drivers in that age group to go to New
York to drink would prove a boon to highway safety.

''The statistics indicate there would be 300 more young drivers in this state
alive today if they didn't have easy access to alcohol,'' he said.

Mr. Herman said 46,000 teen-agers in New Jersey were believed to have drinking
problems, and he called that ''an obscene statistic.'' He said lowering the
legal age to 18 had had a ''trickle-down'' effect of encouraging illegal
drinking among 17 and 16-year-olds.  ''We won't stop all illegal drinking among
teen-agers by raising the drinking age, but we will change the peer group and
limit the abuse,'' he said.

Assemblyman Dennis L. Riley, Democrat of Blackwood, opposed changing the legal
age, saying that backers of the move were using young adults as ''scapegoats for
an extremely serious societal problem - drunk driving.'' He challenged the
figures offered by Mr.  Herman, saying that during the period when
alcohol-related deaths showed a decline, ostensibly because of the higher
drinking age, ''many of our young males weren't here to participate in the
figures - they were off fighting a war.''

Mr. Riley said the statistics did not include the number of New Jersey
youngsters who were killed in New York driving to or from a tavern.

'Legal Hypocrisy'

He said it was ''legal hypocrisy'' to say that an 18-year-old was responsible
enough to sign a contract, own a home, serve on a jury and condemn someone under
the state's new capital punishment law, gamble and even own a tavern, but not
responsible enough to take a drink. ''At 16 a teen-ager can appear in a
pornographic movie, and at 17 can get married,'' Mr. Riley said. ''But he or she
is not responsible enough to drink a beer.''

Mr. Riley said anyone who did not believe youngsters would travel to New York to
drink ''is forgetting his own past.'' He asked, ''Isn't it much safer to keep
our college kids on campus, having a beer in the student lounge instead of
sending them to Greenwood Lake or Staten Island?''

Assemblyman Walter M. D. Kern Jr., Republican of Ridgewood, opposed raising the
drinking standard. ''I visited Greenwood Lake this summer,'' he said, ''and saw
24 former liquor establishments that have gone out of business. If you enact
this change, they will reopen in no time.'' Mr. Kern, who said statistics
indicated New Jersey teen-agers have fewer arrests for driving while drunk than
older age groups, said he found a pancake house, a used car lot and an
electrical company on the sites of some of the drinking places that used to
cater to teen-agers years ago in Greenwood Lake, N.Y., just across the Bergen
County line.

Carl Golden, Mr. Kean's press secretary, said the Governor was expected to sign
the bill in time for it to take effect on Jan. 1.  The only step remaining was a
review by the Governor's counsel's office to make sure the bill contained no
technical flaws.

In another development, the Assembly Judiciary Committee released a list of
recommended legislative steps to penalize those who drive while drunk, including
the imposition of mandatory jail sentences, on-the-spot license revocations and
increased fines, which would be used pay victims of alcohol-related accidents.

In addition, a number of bills on drinking and driving prepared by Mr. Kean's
staff were introduced in both houses of the Legislature.The bills would extend
the state's implied consent law to require motorists to submit to blood and
urine tests for alcohol, in addition to the current breath tests. They would
also set up an enforcement fund to provide grants to local police departments to
finance increased highway patrols and provide for immediate license suspension
of repeat offenders.

----

Reagan For Tougher Laws

WASHINGTON, Dec 13, (Reuters) -A Presidential commission today called for
tougher state and local laws to reduce what it called carnage on the highways
caused by Americans who drive while drunk or under the influence of drugs.

President Reagan said he agreed and told the commission the Federal Government
would study possible ways to finance programs to get drivers who drink off the
roads.

Recommendations by the commission, which was headed by John Volpe, a former
Massachusetts Governor and Transportation Secretary, included raising the
drinking age to 21; having more-stringent penalties, with mandatory sentences
for first offenses for driving while under the influence of liquor or drugs, and
providing Federal help for educational programs run by state and local
authorities.

The commission presented its report at a White House ceremony at which Mr.
Reagan signed a proclamation designating this week as National Drunk and Drugged
Driving Awareness Week.

Mr. Reagan said that half of the annual average of 55,000 highway deaths were
caused by alcohol-related accidents, and that 700,000 people were injured in
such accidents.

He urged Americans to use their seat belts, saying this was the best safety
measure an individual could take to reduce the risk of death or injury.

''For too many years, people have approached the problem of drunken driving as
an unavoidable disaster, like hurricanes or floods,'' he said.

''Action can be taken when the people are concerned enough, and the people are
not only concerned now, they're mad. They want the slaughter on the highways to
stop.''

Mr. Volpe said alcohol-related highway accidents were the main cause of death
for Americans under the age of 44.  ''We must reduce the carnage,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 14, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Peking Hails Cause of Rebels In Cambodia and Afghanistan

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 99 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Dec. 13


Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang renewed China's support tonight for the people of
Cambodia and Afghanistan ''in their struggle against foreign aggression'' but
did not criticize Vietnam or the Soviet Union by name.

He spoke at a welcoming banquet for President Kenan Evren of Turkey, who arrived
today on the first visit by a Turkish head of state to China.

Western diplomats said Mr. Zhao's avoidance of directly mentioning Moscow
reflected Peking's wait-and-see attitude toward the new Soviet leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 14, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section D; Page 30, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 94 words


A sign in a Veterans Administration Hospital reads, ''The Price of Freedom Is
Visible Here,'' and the U.S.O. has not forgotten the men and women who have
fought for the nation. The friendly smile of a volunteer and the red, white and
blue U.S.O. banner make the Vietnam veterans in the 12 V.A. hospitals in the
metropolitan area as well as the servicemen from World War I and World War II
feel that their sacrifices are appreciated.

Tax-deductible gifts may be sent to the U.S.O. of Metropolitan New York, 110
East 42d Street, Suite 1812, New York, N.Y. 10017.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 17, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
22 Amerasians Leave Vietnam for the U.S.

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 120 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 16


Twenty-two more of the thousands of Vietnamese children of American fathers flew
out of Ho Chi Minh City today en route to the United States.

After their arrival here, they were taken to Thailand's refugee processing
center in Phmat Nikhom, about 100 miles southeast of Bangkok. Vietnamese
officials in Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, noted that final clearance on
their exit permits had been speeded up so that the children could spend
Christmas in their new homes.

In October, President Reagan signed a law that will eventually make it easier
for American-fathered Asians from Indochina, South Korea and Thailand to
emigrate to the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 17, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Senate Confirms V.A. Chief

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16


The Senate today confirmed President Reagan's choice of Harry N. Walters as
Administrator of the Veterans Administration and W. Paul Thayer as Deputy
Secretary of Defense. Mr. Walters, who has been Assistant Secretary of the Army
in charge of manpower, succeeds Robert Nimmo, who resigned amid criticism by
Vietnam veterans. Mr. Thayer has been chairman of the board of the LTV
Corporation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 17, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TV: HAGMAN TAKES TO HELICOPTERS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 39, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1131 words


IF you like helicopters, you will love ''Deadly Encounter,'' the new television
movie that can be seen at tomorrow night at 9 on Channel 2. In lieu of Santa in
his sleigh, CBS is giving the country Larry Hagman in his chopper, complete with
Susan Anspach providing ''Perils of Pauline''-style tidbits.

Filmed in Mexico and Arizona, the movie aspires, with almost admirable candor,
to nothing more than action-adventure. Mr. Hagman plays Sam Hooten, a Vietnam
pilot veteran who runs the Y.G.H. (Yankee Go Home) Helicopter Service in the
Mexican town of Guayamas. Sam is on the lam from a phony drug charge in Tuscon.
Enter Miss Anspach as Chris Butler, an old flame of Sam's in Vietnam, where she
was a nurse and ran off with another guy. Chris needs Sam's help. Sam doesn't
want any part of her. ''It's murder seeing you, honey,'' he says.

In no time at all, however, Chris is being kidnapped by thugs using an ambulance
as their cover. Sam, who just happens to be hovering overhead, gives chase in
his helicopter and gets the drugged Chris to a nearby hospital. Just when the
action seems to be subsiding, though, another batch of thugs arrive in their own
helicopter, crashing through the glass ceiling of the hospital and throwing the
other patients into an understandable screaming panic. Once again, Sam hops into
his trusty chopper and gives chase. The pattern for the rest of the movie is now
entirely clear.

Meanwhile, between chases, Chris begins explaining why so many people are
pursuing her so vigorously. Her husband, she says, has been killed by a
racketeer, who also happens to be from Tucson. He had compiled a black book with
names of people being paid off by the gangster. The thugs are really after that
book, which they think is in her possession. The plot is indeed perfunctory.

In any case, scene follows scene in which helicopters can be found climbing over
picturesque mountains and dipping into spectacular canyons. If not fighting one
another in the air, the choppers are dueling with assorted vehicles, even a
bicycle at one point, on the ground. One begins to wonder what the producers can
come up with for a rousing finale. Not to worry. A couple of single-propeller,
double-wing planes are recruited, and Sam gets an opportunity, in midair, to
jump from a plane onto a helicopter in his effort to subdue the villains. ''I
love you, Sam Hooten,'' shouts Chris.  ''After all that,'' he asks, ''who
wouldn't?''

Mr. Hagman has a knack for keeping a safe distance between himself and the silly
roles he sometimes assumes, including J.R. in ''Dallas.'' Miss Anspach always
gives the impression that she is exuberantly ready for just about anything the
world may throw in her path. But the real stars of this curious exercise are
Frank Holgate, the director of photography, Larry Kirsh, the helicopter stunt
coordinator, and about a half-dozen stunt pilots employed for the occasion. Fred
Karlin and Michael Hoenig provided a musical score very much in the
inspirational manner of ''Chariots of Fire.''
Music Specials Feature

Pavarotti and Como

Also tomorrow night at 9, WNET, Channel 13, is once again presenting ''A
Christmas Special With Luciano Pavarotti.'' The concert was recorded in 1980 at
Montreal's Notre Dame Cathedral. The tape was acquired by WTVS in Detroit and,
with underwriting from General Motors, has become an extremely popular staple of
the PBS schedule. A recording of the same hymns has become a tape and disk best
seller.

Accompanied by Les Petits Chanteurs du Mont-Royal, a Canadian boys choir, the
tenor sings such Christmas standards as ''Adeste Fidelis'' and ''O Holy Night.''
He also includes both the Shubert and Gounod settings for ''Ave Maria.'' One of
the highlights is Mr. Pavarotti's beautifully unaffected, simply moving
interpretation of ''Panis Angelicus.'' The hour is truly a holiday classic. The
spirit of the season is continued at 10 on ABC, Channel 7, with Perry Como's
annual special. This one is ''Christmas in Paris.''
For Youngsters:

Police and News

Back on CBS, the network is slipping a special for young viewers into its
schedule Sunday at 5 P.M. ''CBS Field Trip'' puts two youngsters into the hands
of two television stars for a closeup look at some adult occupations. The tours
take place under the title ''The Police Officer and the TV Reporter.''

Erik Estrada, from NBC's ''CHiPs,'' takes 12-year-old Kurt Sterling Soo Hoo to
the Devonshire Police Station in Granada Hills, Calif., where the boy will join
two police officers for an on-the-job tour of regular patrol duty and of the
department's special headquarters in Los Angeles. Young Mr. Soo Hoo seems
properly impressed, but much of the material he is exposed to could just as
easily have been picked up in a week's worth of television police dramas.

The chaperone for 12-year-old Karissa Noel is Linda Kelsey, from the now
departed ''Lou Grant'' series. Miss Noel goes to station KNXT, which just
happens to be owned by CBS, and is introduced to Patty Ecker, described as ''one
of the best television reporters around.'' The young woman is shown how a news
report is put together, from the initial coverage to the final editing.
'Nature' Series

At Its Midpoint

WNET's outstanding ''Nature'' series reaches the midpoint of thesix-part series
''The Discovery of Animal Behavior'' on Sunday night at 8. With the invaluable
participation of the BBC's naturalhistory unit, this project, with John Sparks
as the series producer, explores hundreds of little questions the nonspecialist
might have about animal habits, from the migrations of tiny birds to the
supposed cleverness of dogs. Dramatic re-creations of noted naturalists and
zoologists in the field are combined with wildlife sequences.

This week's essay, ''A Question of Learning,'' produced by Michael Salisbury,
focuses on how animals come to do what they do. The survey includes the work of
Ivan Pavlov and his discovery of the ''conditioned reflex'' and, moving to the
1930's, B.F. Skinner's Harvard experiments in altering animal behavior. One of
the more intriguing cases concerns a horse in 19th-century Austria who gained a
reputation for doing simple arithmetic with uncanny accuracy. It was left to one
Oskar Pfungst to prove that, instead of being gifted, the critter was simply
reacting to physical gestures being made inadvertently by his master. Animal
romantics, those who tend to get terribly mushy about the creatures, may not be
amused.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ISRAELIS AND GERMANS DOUBT BULGARIAN LINK IN ATTACK ON POPE

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1646 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Dec. 17


Israeli and West German intelligence and security sources with a special
interest in international terrorism are skeptical of charges of a Bulgarian
connection in last year's attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II by a
Turk.

Intelligence agencies in both countries, however, regard Bulgaria, as well as
other countries of the Soviet bloc, as important links in a terrorist network.

The Soviet Union and its European allies, as well as China, North Korea, Cuba
and Vietnam, are believed by Israeli intelligence officials to be supplying the
various branches of the Palestine Liberation Organization - some of which are
mutually antagonistic - with arms and training. The Palestinians, in turn,
extend shelter, training and arms to other terrorist groups and sometimes
recruit them for their operations.

The West German and Israeli agencies, which maintain close ties with their
Italian counterparts, as they do with most others in pro-Western countries, do
not regard the Italian secret services as of the highest standard.

Rivalry Among Italian Agencies

They fear that rivalry within the Italian internal security agencies, suspect
evidence or outright ''disinformation'' may have played a role in the disclosure
of information that caused an investigating magistrate, Ilario Martella, to have
a Bulgarian airline official in Rome arrested last month on suspicion of
''active complicity'' in the attempted assassination of the Pope on May 13,
1981.

Mr. Martella has also moved for the lifting of diplomatic immunity from two
members of the Bulgarian Embassy's staff, so that he may issue arrest warrants
for them on related charges. Both have been withdrawn to Bulgaria.

The sources, interviewed in Israel and West Germany, do not claim possession of
evidence exonerating Bulgarians from having aided Mehmet Ali Agca, who is
serving a life term in Italy for having fired the shots that seriously wounded
the Pope. But separately and firmly they stated their belief that Bulgaria,
whose secret service they consider an adjunct of the Soviet K.G.B., would not
have taken so grave a diplomatic risk for so nebulous a political advantage with
such a high chance of the plot's disclosure.

The skepticism of the intelligence agencies is the more striking in Israel,
which has waged a consistent campaign to convince the world that Palestinian
terrorism is a creature of Soviet policy and the source of other terrorist acts
in Western nations, and would have been happy to have been able to implicate
Palestinians or Bulgarians.

Palestinians Reported in Bulgaria

The Israeli intelligence officials said that Israel had captured enough men,
materiel and documentation during the war in Lebanon to sustain Israel's charges
against the Soviet Union and its satellites. But they said they had seized no
Western European or Japanese terrorists, only 28 Turks, in their occupation of
Palestinian camps and bases.

They said they had shared documentary evidence of Turkish, West German, Italian
and Irish terrorists who had been trained in Lebanese Palestinian camps with the
governments concerned and would not be surprised if recent arrests of suspects,
particularly in Italy and West Germany, had resulted from such intelligence.

Confirming a report from a high-ranking West German Interior Ministry official
last week, an Israeli intelligence source said a number of Palestinian activists
who had fled from Beirut during the Israeli siege had been given shelter in
Bulgaria. He reported that three officers of the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine, a leftist hard-line group headed by Dr. George Habash,
were now staying at the Vitosha Hotel in Sofia.

Reports originating in Italy, believed to derive from continuing ''concessions''
by Mr. Agca, had described the Vitosha as a meeting place for terrorists,
gunrunners and narcotics smugglers.

Cache of Arms Seized in 1980

The source said that Israeli intelligence had traced no movement of P.L.O.
activists to other Communist countries since their departure from Beirut. But he
said the grant of asylum to Palestinian militants marked the second time that
Israeli intelligence had noted special Bulgarian consideration for such groups.

He said that in June 1980, two Palestinians of the Abu Nidal organization, an
anti-P.L.O. terrorist group said to be operating on behalf of Iraqi intelligence
mainly against Jewish targets in Western Europe, left Baghdad in a Mercedes-Benz
200 bearing Kuwaiti license plates. Half of the fuel tank, he said, was taken up
by a compartment that contained 30 Soviet-made Makarov and Tokarev pistols, four
Polish-made WZ-63 submachine guns and 400 rounds of nine-millimeter ammunition.

The car crossed Turkey without being searched at the borders, but Bulgarian
inspectors discovered the cache. The men were jailed, but 35 days later they
were said to have been released and the arms placed back in the fuel tank. The
car crossed Yugoslavia and Italy unscathed, and the source said the trail
petered out when in late July, in Rome, an Italian and a man of Middle Eastern
appearance carried the arms and ammunition off in large suitcases.

Attack Used to Justify Invasion

Asserting another link between the Communist country and Palestinian terrorism,
an official placed on his desk a WZ-63 submachine gun, which he said was the
weapon with which the Israeli Ambassador in Britain, Shlomo Argov, was
critically wounded last June.

He said that the gun had traveled from Warsaw to Baghdad and then to London in
the Iraqi diplomatic pouch. In London it was handed to the assailants. The
attempted assassination was invoked by Israel to justify its invasion of
Lebanon.

Israeli intelligence sources also said they had evidence that two West German
women who took part on Sept. 15, 1981, in an attack with guns and anti-tank
grenades against the car in which the commander of the United States Army in
Europe, Gen. Frederick J. Kroesen, was traveling near Heidelberg, had been
trained in a Palestinian camp in Tyre, Lebanon. Moreover, the Israelis claimed
the grenades had been smuggled to Germany in the Syrian diplomatic pouch.

Other sources said the attack on the general, who escaped injury, had been part
of a conspiracy to strike at American targets throughout Europe that had been
decided on at a meeting in Lausanne, Switzerland, the preceding July by European
and Palestinian terrorists. They included the Red Brigades of Italy, the German
Red Army faction, the Basque E.T.A., the Irish Republican Army and the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine.

Abduction of U.S. General

The attack in Germany was followed by a vain effort to kidnap a general in Italy
and the successful abduction of Brig. Gen. James L.  Dozier the next day, last
Dec. 17. In Paris, an attempt on the life of the charge d'affaires, Christian A.
Chapman, failed, but last Jan. 18 a military attache, Lieut. Col. Charles R.
Ray, was gunned down.

But the Israeli sources said evidence of specific acts by Communist countries in
support of specific terrorist operations was there. What is depicted here as
firmly established is a heavy flow of Communist arms to Palestinian bases and
military training of Palestinians in Communist countries. An official said
Bulgaria played a leading role in both activities.

An Israeli source said that from 1979 until the June 6, 1982, invasion, the
Bulgarian Black Sea port of Varna handled 80 percent of the flow of arms for the
Palestinian forces in Lebanon. The shipments went to the Lebanese ports of Tyre
and Sidon and to the Syrian port of Latakia. All the European Communist
countries contributed to the flow, and East Germany and Czechoslovakia also
shipped directly by air, usually via Damascus.

Israeli intelligence sources said they had identified training centers for
Palestinians in the Soviet Union and all its European allies except Poland, as
well as in Yugoslavia. The principal centers in Bulgaria were identified as
Adropola, about 12 miles north of Varna, and the Bulgarian Army camps of Salvan
and Smolyan.

Training by K.G.B. Agents

The main Czechoslovak camp is said to be near Karlovy Vary. In East Germany,
Palestinians are reportedly training near Karl Marx Stadt.  In the Soviet Union,
Simferopol in the Crimea is said to be the camp for ground troops, while pilots
are trained near Moscow.

At the Karlovy Vary installation, the training is reportedly conducted by K.G.B.
officers, while Soviet military intelligence is believed to be running another
camp at Doupov. The Bulgarians and East Germans are believed to be conducting
their own training, and Bulgarian experts are reported also to have been active
in camps in Lebanon.

In the absence of evidence, West European and Israeli analysts and intelligence
officials speculate over the source and aim of the charges of what is being
called ''The Bulgarian Connection.'' Much of the skeptical speculation centers
on ''disinformation,'' the word in clandestine circles for the circulation of
false information with the intent of embarrassing an opponent.

In these theories, the target is Yuri V. Andropov, the new Soviet leader and
longtime K.G.B. chief, whose position might be weakened were his organization
found to be involved in the attempted slaying of the Pope. The possible source
of the disinformation in these hypotheses could be either internal rivals or
external foes of Mr.  Andropov.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SAUDI GIVES HARVARD MUSEUM $600,000 TO FIND MIDEAST PHOTOS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Dec. 17


Harvard University's Semitic Museum has received a $600,000 grant from the King
of Saudi Arabia to search out and preserve early photographs of the Middle East,
the museum announced today.

The museum's curator, Carney Gavin, said the grant from King Fahd would help the
museum open ''a new field of archeology.'' He said researchers would try to find
personal photographs taken or bought by travelers in Middle Eastern countries
beginning in the mid-19th century.

The King said in a letter to Mr. Gavin that the grant to the museum was ''given
in appreciation of its mission, dedicated to preserving Middle Eastern
civilization.''

Frederick H.S. Allen, chairman of the committee for the Harvard Semitic Museum,
said photographs taken even 30 years ago in the Middle East had historical value
because the area had been ''utterly unchanged for millenia.'' Only in the last
20 to 30 years has the region changed radically, with the influx of oil revenues
and with large urban renewal projects. Many structures seen in early photographs
have been destroyed by earthquakes or war, Mr. Allen said.

Asked whether the museum expected Jewish protests over the Saudi donation, he
said the grant was ''absolutely noncontroversial'' because it had ''no strings
attached'' and was to be used for a noncontroversial project.

Bombing Uncovered Photos

The Semitic Museum discovered it had a collection of 28,000 19thcentury and
early 20th-century photographs of the Middle East when a bomb was set off in the
building in 1970 by students protesting the Vietnam War. At the time the museum
was relegated to the basement, and Harvard's Center for International Affairs,
where Henry A. Kissinger had an office, occupied the top floors. The explosion
uncovered the photographs in the eaves above an upper floor ceiling.

Part of the collection is on display through March. The grainless, brown and
white photographs, which were made on glass plates and toned with liquid gold,
depict scenes from Jerusalem to Cairo.  Travelers in the 19th century would buy
such photographs from the few people who had cameras. The camera was invented in
1839.

Mr. Gavin, the curator, said the best source for uncovering photographs was the
''human network.'' Although the museum wants to document collections in other
museums, its main goal is to look for ''what's in Aunt Matilda's attic,'' he
said.

A woman who works for the museum had asked priests at the Jesuit University of
St. Joseph in Beirut, Lebanon, whether they had old photographs. When they
looked, they found that Jesuits had been taking photographs to go with their
work in such fields as architecture and agronomy since the 1840's.

Photographs such as these are not rare but are forgotten, Mr. Gavin said. Middle
Eastern governments have been interested in seeing them for evidence about how
their ancestors lived. In some cases, the countries have been able to use the
photographs to reconstruct accurately buildings that have been demolished.

Although archeologists have scrutinized nearly every available piece of writing
related to the Middle East, ''early photographs have fallen through our
scholarly net,'' Mr. Gavin said. ''It's been a blind spot.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM PRESIDENT'S INTERVIEW ON RADIO AFTER WEEKLY ADDRESS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2297 words


Following are excerpts from questions and answers from President Reagan's radio
interview after his weekly address in Washington yesterday, as transcribed by
The New York Times and the White House:

Action on Jobs Bill

Q. Mr. President, with the lame duck Congress in rather noisy session, our gaze
inevitably falls on Capitol Hill. Technically many government agencies are out
of cash today because there's still no stopgap funding authority. Now you
threatened to veto the so-called continuing resolution if it contains what you
call the pork barrel jobs bill. The fact of the matter is the Senate has voted
$1.2 billion to that aim, the House $5.4 billion. The estimate is you'll get a
compromise that contains somewhere in the area of about $2 billion. Isn't that
the bottom line that you're going to be able to accept? In light of the trouble
you've had with this lame duck session, are you going to take Senator Hatfield's
suggestion and take the $2 billion and run or are you going to stand and fight?

A. Well, obviously I have to wait and see what comes down to me and what's in
front of me before I actually say veto or the other way, but I have to tell you
this: I cannot sign that bill. I will have to veto if it contains these various
amounts that have been suggested, because in truth these aren't job-creating
bills. The 5.4, for example, that was introduced in the House, I think that a
great many Congressmen, in fact some of them openly admit it, were calling it a
free vote in which they could apparently vote for a job bill knowing that I
would veto it and that they wouldn't have to live with it.

Actually that 5.4 is not a job-creation bill. It is a pork barrel and filled
with all sorts of projects, many of which wouldn't create employment at all and
many which wouldn't create employment while one particular wouldn't even be
effective until 1985. That's not going to help the unemployed today. But also,
many of those would - whatever work they would create would be at a tremendous
cost.

For example, in the Bureau of Reclamation Project that has been included in
there, it would cost $49,000 for every job that would be created. In the General
Services Administration, the element that's in there, that would be $25,000 per
job. And, as I say, there's another one, a billion-dollar program, that wouldn't
begin until 1985. So I just think the answer to recovery has to be - or to
unemployment I should say, is recovery. And anything that adds to the deficit
and delays economic recovery is going to set us back far more than a temporary
job.

The military bill - the Pentagon asked for less than half of the amount that
they've added in this bill in the House for military residence construction, so
there's half of that that wouldn't even be spent.

Q. Well, now, you seem to have made up your mind already. You say if those
figures that I mentioned are the figures that actually reach your desk, you
would have to veto. What is there to study then?

A. Well, the thing is, if it contains the things that are originally there -if,
on the other hand, they come down with some addition to this that is in another
area that you look at and say, well, there is a value to this and while I would
prefer that if we not increase the budgeting, I would have to look and see does
the value offset the risk of adding this to the deficit. But when I was talking
here, I was talking of the things that we presently know are there. You know,
when a couple of -an orange and an apple went into the conference committee, it
might come out a pear.

Report on MX Missile

Q. Mr. President, the continuing resolution will probably also contain the MX
proposal, and you just appointed a commission to look into the basing options
for MX. I was wondering, given the complexity of that task, is it realistic to
expect them to report by March first or could that date somehow be slipped?

A. I think it is, because of all the study, the research, that has gone into
this before. This whole thing came about - we asked originally for money to
begin the process of building the MX. We don't even have an assembly line for
building missiles. That was done away with in the previous Administration. And
we asked for the right to put them, the first ones off the line, into MX
existing - into Minuteman silos while we continue to study a basing plan.

The Congress denied us the right to do this, the ability to do it, and so we
continued to study, and the dense pack basing mode - and it may still turn out
to be the one that has the least warts. There's something wrong with every
system. But I was required to come up by Dec. 1 having selected a basing mode,
and this was the best one we had on hand. So there was no opportunity to consult
with them or for them to have access to all the study and the research that have
gone on.

We hope now in these few months that we can present everything, and if some of
our scientists come up with a new and improved mode, why, we'll take a good look
at that one.

Q. Are you willing to accept whatever the commission comes up with?  A. Well it
would depend on whether there was other agreement with the commission, too, and
by that I mean the expertise of our own military people, who are going to have
to use these weapons if they're ever used. And let me add here, unless there's
misunderstanding of that line, the real purpose of those missiles is to never be
used. We're trying to create a deterrent that will prevent there ever being a
need for them or a war.

Strength of Soviet Forces

Q. Mr. President, you have spoken about a window of vulnerability, and you've
said that the United States, in terms of defenses, is inferior to the Soviet
Union in many areas. My question is, looking at U.S. defenses overall, would you
trade American forces for Soviet forces?

A. Obviously the answer would be as it's been for many military men. No, because
of my faith in America and in the young men and women of America who are in our
armed forces. But I still have to say that to continue as we have been in the
previous decade and the last several years, leaving those fine young men and
women with tools incapable of doing the job, endangering their lives by lack of
training because we were denied the fuel through budgetary restrictions to fly
airplanes as often as they should.

On any given day when we came into office here, only half the airplanes in our
Air Force could be flown because of lack of spare parts. Only half the ships
could leave harbor, for lack not only of spare parts but of complete crew. So
what we're trying to do is make sure, and we have made remarkable progress.

There is an esprit d'corps in our military today and a pride in the uniform that
I think would bring a glow to every American's heart if they were as aware of it
as I of necessity am. And so the answer would be no in that one way.

But if you ask me is there still a window of vulnerability, do they have a
superiority in firepower and so forth, the answer is an unqualified yes. You
can't help but look at the NATO line, with more than 300 triple-warhead
missiles, intermediate range, aimed at the targets of all of Europe, the Middle
East and northern Africa, and we have not in that theater, is a valid
comparison.

Q. Mr. President, we also do have submarine missiles in the area which would
serve an intermediate missile function.  A. And they have submarines and
submarine missiles. And a part of the threat is not only what's on hand. It is
that at the moment their rate of increase in their weapons compared to ours. In
the last 15 years, I think, they added some 60 submarines, nuclear submarines,
while we were adding none.

Q. Just one last follow-up question. We are adding the Trident submarines, are
we not, at this point?  A. Yes. And they're adding one that's bigger and carries
more missiles.

Future of the MX

Q. Mr. President, what if this commission you're going to appoint comes back to
you and says: The MX may not be such a good idea, after all. Let's have a
modification of the Trident or some other variation on the missile. Will you be
able to accept that kind of recommendation?

A. Well we'd certainly look at it. I would - it would be difficult for me to
think that we could, knowing the length of time that it takes to get something
researched, tested fully and then into operation. Even with this MX and with all
of the work that's been done so far, that system won't begin to be installed
until 1986, won't be operational.

Q. So for logistical reasons you would be inclined to stand firm on the MX as a
system?  A. Yes, let me just say though, lest you think I have a closed mind. If
a miracle happens and someone came along with something that could be
implemented better and sooner, obviously we'd choose that.

Role in Boston Quota Case

Q. Mr. President, I'd like to move to a different area. In Boston, during the
period of budget cutting, the First U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that
white police officers and firefighters be laid off rather than blacks and
Hispanics with less seniority. This was done to maintain minority percentages.
Why did your Administration ask the Supreme Court to strike down the lower
court's order?

A. We did it because, number one, in the law itself it says that hiring or
firing cannot be on the basis of race, and second, that the Federal courts have
no authority to come in with regard to overthrowing seniority. There is a third
reason. I'm old enough to remember when quota systems and so forth were used,
not to end discrimination, but actually to legitimize it. And the precedent that
would be set if this policy, which is embodied in law and all of seniority and
layoffs is used in this instance, admittedly to try to keep a better balance,
which we're all in favor of in public employment in that area, but if that
precedent is set that seniority is meaningless, and that purpose, someday you
could find an Administration that wants to turn it around and use it to go back
to what we hopefully have gotten rid of in this country, a discrimination
against minorities.

Q. There could be or there could have been other options. Let's say, for
example, some sort of proportional layoff system, which I understand the U.S.
Civil Rights Commission had recommended. But why shouldn't affirmative action
supporters view this voluntary entry, your Administration's voluntary entry into
the case, as an attack on affirmative action?

A. Well, maybe some of them will, because an image has been created of me, I
know, that I do not support these antidiscrimination measures. The record, on
the other hand, proves the reverse. As the Governor of California, I appointed
more minority members to executive and policymaking positions in the state
government than all the previous governors in the history of California put
together.

Here we have already - and we haven't been here two years yet - we have 130
members of the black community in top executive positions, beginning with Sam
Pierce, a very capable member of our Cabinet, and two assistant Cabinet members,
and this includes - and then added to that we're doing the same thing with
regard to women, and we're doing the same thing with regard to Hispanics.

The most recent Hispanic employee is one I'm very proud of, Everett Alvarez, who
has the record of having been held in captivity the longest as a P.O.W. in
Vietnam. And he is the Deputy Administrator of the Veteran's Administration. But
our record there - but also, if you'll look at the Justice Department and the
Legal Employment Opportunities Commission, you will find that we've broken all
records in the history of the national government with regards to hearings on
violations of civil rights, on trials and on successful convictions of
violations of civil rights. So I think our record - and incidentally just
yesterday I signed a paper with a group of minority small business people that
is going to increase the amount of procurement that the Federal Government buys
from minority-owned businesses.

Appeal of Presidency

Q. I get the impression from afar that the job may have lost some of its appeal,
especially for Mrs. Reagan as a result of the assassination attempt. Is that
true?

A. I know that this was quite a traumatic experience for her. I also know that -
you know, the government, for the First Lady gets an employee free. They have
her just about as busy as they have me. But, no, she's made no decision either.
She and I are together on this.  But I have to tell you, frankly, I have enjoyed
the opportunity of dealing with the problems that are before us. I think we've
made great progress in a definite turn in government and turning away from some
of the things that have brought on the very economic crisis we're suffering
from. And it has its drawbacks, of course. You either live in a - like a bird in
a gilded cage, and I sometimes look out the window at Pennsylvania Avenue and
wonder what it would be like to be able to just walk down the street to the
corner drugstore and look at the magazines. I can't do that anymore.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Pres. Reagan with reporters

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ANTINUCLEAR GROUP HOLDS SESSION ON STRATEGY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 53, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 701 words


Participants in a two-day session, ''Funding the Prevention of Nuclear War,''
have found that antinuclear groups were able to raise only $20 million last year
for their movement.

Those who participated in the session were individual philanthropists and
foundation representatives making grants in the disarmament field. The group
itself has neither a name or a headquarters, but this was the third gathering of
the loosely knit coalition and brought together 148 participants from 20 states.

A study made for the meeting estimated $20 million was received from all sources
last year by 90 leading national organizations working on arms control or peace
issues. Robert Stein, director of the Forum Institute, which prepared the
survey, said the $20 million was one-fiftieth the initial development cost of
the MX missile.

The venture was financed by the Field Foundation, Jay Harris, the Levinson
Foundation, New World Foundation, Rockefeller Family Associates and the
Rockefeller Family Fund.

Concern about nuclear war was the focus, but participants clearly pursued
different approaches: Many insisted on a freeze on nuclear weapons as a
priority; others favored a campaign linking arms curbs to social-justice issues
such as jobs and equal opportunity.

Warning Against Complacency

The Catholic Bishops' recent pastoral letter condemning the use of nuclear arms
and calling for a verifiable nuclear freeze was repeatedly mentioned as
strengthening their cause. Moreover, many argued that the peace movement had
been so legitimized that there was small danger that efforts to paint the
movement as Communist-inspired would succeed. But others warned against
complacency and expressed resentment about President Reagan's contention that
''foreign agents'' had instigated the nuclear-freeze campaign.

''What brought me here is a sense that our existing public institutions are not
dealing adequately with the issue of the arms race,'' said Susan Silk, executive
director of the Columbia Foundation of San Francisco. She added that her
criticism was directed at universities, scientific circles, the school system
and adult education. ''As a consequence we do not have an educated public,''
said Miss Silk, a former teacher.

''We need to search for alternatives to present policies,'' said Sidney Shapiro,
director of the Max and Anna Levinson Foundation of Boston.

''We're building a constituency among businessmen to influence decision
makers,'' said Stanley Weiss, president of Business Executives for National
Security.

Movement's Diversity Stressed

''Parents and teachers need to have it brought home to them that lots of kids
simply do not feel there is going to be a future,'' said Tony Wagner, director
of Educators for Social Responsibility. He advised the participants to shape a
campaign around this concern.

The session began as the House of Representatives voted to kill the $988 million
MX missile development program, and an opening day reception at the home of
Stewart R. Mott, a General Motors heir and multimillionaire, was crowded with
celebrants. ''The mood is absolutely euphoric,'' said Mr. Mott.

Organizers of the recent meeting acknowledged they had restricted invitations to
the meeting to those known to be supporters of the campaign against nuclear war.

But David R. Hunter, executive director of the Stern Fund, argued that the
loosely structured gathering reflected broad diversity - some participants
coming from the anti-Vietnam War movement and others who were activists on
environmental issues. He added that there were ''some with old money and some
new and younger groups with very little money.''

Participants decided after two minutes of talk about future strategies to meet
next in Washington, most likely in March.  Meanwhile, they would pursue the
fund-raising effort that was underscored by the study made by the Forum
Institute, a year-old Washington research organization.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Carol Murphy Bride of Dr. J.P. Lyden

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 85, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 243 words


The marriage of Carol Slater Murphy to Dr. John Pierpont Lyden took place in the
chapel at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church yesterday. The Rev. Robert A.
Nunn performed the ceremony.

The bride is a daughter of Dr. James Slater Murphy of New York and Happy
Rockefeller, widow of Nelson A. Rockefeller, who was Governor of New York and
Vice President of the United States. The bridegroom's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Lyden of New Canaan, Conn.

Elsie Dowd and Dale Jenkins attended the couple as matron of honor and best man.
The bride graduated from the Chapin School and graduated from Georgetown
University. Her father is associate professor of virology at the Rockefeller
University. Her previous marriage ended in divorce.

Dr. Lyden, an associate attending orthopedic surgeon at the Hospital for Special
Surgery and clinical associate professor of surgery at the Cornell University
Medical College, graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy, Harvard and the
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons. His service as a
lieutenant commander with the United States Navy Medical Corps included duty
with the First Marine Division in South Vietnam. His father, who is retired, was
vice chairman of the board of Ted Bates Worldwide Advertising Inc.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MATTERS WORTH PONDERING INCLUDING STARDOM AND FLOPS

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1824 words


There follow 10 subjects for further thought in any consideration of the 1982
film year. They have nothing to do with the year's best films, which will be
discussed next week, but have to do with some of the people, places, films and
events that will henceforth be identified with the year that is now effectively
over.

1. Whither Richard Pryor? Writing about this great, high-voltage performer in
his latest, least rewarding vehicle, ''The Toy,'' I began to feel completely
superfluous, like some humorless don, tucked away in academe, fussing about the
death of the American novel while, on the outside, people can't get enough of
Mailer, Updike, Malamud and Judith Krantz.

It may be that Mr. Pryor will go on forever making third-rate junk like ''The
Toy'' and not lose his public, but I wouldn't bet on it.  Of the three Pryor
films released in 1982, only ''Richard Pryor Live on the Sunset Strip'' caught
the measure of the man's peculiarly dangerous brilliance, but ''Sunset Strip''
was a ''concert'' film.

Michael Pressman's ''Some Kind of Hero,'' about a Vietnam vet in a civilian
world he never made, was a sincere attempt to find a fiction form to fit the
Pryor personality by mixing high drama with farce. Definitely not the right
direction is the sort of nonsense that tries to sentimentalize - and civilize -
the man, as ''The Toy'' wants to do, by transforming him into a little (white)
boy's best friend, a sort of male mammy.

2. Alternative Cinema. Do you feel less elegant than the ushers at Loews Tower
East? Would you prefer not to inhale the exhaust from someone else's grass at
the Cinerama on Broadway? Are you exhausted after sitting motionless through an
entire feature at a comparatively new Lincoln Plaza theater, just because the
seat's squeaky springs announce every change in position to the rest of the
audience? Are you willing to risk a long subway ride and maybe boredom on the
chance of seeing something different?

New York's three major ''alternative'' cinemas have been doing an excellent job
recently. The best of the lot is down on Watts Street, which seems to be just
this side of New Jersey. It's the beautifully equipped Film Form that, this
year, gave us the Manhattan premieres of Robert Altman's ebullient ''Health,''
Percy Adlon's rigorously beautiful ''Celeste,'' a German film about Marcel
Proust as seen through the eyes of his housekeeper, played by Eva Mattes; the
satiric, independently-made American documentary, ''The Atomic Cafe''; and
''Sartre par Lui-Meme,'' the fine, very long French documentary in which Sartre
talks about his life, work and times, with footnotes and corrections added by
Simone de Beauvoir, who sits just a little to his left.

The film program at Joseph Papp's Public Theater is more bizarre.  This summer's
''Summer in Japan'' series featured the first New York commercial showings of
Akira Kurosawa's 1947, Capra-esque comedy, ''One Wonderful Sunday,'' as well as
the New York premiere of the Japanese-language version of ''Godzilla.'' The
theater also has an ambitious free-movie program that this year presented, among
other things, ''Eight Minutes to Midnight,'' a good, tough documentary about Dr.
Helen Caldicott, the anti-nuke activist, and ''Iracema,'' one of a number of
sometimes worthwhile Brazilian films the theater frequently shows.

The Agee Room at the Bleecker Street Cinema is only slightly larger than your
living room, but the theater's sense of mission is contagious. When you leave
the place you feel a tiny bit more worthy. Among its 1982 programs were the
first New York showings of Jean-Luc Godard's 1976 ''Comment Ca Va?'' and Ed
Pincus's ''Diaries,'' in which the Boston-based, independent filmmaker spends
over three hours examining seven years of his own life. You don't have to like
the Pincus film a lot to admire it for the way it provokes important questions
about the nature of movies, sometimes called the aesthetics of cinema.

3. Bombs Away. There are two kinds of flop film. There's the kind that
aggressively bores at your intelligence, like a flesh-eating termite, and leaves
you depleted and furious, and the well-meaning kind that, for various reasons,
doesn't work. A spectacular example of the former is Richard Brooks's ''Wrong Is
Right,'' which means to be a black comedy about Middle East oil politics, random
terrorism, Washington duplicity and World War Three. It has one disadvantage.
It's not funny. Worse - it bores as it bores.

Francis Coppola's ''One from the Heart'' is something else, a new kind of
old-fashioned love story that proves again that new is not always better. The
film's beautiful technical effects, which are of real interest to other
filmmakers, make something apocalyptic out of a sweet, small, commonplace
comedy. It's as if someone had decided to raise Little Orphan Annie to sainthood
by making a big movie musical about her, or have they?

4. New and Comparatively New Faces. Jessica Lange is not a new face but, if her
agent plays his cards right, she'll be a true star by the end of 1983 as a
result of ''Frances.'' Annie Potts, who plays Margot Kidder's naive, pregnant
friend in ''Heartaches,'' is an extremely pretty, idiosyncratic new movie
personality, while Paul Bartel and Mary Woronov, who co-star as man-and-wife in
Mr. Bartel's ''Eating Raoul,'' are the last, hilarious word on the sort of
genteel marriages once represented by Mr. and Mrs. Miniver when they were played
by Walter Pidgeon and Greer Garson.

Eddie Murphy makes a smashing, movie-star debut as Nick Nolte's cohort in Walter
Hill's breezy and brutal comedy, ''48 Hours.'' He's got class and a wickedly
cool sense of humor. Mel Gibson, the American-born, Australian-bred star of
George Miller's ''The Road Warrior,'' and Gary Swanson of Gary A. Sherman's
''Vice Squad,'' don't really look alike but each possesses some of the same
quality that made Steve McQueen into a bankable superstar. The year's most
astonishing performance by a new - to American audiences - face is Ben
Kingsley's in the title role of Richard Attenborough's ''Gandhi.''

5. Camp Classics for Connoisseurs. 1982 has been a vintage year, what with
Terence Young's ''Inchon,'' in which Laurence Olivier is doing an impersonation
of Gregory Peck's impersonation of General Douglas MacArthur. But there's also
John Milius's pumped up ''Conan the Barbarian,'' with Arnold Schwarzenegger,
Frank Perry's ''Monsignor,'' with Christopher Reeve as the lusty prelate, and
Matt Cimber's ''Butterfly,'' starring Pia Zadora in a film financed, apparently,
by her husband.

My favorite: ''Monsignor.'' It's just plausible enough to grab the imagination,
and funny enough to tickle it silly. Don't miss the grand ''recognition'' scene
in what passes for the Sistine Chapel.  Still, Miss Zadora deserves some sort of
recognition as one of showbusiness's most willing tax-loss-carry-forwards.

6. Sylvester Stallone, Gold Mine (Sometimes). After having reviewed ''Rocky
III,'' I didn't rush out to see ''First Blood'' the minute it opened a couple of
weeks later. To be perfectly frank, I might not have ever gone if it had not
become so immensely popular. After the box office failures of ''F.I.S.T,''
''Paradise Alley,'' ''Victory'' and ''Nighthawks,'' it seemed that Mr. Stallone
might never make the grade in a non-Rocky picture. Then ''First Blood'' took
off. Why?

Two reasons, I suspect. First, director Ted Kotcheff does a terrific job
orchestrating the suspense in ''First Blood.'' Once the improbable central
situation has been established, the tension doesn't let up until the improbable
finale. The audience is willingly trapped in the tale of one man fighting both
society and the wilderness. Second, the Stallone character is just the way the
audience wants to see him, and I emphasize see. He doesn't say very much. He
simply moves, and movement is what Mr. Stallone does best.  He's like a great,
sleek, mindless machine, a human automobile, a souped-up, chrome-plated Detroit
monster with all of the extras.

7. Missing but Still with Us for as Long as People Watch Movies.  Henry Fonda,
Ingrid Bergman, Grace Kelly, Jacques Tati, King Vidor and Rainer Werner
Fassbinder. Fassbinder's ''Berlin Alexanderplatz,'' a 16-hour mini-series made
for television, has just been shown at the Museum of Modern Art and may return
next year. His last film, ''Querelle,'' will be released in 1983.

8. Several More Memorable Performances. Paul Newman, as the washed-up,
ambulance-chasing Boston lawyer, and James Mason, as his powerful, witty,
sardonic adversary, in Sidney Lumet's ''The Verdict''; Joseph Bologna and Peter
O'Toole in ''Richard Benjamin's ''My Favorite Year,'' a nice comedy whose good
moments about equal the not-so-good; Willie Nelson in Fred Schepisi's
''Barbarosa,'' and Bob Hoskins in Fred Mackenzie's English-made ''The Long Good
Friday.''

9. Some Good Foreign Films You Probably Haven't Seen but Should.  Ettore Scola's
''Passione d'Amore,'' Fassbinder's ''The Stationmaster's Wife,'' made in 1977;
''Bob Le Flambeur,'' Jean-Pierre Melville's blithely funny film noir, made in
1956 but just now released in this country, and Bernardo Bertolucci's ''Tragedy
of a Ridiculous Man.''

Ransacking the Vaults. You might think that just because an actor is dead, he
won't make any more movies. Not so, as Carl Reiner demonstrates in his
lighthearted parody, ''Dead Men Don't Wear Plaid.'' Through the magic of film
editing, private-eye Steve Martin goes through a 1940's caper as the co-star of
such shades as Humphrey Bogart, Veronica Lake and dozens of other actors, many
of whom are still living though they are now somewhat older - all expertly
purloined from 40-year-old movies.

An even more peculiar example of vault-ransacking is Blake Edwards's ''Trail of
the Pink Panther,'' made after Peter Sellers's death with outtakes from earlier
Panther movies, plus gags shot but not used in those movies. The film is
dedicated to Sellers, about whom Mr. Edwards makes a number of blunt remarks in
a current Playboy interview.

At first, ''Trail of the Pink Panther'' seems to be a rip-off. The film has no
real story. It meanders. However, the gags are superb and, eventually, the
buoyancy of the Sellers-Edwards team asserts itself and the film becomes a grand
lark. It may not be completely honest to call it ''new.'' It's more on the order
of a retrospective, but it's a fond, very, very funny one.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of new movies

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KREMLIN'S GLOBAL GRIP LOOSENS, BUT IT'S STILL 'US' AGAINST 'THEM'

BYLINE: By FLORA LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2523 words

DATELINE: PARIS


There is still a ''world Communist movement,'' but the one Yuri V. Andropov has
inherited as head of the Bolshevik party is so different from what it used to be
that it's hardly recognizable. The Russians have been unable to assemble a
conference of all the Communist parties since their attempt to drum out the
Chinese in the 1960's. The best they could manage was a European meeting in East
Berlin in 1976, where Santiago Carrillo of Spain proclaimed in front of Leonid
Brezhnev and the other chiefs that ''Moscow is not our Rome and the October
Revolution is not our Christmas.'' The Russians had to swallow a drastic change
of official rhetoric and the endorsement of ''many roads to socialism.''

Even within the Warsaw Pact, Communist parties show many important differences
beneath the veneer of bloc allegiance. They range from the relative economic
liberalism of Hungary to the taut Stalinist repression of Rumania. Elsewhere,
official Communists come in a spice shelf of varieties, not to speak of the
other revolutionary groups - Maoists, Trotskyists and homemade styles. Moscow's
relations with most of the world's Communists are now merely bilateral, some on
better terms, some on worse, and one - Albania - none at all.

The erosion of Moscow's control has involved spectacular ruptures, as with
Yugoslavia's Tito and China's Mao Tse-tung, but on the whole has been gradual.

Hungarian Communists jokingly ask, ''Why do we always call the Russians
brothers?'' Answer: ''Because you can choose your friends.'' Yet the ties of
ideology still bind. Fraternal sentiment, nostalgia, habit and tradition still
link Communists to Moscow in their hostility to capitalists and the
''bourgeoisie.'' A certain clannishness persists, a sense of coreligion and a
line separating ''us'' and ''them'' that goes beyond dependence on Moscow's
money and arms. It takes a flaming faith to make revolution and the embers last.
While non-Communists condemn the whole system, Communists, when they criticize
the Russians, blame them for distorting the system or managing it badly. That
tends to sustain Moscow's claim to have discerned the inevitable direction of
history and to have been first to plunge successfully on the path.

The following survey of the worldwide relationship includes reports contributed
by New York Times correspondents in Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin America.

*

Outside the Communist-ruled countries, the major party closest to Moscow is the
French. Mr. Andropov made a point of receiving the French leader, Georges
Marchais, at the time of Leonid I. Brezhnev's funeral, thus snubbing Prime
Minister Pierre Mauroy and the Italian party chief, Enrico Berlinguer. The
Socialist Guy Mollet once said that the French Communists ''are not to the left
but to the East.'' That is less true today but despite their intense chauvinism,
there is still something in it. The French had a brief flirt with Eurocommunism
in the mid-1970's before reverting. The French party faults Moscow on some
points but insists that ''the overall balance is positive.'' Mr. Marchais' party
endorsed the Soviet stand on Poland and supports Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski. The
French Government took the opposite view, although the Communists are junior
partners in the coalition.

Western Europe's other Moscow-line party is the Portuguese.  Clandestine until
the overthrow of the dictatorship in 1974 and still organized in small, tight
cells, Alvaro Cunhal's Communists exercised great influence for a year or so and
came near establishing a grip on state power. But they over-reached and, after a
coup that failed, their importance is virtually marginal. They are unlikely to
get another chance.

The Italian party, largest outside the Communist countries, has ambiguous
relations with Moscow. Officially it rejects the Soviet model, as do the
Yugoslavs. The Italians have sharply condemned Polish military rule, openly
blaming Moscow. But a pro-Moscow minority in the leadership nourishes clumps of
ardent grassroots affection for the Russians, as firmly rooted as other
Italians' devotion to their church. Mr. Berlinguer's party is organized in large
cells, ill-suited for secret operations. But it runs its own welfare, cultural,
and other services; and using the Italian custom of patronage, the party
controls a huge number of jobs. It can provide a baby-sitter, a career in opera,
a municipal sinecure or a factory post, and its reputation for being less
corrupt than other parties adds to its strength. The Italian party attacks
Washington and NATO and deplores terrorism and the radical underground. It tends
to agree with the Russians on disarmament and the Middle East.  The Italians
thought up Eurocommunism but since the French retreat, they have been trying to
sidle up to European Socialists. Little has come of this.

Spain's Communists are the most openly opposed to Moscow's line, though they,
too, have pockets of pro-Soviet orthodoxy and nostalgia. In Barcelona, one group
said it would welcome Soviet tanks in their city while the hierarchy was
vehemently denouncing the military coup in Poland. The veteran leader, Santiago
Carrillo, who participated in the civil war but later broke with the Russians,
has been deposed, but not because of Moscow's disapproval. His Spanish comrades
considered him still too Stalinist and authoritarian in internal party affairs.

The party has not done well since Franco's death and the Socialists can govern
with an absolute majority. That played a role in Mr.  Carrillo's ouster and the
choice of a new 37-year-old leader, Gerardo Iglesias (even younger than
Socialist Premier Felipe Gonzalez), who represents renewal. The Communists have
even lost influence in the unions, which they largely organized and dominated
during the long clandestine period under Franco.

None of the other West European Communist parties matter much. Most have been
outflanked by romantic splinter groups on the radical left such as the
''Militant Tendency,'' with Trotskyist leanings, in Britain's Labor Party. But
they share views, particularly on unilateral disarmament and against the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, which makes it easy for Communists to participate
in mass movements where their influence is hard to measure. However, Britain's
serious espionage problems in recent years no longer seem to be based on
ideological affinity, as was usually true of spies recruited before and during
World War II. Those uncovered recently were blackmailed or attracted by money,
not by sympathy for Moscow.

The Yugoslav Communists, firmly entrenched in power but outside the Soviet
system, have been drawing closer to the East bloc for trade because of severe
economic problems. But there has been no change in their vehement stand against
Soviet intervention anywhere. Among the countries that profess nonalignment,
Yugoslavia is a leader of moderates, as opposed to Cuba which contends that the
Soviets are ''natural allies'' of countries outside the superpower alliances.

In Asia, too, Communists take a broad range of stands, governed more by national
than party interests. The cautious improvement in Soviet-Chinese relations has
begun on a state-to-state, rather than party, basis. Peking has signaled, by its
warm reception of French Communists, that it is prepared to normalize relations
with pro-Soviet parties. But the Chinese are adamant against interference from
Moscow. They have been zigzagging toward ideological and governmental reform,
with no concern for Moscow's views. China's requirements for rapprochement
concern security issues - Vietnamese militarism, Soviet troops in Afghanistan,
Mongolia and the Chinese-Soviet border.

Relations among Asian Communists and their attitudes to Moscow have developed
along geopolitical lines. The crisscross of fears outweighs common ideology or
revolutionary solidarity.

China helped North Vietnam fight France and the United States, but later they
had a brief war of their own. Hostility is intense. Hanoi snuggles close to
Moscow as protector against Peking, and Vietnamese leaders worry that they may
lose out in any Chinese-Soviet reconciliation. China also supports Cambodian
rebels, even anti-Communists, against Vietnam's expansionism. North Korea, which
had extensive help from both Moscow and Peking during its American war, now
tilts toward Peking. Unlike Vietnam, North Korea's regime welcomes a
Chinese-Soviet thaw in hopes that together they may again support Pyongyang's
ambition to take over the South.

Japan's Communist Party, with 450,000 members (third largest in the capitalist
world after Italy and France), is neutralist and pacifist. It rejects both
Moscow and Peking as tutors.

Like so much in the Middle East, the Communist role there is a murky matter. The
legal Israeli Communist party, which appeals mostly to Arabs, is represented in
the Knesset. It is believed to have spread its influence in the West Bank, but
it isn't always easy to tell whether support is for Communists or for leftist
factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization or whether the difference is
significant.

P.L.O. relations with Moscow appear more opportunistic than comradely and there
are constant subtle shifts. The Kremlin's Arab connections rely more on arms
supplies than on Communist solidarity.  Syria has good relations with Moscow
through its Baath military regime. Iraq's have cooled. Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi
leader, has executed Communists on charges of plotting with Syria against him.
Mr. Hussein is also annoyed with Moscow which he suspects of tilting to Iran in
the Iraq-Iran war. Even before the war, Iraq tried to diversify its weapons
suppliers and open contacts with Washington, largely through its banker, Saudi
Arabia.

Apart from Afghanistan's beleaguered puppet regime, the most important Middle
Eastern Communist party is the Tudeh in Iran.  Headquartered in East Berlin when
the Shah drove it underground, it remains close to Moscow. Tudeh sprang back to
life with Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's revolution. Despite the obvious anomaly
of creeds, it quickly portrayed itself as ultra-Islamic, complete with beards
and prayer rugs. Iranian Communists with modern educations are more attuned to
office work than mullahs and are said to have made considerable headway in
penetrating Government ministries. The mullahs are as anti-Soviet as they are
anti-American, but Moscow may hope to establish surrogate power in Iran through
the Tudeh party, if the Khomeini regime begins to crumble.

Communist influence in Africa is less opaque but no more predictable. Soviet
support for anticolonial wars brought important ties for Moscow, but Marxist
regimes are not necessarily under the Kremlin's thumb. The rule is one-party
states, and Soviet-style trappings do not reveal the relative roles of
Communists and other tendencies. If the Communists are organized separately,
they keep it deeply secret.

In South Africa, the Communist Party has been illegal for well over a
generation, although the Pretoria Government makes it sound important with
charges that it dominates the African National Congress. But apartheid, not
Moscow's inspiration, appears to be the main source of recruits for the black
nationalists.

Moscow has also had a long tradition of involvement with Latin American
Communists. Until the 1959 Cuban revolution, the parties were small and loyal to
Moscow. Most of the official Communist parties remain ineffective, often harshly
persecuted; none of them has succeeded in becoming the springboard of
revolution.

Meanwhile, other bolder groups, sometimes, as in Nicaragua and El Salvador, in
alliance with non-Marxists, have swollen guerrilla movements. In the 1960's,
Moscow and Havana disagreed sharply over Cuban activism, and Havana, not Moscow,
became the beacon of revolution. Ernesto ''Che'' Guevara's failure in Bolivia in
1967 brought Fidel Castro to some restraint in the region, but Cuba continued to
support and train revolutionaries of various hues while the Kremlin recognized
only official Communist parties.

But after the Nicaraguan revolution in 1979 showed again that armed struggle
could succeed in Latin America where Moscow-line political action had not, the
Soviet and Cuban slogan became leftist unity. Washington often refers to Mr.
Castro as a Moscow proxy, but he is a tail who has the will and occasional
capacity to wag the dog.

The Mexican Communist Party, now legal, ran its leader Arnoldo Martinez Verdugo
for President. With the backing of four other tiny Marxist groups, he won 3.5
percent of the vote. The Mexican party seeks respectability and eschews local
guerrillas. Cuba, eager for Mexican friendship, also has ignored the guerrillas
there.

Some of the most virulently anti-Communist countries, notably Argentina and
Brazil, have developed important trade with the Soviet Union. Moscow's political
instincts in Latin America have seemed too conservative for local revolutionary
tastes.

In Chile, the one Latin country whose Communist leadership is still based in
Moscow, the local underground is unhappy with the Soviet line. For example,
Chilean Communists find it hard to distinguish between Poland's General
Jaruzelski and Chile's strongman, Augusto Pinochet. Exiles are impressed with
the Spanish example -emergence from dictatorship and the eventual election of
democratic Socialists.

The Castro revolution has weakened the orthodox Communist parties.  Cuban
revolutionary militance and ability to win power without Moscow's direction have
great appeal for Latin Marxists. The Russians may be the indirect providers of
money and arms, but Castro, not Brezhnev or Andropov, is the father figure. If
Cuba acts as surrogate for the Russians in Angola or Ethiopia, that is Fidel
Castro's choice and Moscow would stand to lose almost as much as he if it cut
him off for insubordination. He reportedly advised Nicaragua's Sandinists
against becoming dependent on Moscow.

Thus, Soviet success in helping foreign Communists to power has weakened
Moscow's grip on the world movement and has made support for Communism abroad
vastly more expensive. Soviet state interest, the extension of historical
Russian interests, can no longer be easily blurred with an international
revolutionary credo. More and more, Moscow must rely on traditional power and
diplomacy. The appeal to comradeship no longer commands automatic obedience.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Communist Party meeting

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RUSHING MEDICINE TO CRISIS AREAS

BYLINE: By KATHLEEN TELTSCH

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 2; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1615 words


NEW CANAAN BECAUSE he put together a million-dollar airlift of medical supplies
for war-torn Lebanon in August and rushed off a similar shipment of drugs to
Poland earlier this month, Robert C. Macauley is being described these days as a
''Connecticut philanthropist,'' and the label bothers him a bit.

He balks about the philanthropist image, saying he's just a prosperous
businessman who has a way of coaxing pharmaceutical companies to donate drugs
and persuading other executives to give money or volunteer their time to the
Americares Foundation, which he set up three years ago. Moreover, the Macauley
manner of operation is not in accord with the conventional notion of a
philanthropist.

What philanthropist would admit cheerfully to once signing a $150,000 check,
knowing it might bounce?  The check was to pay for a jet airliner he ordered to
rescue Vietnamese children when a United States military plane bringing them to
the United States for adoption crashed on takeoff from Saigon.  ''Many would
have died and we could not wait,'' he said of the episode in 1975, which ended
successfully. The bank got its money and President Gerald R. Ford was at his
side in the welcoming party when the plane touched down in San Francisco.

The 58-year-old Mr. Macauley regards himself as a pacesetter rather than a
philanthropist, a man who sees a humanitarian crisis and rushes to help, hoping
he is pointing the way for others, such as government agencies, the United
Nations or private relief organizations.

''You see a situation and you have to move, boom, boom, boom,'' he said,
slapping his palms against the leather armchair in the office where he often
spends 16 hours a day, and many weekends.

Even sitting at his desk, tieless and in shirtsleeves, the 6-foot-2, 220-pound
Mr. Macauley gives an impression of driving energy.  The modest, one-room
headquarters of the nonprofit, tax-exempt corporation is located here in the
executive office of the Virginia Fibre Corporation, a paper manufacturing
company. Mr.  Macauley is the company's chairman and chief executive officer.

After three years, he has finally got around to putting out a formal brochure
about Americares. In contrast to the glossy, illustrated booklets furnished by
most philanthropies, he has put together a Spartan work, but the names on his
prestigious board of advisers and supporters are impressive.

Zbigniew Brzezinski, the Polish-born national security adviser to former
President Jimmy Carter, agreed to serve as honorary chairman of Americares for
Poland, a division of the parent foundation. The list of sponsors includes
ambassadors and corporate executives, Christian and Jewish religious leaders,
and the supporting companies include many of the country's top pharmaceutical
manufacturers.

''At Americares, we do not believe that we can cure all of the ills of this
world,'' Mr. Macauley wrote in setting out the organization's aims, adding,
''but we do believe that by acting as a pacesetter in sending supplies to
disaster areas, we can lead the way.'' The relief organization has dedicated its
efforts to helping victims of all types of disaster, whether war or flood or
famine.

Being a pacesetter also has involved calling on old friendships when necessary
to help the cause, and making appeals to the Government and even to Pope John
Paul II.

In the case of the Polish airlift, there was no problem getting Washington's
approval. Although the United States had imposed economic sanctions against
Poland in response to the Warsaw regime's martial law crackdown, President
Reagan had underscored that humanitarian assistance would continue to be
permitted, provided that such help was channeled through private, charitable
groups in Poland.

Mr. Macauley said the relief shipments to Poland did not require licenses or
approval from the State Department, and the Polish Government waived the
customary landing fees for the plane. The $80,000 costs for the plane and
handling charges were paid for by private contributions. Mr. Macauley said he
paid a substantial share himself, although he said he had not calculated the
total amount.

More than a dozen leading pharmaceutical manufacturers contributed to the
airlift to Poland. One of the largest, Richardson-Vicks of Wilton, donated
nutritional supplements valued at $250,000. Merck & Company of Rahway, N.J.,
supplied prescription drugs valued at $100,000.

Corporations are entitled to claim charitable tax deductions, under Federal law,
provided the gifts are made to a nonprofit American organization - and the
products are used for direct aid for the needy. According to John A. Edie,
general counsel of the Council on Foundations, the claim permitted would be
equivalent to the cost of the product plus 50 percent of the current selling
price.

When he decided in March to send off a first shipment of medical supplies, Mr.
Macauley focused on arranging for the Roman Catholic Church in Poland to handle
the arriving drugs, valued at $2.4 million. The Charitable Commission of the
Polish Episcopate assumed responsibility for distribution, but Americares
representatives accompanied the flight and filmed the distribution throughout
Poland.

With regard to the distribution of the relief supplies by Americares, William E.
Schaufele Jr., who is on the advisory committee and who was the United States
Ambassador to Poland from 1977 to 1980, said that the Polish church had proved
to be an effective agent in making sure such assistance went to those for whom
it was intended. Mr. Schaufele, who is now the president of the Foreign Policy
Association, said he agreed to serve on the committee ''because the organization
is contributing to the goal of helping the Polish people.'' Another committee
member is Walter J. Stoessel Jr., also a former ambassador to Poland, who
retired this year as Deputy Secretary of State.

Five months after the Polish airlift, Americares co-sponsored the first private
shipment of medicines to the people of Lebanon, a $1 million cargo of 87,000
pounds of pharmaceutical supplies. The distribution locally was carried out by
the Middle East Council of Churches and, again, Americares made a documentary
record of the distribution, showing relief went only to noncombatants.

The second airlift to Poland, two weeks ago, marked the start of a sustained
effort that Americares is prepared to continue for five years, if needed, Mr.
Macauley said, adding, ''and if the American public is generous.''

This time, Vice President Bush had planned to be present when the plane took off
but had to cancel the trip. Instead, his brother, Prescott Bush Jr., of
Greenwich, read the Vice President's message of good wishes. Mr. Macauley has
known both men since boyhood.

Another shipment of medical supplies for Poland is scheduled to leave tomorrow
from Newark by ship. The Polish Government is picking up the cost of the ocean
shipping and Americares is paying to transport the supplies to the ship.

As usual, the shipment is mainly medical supplies, valued at $2 million, but it
will also include 80,000 pounds of candy for Polish children. Four companies,
Hershey, M & M Mars, Nestle and Peter Paul Cadbury, were the contributors.

Mr. Macauley, who was born in Connecticut, attended Andover Academy and Yale
University, where he studied international affairs. His wife, Leila, and their
16-year-old son, Robert Jr., frequently join him on weekends in the Americares
office to help with the work so that administrative costs can be kept down. The
Macauleys also have a daughter, Melinda, 22, who recently received a master's
degree in journalism and is now working for a newspaper in Boston.

The establishment of Americares in 1979 capped years of earlier activity by Mr.
Macauley on behalf of the needy.  He regards his giving of money and time as a
way of ''giving back something, because I've been so lucky in my family and in
my business.''

In the late 60's, he started giving contributions to help homeless Vietnamese
youngsters. He helped establish the Shoeshine Boys Foundation, as it came to be
known because the youngsters in Saigon shined the shoes of American soldiers as
a way of supplementing what they received from the charitable organization. At
the war's end, the 14 homes established had given help to 2,500 children.

Mr. Macauley also has had a long association with Covenant House in Manhattan,
which began as a crisis center in the Times Square area and today runs shelters
in a number of cities here and abroad, and he says he has drawn inspiration from
observing the untiring work of the Rev. Bruce Ritter, the founder and president
of Covenant House. Mr.  Macauley is the vice chairman and a director of Covenant
House and Father Ritter is a director of Americares.

The Americares office, at 51 Locust Avenue, and Mr. Macauley's desk are
cluttered with letters from supporters. He cherishes most those written on lined
copybook paper, which came from distant cities.  They are greetings and words of
encouragement from Mother Teresa of Calcutta.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert C. Macauley

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Amerasian Children Stop Off in Hong Kong

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 142 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Dec. 19


Twenty-two children fathered by Americans during the Indochina war arrived in
Hong Kong today.  The children are the third such group to be flown from Vietnam
for homes in the United States this year. Their travel arrangements were speeded
up so they could be home for Christmas.

''I don't think they really know very much about what Christmas is about,'' said
George Wagner, a refugee official accompanying the youngsters and 12 relatives
allowed out of Vietnam.

The children, aged from 8 to 16, left Ho Chi Minh City Thursday for Bangkok and
stayed at a refugee camp southeast of the Thai capital.

The Hanoi Government has scheduled another flight for Jan. 27, which it said was
timed with Tet, Vietnam's Lunar New Year celebration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA DROPPED FROM INDIA PARLEY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 389 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Dec. 19


India, the host country for the next summit meeting of the nations describing
themselves as nonaligned, has announced that it is not inviting the
Vietnamese-backed regime in Cambodia to the conference.

The recently formed Cambodia coalition in exile, led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
has also been excluded from the talks, due to take place in March.

The moves are apparently aimed at containing divisions between supporters and
critics of the Soviet Union.  Vietnam, Cuba and Afghanistan, among other Soviet
allies, support Heng Samrin, who was placed in power by the Vietnamese in
January 1979. India, the only nation outside the Soviet bloc to have extended
full recognition to the Cambodian regime, has been criticized for its action by
the non-Communist governments of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

It is believed here that the conference will provide the Government of Indira
Gandhi an opportunity to refurbish its nonaligned image, which was damaged after
New Delhi recognized the Heng Samrin regime in Cambodia and failed to speak out
strongly against the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.

Test for Mrs. Gandhi's Prestige

The New Delhi conference is also perceived as a major test for Mrs. Gandhi's
prestige and tact as a leader of the third world. Mrs.  Gandhi has recently been
trying to change her pro-Soviet image by overtures to the West, especially to
the United States, and by shoring up India's nonaligned position.

India is due to take over as the head of the nonaligned movement after the March
conference. Cuba has been head of the organization since the last summit
meeting, which took place in 1979 in Havana. A meeting had been planned for
Baghdad this fall, but the Iraqi Government, involved in a war with Iran, had to
withdraw its invitation.

The movement was founded in the 1950's by Jawaharlal Nehru, Mrs.  Gandhi's
father; Egypt's Abdel Gamal Nasser, and Marshal Tito of Yugoslavia. It was
originally meant to embrace those newly independent nations that wanted to stay
out of the spheres of influence of the United States and the Soviet Union. Its
membership amounts to 96 countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TROOPS OF 5 SOVIET ALLIES REPORTED FIGHTING GUERILLAS IN AFGHANISTAN

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 249 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, Dec. 19


Soldiers from five Communist countries are fighting with as many as 100,000
Soviet troops against Moslem insurgents in Afghanistan, sources in Pakistan said
today.

The sources, who spoke with reporters on condition they not be identified, said
the information came from two Afghan intelligence officers who defected to
Pakistan last Thursday.

The informants were identified as Lieut. Gen. Ghulam Siddiq Mirakay, chief of
the Afghan intelligence training academy in Kabul, known as Khad, and Brig.
Habibullah Hidayat, head of the Pakistan and Iran affairs section of the Khad
academy.

''The armed forces of Cuba, Vietnam, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and the Democratic
Republic of Germany are engaged in war against the people of Afghanistan,
besides the Russian troops,'' General Mirakay was quoted as saying.

He apparently did not estimate the total number of Communist troops or say how
long the Soviet allies had been participating.  The Soviet Union sent troops to
Afghanistan in December 1979, and since then has been helping the pro-Moscow
regime of Prime Minister Babrak Karmal in its fight against armed Islamic
insurgents there.

The sources also quoted General Mirakay as saying the Soviet Union has used
poisonous gas - a charge the United States also has made and the Soviet Union
has denied.

The sources said General Mirakay did not provide any dates or casualty figures
on Soviet use of poison gas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DWIGHT MACDONALD IS DEAD AT 76; CRITIC HAD ACERBIC VIEW OF POLITICS

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1428 words


Dwight Macdonald, the author, essayist, editor and gadfly critic of books, films
and politics, died yesterday at Metropolitan Hospital of heart failure. He was
76 years old and lived in Manhattan and East Hampton, L.I.

Known for the wry, witty style he brought to his articles in such magazines as
The New Yorker, Mr. Mac-donald nevertheless felt the swirl of political
contention for much of his life. He set out as a Stalinist but then passed
through Trotskyism, anarchism and pacificism and often seemed like a one-man
anti-Communist Left movement all by himself.

He was too much of an individualist and inborn skeptic to be beholden to any
confining ideology for long. Though he admitted he had mellowed in recent years,
he never was far from the jousting in public print that marked the
much-splintered left in the years before and after World War II in this country.


Named to National Institute

Despite those decades of at times bitter argumentation, his literary merits
earned him election in 1970 to the National Institute of Arts and Letters, the
honor society for the arts chartered by Congress. He also held visiting
professorships at a number of colleges over the years and taught at John Jay
College in New York in the mid-1970's.

''I was a Trotskyist once,'' he observed in 1970 during a discussion of labeling
people in politics, a practice he regarded with some disdain. ''Then I became an
anarchist, and then I lost interest because I saw no possibility under
Eisenhower. I began to worry about politics again only about 1965 -and that was
over Vietnam. I'm not a radical now in the sense of believing in a revolutionary
solution. But I don't fell particularly conservative.''

The Vietnam War, in fact, was the last catalyst to bring Mr.  Macdonald into the
national political fray. In 1968, he joined other activists on the campuses to
speak out against American involvement and to urge young men to defy the draft
even if it meant going to jail - in itself a criminal offense.

How He Saw Disobedience

''I have reluctantly decided that civil disobedience is the only answer to the
immorality of our times,'' he declared then. ''This is the first time in my life
that I have ever felt obliged to violate the law.''

Among the books Mr. Macdonald wrote were ''Henry Wallace: The Man and the Myth''
(1948); ''The Ford Foundation: The Men and the Millions'' (1956), ''The Memoirs
of a Revolutionist: Essays in Political Criticism'' (1957), and ''Essays and
Afterthoughts: 1938-1974.'' He also edited ''Parodies'' (1960), an anthology of
prominent authors from Chaucer to Max Beerbohm and beyond.

Mr. Macdonald had the relatively rare distinction among contemporary authors of
having one of his 1963 collections, ''Against the American Grain,'' reissued in
1980.

The dedication of ''Parodies'' - a book that was greeted in The New York Times
Book Review as a ''splendid compilation'' - read, ''To my dear sons Michael and
Nicholas, without whose school bills this anthology would not have been made.''

Looked Beneath the Surface

Mr. Macdonald had an eye for the underlying significance of events in politics
and culture, a flair that made his writings more enduring than those of many
other contributors to periodicals. In addition, he had the courage of his
integrity that let him take a stand, revise his own opinions as the years passed
and admit the errors of earlier conclusions.

His witty and frequently learned criticism in The New Yorker, Esquire and other
magazines appeared in collections that retained their interest and focus when
the pages of the original publication had yellowed. He also applied unsparing
standards of classical excellence and shunned flashy writing that impresses
without containing substance.

His New Yorker articles included profiles of Dorothy Day, the Roman Catholic
social activist, and Roger Baldwin of the civil rights movement; a hard-hitting
review of Webster's Third New International Dictionary; and a broadside at the
Revised Standard Version of the Bible that defended the King James Version.

Unafraid to engage in literary skirmishes with his peers, he also was the author
of a much-discussed series of articles seeking to define the cultural divisions
between those belonging to what he termed American ''mass-cult'' and
''mid-cult.'' Essays on who belongs to which appeared in his ''Against the
American Grain.''

Criticized Warren Panel

A critical post-mortem on the Warren Commission findings in the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy came with his ''The Ghost Conspiracy'' in 1965.

The author William Barrett, in his recent book ''The Truants, Adventures Among
the Intellectuals,'' wrote: ''Macdonald had some kind of galvanizing power,
either generating arguments of his own or attracting them down on his head, so
that when he was present, disputes seemed to go off like small firecrackers all
over the place.''

''He is one of the very few political and social thinkers since 1940 to have
maintained independence of mind and a style uncorrupted by the editorial
politics of the journals he has contributed to,'' wrote Eric Mottran, a lecturer
in American literature at Kings College, University of London,

And Hannah Arendt, the antifascist philosopher, writing about Mr.  Macdonald in
The New York Review of Books in 1968, had the article entitled, ''He's All
Dwight.''

Graduated From Yale in 1928

Dwight Macdonald was born in New York City on March 24, 1906. A bookworm from
age 10, he attended the Collegiate School and the Barnard School for Boys in New
York and graduated from Phillips Exeter Academy in 1924 and from Yale in 1928.

He began to write as a boy, stimulated by his English teachers and such subjects
as Greek. At Exeter, he helped edit the weekly school paper and monthly literary
magazine. Majoring in history at Yale, he also won several literary prizes and
was chief editor of The Yale Record, a columnist for The Yale News and managing
editor of the Yale Literary Magazine.

Mr. Macdonald got a job in 1929 at the magazine Fortune, then being started by
Henry R. Luce, and stayed on for seven years at a time when the magazine staff
included James Agee, Archibald MacLeish and John Kenneth Galbraith. Not
committed to capitalism like Mr. Luce, Mr. Macdonald resigned in 1936 over
changes made in an article of his on the United States Steel Corporation.

It was about that time that Mr. Macdonald started reading Marx, Lenin and
Trotsky, an experience that changed him in a few short years from a liberal to a
radical to an ardent anti-Stalinist by the time World War II erupted. In 1937,
he joined the magazine Partisan Review, which had been turned into revolutionary
socialist but anti-Stalinist publication.

Wrote for Trotskyist Journal

As a member of the Trotskyist Party, he contributed to its monthly even as he
began to write for The Nation, The New Yorker, Harper's and other periodicals.

During World War II, which he opposed, he founded Politics as its publisher,
editor, chief contributor and proofreader. A ''small'' antiwar magazine, it
nevertheless was noted for its literary worth, featuring such authors as Andre
Gide, Albert Camus, Victor Serge, Simone Weil, Bruno Bettelheim, Meyer Schapiro,
John Berryman, Marianne Moore and Mary McCarthy before its demise in 1949 for
lack of money and Mr. Macdonald's desire to devote more time to his own writing.

In 1951, he became a staff writer for The New Yorker, remaining one until 1971.
During that period he was also film critic for Esquire.  Standing more than 6
feet tall, he and his white goatee became a familiar sight on college campuses
as a lecturer, speaker and political agnostic. He was a member of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences and, from 1968 on, served as chairman of Spanish
Relief Aid.

Mr. Macdonald, whose first marriage to the former Nancy Gardiner Rodman ended in
divorce, is survived by his wife, the former Gloria Lanier; two sons, Michael
and Nicholas, both of New York City, and two grandchildren.

A funeral service was scheduled for 1 P.M. Thursday at the Unitarian Church of
All Souls, 1157 Lexington Avenue, at 80th Street.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 21, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FIRST CAMBODIAN PRIORITY; STOP POL POT

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 671 words


To the Editor:

Stephen J. Morris makes several misleading assertions in his Op-Ed piece on
Cambodia (''Aiding Cambodia,'' Dec. 15). I am writing to modify or correct his
analysis based on my extensive experience inside the country working for Oxfam
America, a private voluntary agency based in Boston.  Mr. Morris writes that the
Vietnamese ''tried mass starvation'' to crush resistance in 1979. The famine in
Cambodia in 1979 resulted not from deliberate Vietnamese policy but from the
chaos which followed the disintegration of the Pol Pot regime. Retreating Pol
Pot troops and cadre, not the Vietnamese, pursued a scorched-earth policy,
destroying what rice and supplies they could not take with them as they fled.

The survivors of the Pol Pot holocaust exhausted themselves trying to travel
long distances to their former homes while seeking out missing loved ones along
the way. Refugees from this period have described the treatment they received at
the hands of Vietnamese troops who provided food and medicine to those in
particularly desperate condition.

But there were no resources -human or material - to support rice production
during this chaotic period. No rice production, coupled with the destruction of
granaries and human beings by Pol Pot, created the Cambodian famine.

* Mr. Morris states that the Cambodian non-Communist resistance has survived in
the face of 180,000 heavily armed Vietnamese as a result of ''grass-roots
support.'' Their survival testifies solely to the fact that the resistance is
based in Thailand and dares operate only in isolated areas of Cambodia.

In fact, since conditions stabilized inside the country in late 1980, there has
been virtually no movement of Cambodians from areas controlled by the Heng
Samrin Government to the border areas controlled by the resistance. Nor, in the
course of four trips to Battambang province in western Cambodia in the past 18
months (most recently in October), have I come across a single act of sabotage
(of one of the numerous bridges, for example) by the resistance which supposedly
enjoys grass-roots support.

This lack of dramatic success contrasts sharply with insurgencies which enjoy
the support of a significant portion of the rural population, as in Afghanistan,
El Salvador and the northern tier of Ethiopia.

* Mr. Morris implies that the American refusal to arm the non-Communist
resistance is the key factor which forces Cambodians into the horrible situation
of having to choose between the Vietnamese and Pol Pot.

There is only one reason why Cambodians today are confronted with this choice:
Thailand and other Asean (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) members as
well as China and the United States refused to abandon Pol Pot and the Khmer
Rouge to their deserved fate in 1979. Instead, these countries have pursued a
policy of military, diplomatic and material support to this movement of mass
murderers.

This policy, which is morally bankrupt, has prevented the vast majority of
Cambodians from resisting the Vietnamese occupation of their country, for the
people of Cambodia correctly perceive that such resistance would result in the
return of Pol Pot to power in Phnom Penh.

Indeed, there is no clearer testimony to the world's lack of respect for
Cambodian dignity, culture and national sovereignty than the spectacle of the
last Cambodian leaders with a shred of credibility, Prince Sihanouk and Son
Sann, being coerced, in exchange for promises of military aid, into signing a
coalition agreement with the political movement which destroyed their country
and murdered members of their own families.

Thus, arms aid to the feeble non-Communist resistance, as Mr.  Morris advocates,
is irrelevant to the welfare of Cambodians as long as Asean countries, China and
the United States maintain Pol Pot and his brutal followers as contestants in
the struggle for control of the future of Cambodia.
JOEL R. CHARNY, Boston, Dec. 16, 1982.

The writer is Southeast Asia Projects Officer for Oxfam America.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DOUBTS EXPRESSED ON AMERASIAN LAW

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 809 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 21


Representatives of several American voluntary agencies have expressed concern
that a new Federal law, meant to let thousands of Asian-born children of
American fathers emigrate to the United States, may raise unintended
difficulties, especially in the case of Vietnam. The law is due to go into
effect on New Year's Day.

Speaking in interviews, the agency representatives said the law's provision for
admitting the children alone - and not their mothers, guardians, brothers or
sisters - could cause Hanoi to keep the children in Vietnam. They said also that
the guardians might decide not to send their children to the United States or
they might send them and break up their own families in the process.

Voluntary groups have recently been making the same points to the Departments of
State and Justice in Washington because procedures for carrying out the law,
which was passed Oct. 1 and signed by President Reagan, are still being drafted.
In the interviews here, some representatives expressed doubt that their agencies
would cooperate in carrying out the new law if families were regularly left
behind.

The cooperation of the voluntary agencies is an explicit assumption of the
legislation, which is meant to help children abandoned by or unknown to their
American fathers. It provides that for admission to the United States, the child
must have a guarantee of financial support for five years from either an
American family or a private charitable agency.

Few Are Expected to Join Fathers

Amerasians admitted so far have been allowed into the United States under other
regulations, many with relatives accompanying them, and a few have had widely
publicized reunions with their fathers. Few of Vietnam's 8,000 to 10,000
Amerasians, however, are expected ever to become members of the families of
their fathers in the United States.

Fifty-nine of the children have been ushered out of Vietnam since Sept. 30, some
of them American citizens. Automatic citizenship will not be conferred under the
new Amerasian law, which makes it easier for the children or their guardians to
prove that they are the offspring of American soldiers or civilians.

Among those who expressed doubt about the cooperation of their agencies unless
families were admitted as well was George R. Wagner, who works in Washington for
the United States Catholic Conference and for the conference's International
Catholic Migration Commission. He said ''the family problem'' also applied to
the other countries within the new law's scope - Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and
South Korea.

Mr. Wagner spoke here before he left Sunday to escort a group of 22
Vietnamese-American children and 12 relatives to the United States. They left
Vietnam's Ho Chi Minh City last Thursday.

The Other Groups

Doubts similar to Mr. Wagner's are being heard from the Pearl S.  Buck
Foundation, Holt International Services, Save the Children and Church World
Service. All these groups hope to help the Amerasians move to the United States.

One private American agency's representative said of a meeting in Ho Chi Minh
City with senior Vietnamese officials last Thursday that it appeared ''that
they're extremely anxious to move out the children and their relatives.'' He
said that Cu Dinh Ba, head of the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry's North American
desk, told the Americans that the children's mothers and families did not fit
into Vietnamese society any better than the children did.

Another American at the meeting said Mr. Ba had been asked whether the children
would be allowed to leave if the United States did not also take their families.
Mr. Ba reportedly replied, ''It would be a matter for discussion.''

Washington and Hanoi conduct very few such talks because they have no diplomatic
relations.  Douglas R. Beane, a representative of Church World Service, the
relief arm of the National Council of Churches, said exclusion of families was
''a real problem.''

Michael Nebeker, director in Thailand for the Buck Foundation, said the
Amerasian law contradicted an American policy favoring the admission of refugees
with relatives in the United States.

----

U.S. Works on Problems

Special to the New York Times

WASHINGTON, Dec. 21 - Laura Genero, assistant coordinator for refugees at the
State Department, said today that the Reagan Administration expected to resolve
the problems involving Amerasians in Vietnam ''in the next month or so.''

She said Powell Moore, Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations, sent a
letter to Congress last week outlining a proposal to allow Amerasian children
from Vietnam to enter with their mothers under procedures of the ''orderly
departure program'' set up in 1979 for Vietnamese refugees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY IS REVIVING USE OF REGIMENTS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 21


The Army has revived an ancient and honored military unit, the regiment, as part
of a program intended to stabilize the lives of soldiers in combat units.

The Army has also begun to form companies of 150 to 200 soldiers who come into
the service and stay together for three years as they go through basic training,
assignment to a combat unit, training in the United States and deployment
overseas, where half the Army's combat forces serve.

Earlier, the Army announced that lieutenant colonels who commanded battalions
and colonels who commanded brigades of three battalions would serve for 30
months rather than 18 months to give continuity of leadership in those tactical
units.

The new policy, initiated a year ago by the Army's Chief of Staff, Gen. Edward
C. Meyer, is intended to reduce ''turbulence'' arising from the 30-year practice
of moving soldiers around as individuals rather than in units.

They Say It Eroded Cohesion

Army personnel officers, led by Lieut. Gen. Maxwell R. Thurman, say that that
has discouraged many soldiers from making careers in the service. More
important, it has eroded unit cohesion and therefore combat ability. An old
infantry saying holds, ''A soldier doesn't fight for his country, he fights for
his friends.''

Most American regiments disappeared in a 1957 reorganization in favor of more
flexible brigades. In the Vietnam War, soldiers rotated through combat units on
12-month tours, with the turnover so great that often a rifleman in battle
hardly knew the soldier next to him.  Many battalion commanders, the key
tactical leaders, served with a battalion for only six months.

General Thurman, at a briefing Friday, said that the Army's new plan relied on
fluid maneuvers, independent operations and skilled leadership of small units.
''Therefore, there is a clear need for tightly knit units,'' he said. Col. B.@I.
Legge, who heads a team working out the specifics of the new system, added:
''We've created a smaller community than the Army at large with which the
soldier can identify.''

The 64 new regiments to be formed over the next eight years will comprise three
to six battalions each, with 550 to 835 soldiers and officers to a battalion.

Colors for 2 Regiments

Next month, the first two of the new regiments to receive their colors will be
the 23d Infantry, which fought in battles from Antietam in the Civil War through
Normandy in World War II and one of whose battalions fought in the Tet offensive
in Vietnam, and the 327th Infantry, which fought in France in World War I, at
Bastogne in World War II, and a portion of which also served in Vietnam. The
ceremonial presentation of the United States and regimental flags, with battle
streamers, signifies the activation of the regiment.

While there have been no regiments, some of their numerical designations, for
reasons of tradition, pride or sentiment, have continued in use through
attachment to battalion names. For instance, the Second Battalion, has carried
the regiment's designation, 325th Infantry, in the 82d Airborne at Fort Bragg,
N.@C. Other regimental designations were assigned to the reserves and some
simply lapsed.

Under the new system, battalions with similar missions and weapons, such as
mechanized infantry, will be grouped in a regiment, with some battalions at a
permanent post in the United States and some abroad. Companies will rotate so
that soldiers will be familiar with the posts abroad and will return to known
home bases. The regiment is intended to give the soldier ''a home in the Army.''

The regiment, however, will not become a tactical unit. Command of battalions
will remain with brigades, which are able to group three to six battalions for
specific missions. Nor will the regimental system enlarge the Army's manpower.
General Thurman said that rotation by units would not cost more than movement of
individuals while Colonel Legge said that savings might accrue later.

Along with the revival of regiments, the Army has begun forming ''cohort''
companies of new soldiers who will spend their first three years of service
together. A cohort was a unit in the Roman legions; in the United States Army,
with its addiction to acronyms, cohort stands for COHesion, Operational
Readiness, Training.

At present, two cohort companies, one armored and the other field artillery,
have been sent to Germany, 28 are in divisions in the continental United States
and 10 are in basic training. About 80 cohort companies are to be formed by
1985.

They Disband After 3 Years

At the end of three years, a cohort company will disband, with those soldiers
intending to stay in the Army moving on as drill sergeants in training camps, to
recruiting duty, to specialty schools or to staff duties.

When those sergeants return to troop duty, they will go to their home regiments
to serve with other sergeants they knew as young soldiers. Eventually, company
first sergeants and battalion sergeants major will have risen through the ranks
of the same regiment.

Army officers said it might take 10 years, or three full three-year cycles, for
the regimental and cohort systems to take hold. But they asserted that not only
would the Army benefit, so would the individual soldier, who could buy a home
and make other personal connections in a community.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A LOOK AT ROBERT MCNAMARA'S RETIREMENT AGENDA

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1229 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 21


Probably the hardest thing, says Robert S.  McNamara, is adjusting to the
noninstitutional world, the one without the legions of staff that most
accomplished people have learned to use to lever their efforts.

After 40 years as an executive of the Ford Motor Company, Secretary of Defense
and president of the World Bank, his support system these days consists of
exactly one secretary. When she is out, he answers his own phone. ''I've had to
manage without staff,'' lamented the man President Kennedy sought to groom as
his successor. ''It's stretching me.''

It has been 18 months since Mr. McNamara left the World Bank, and if he isn't
running as fast as ever, he's doing a pretty good imitation. Two trips to Europe
in one week to discuss nuclear strategy and other issues with European
officials. A trip to Johannesburg in October to deliver a self-researched speech
in which he warned that apartheid may cause South Africa to become as great a
threat to world peace in the 1990's as the Middle East is today. A job as head
of a group at the Greater Washington Research Center that issued a report last
week recommending the adoption of long-range planning by local government, a
study he hopes will prove a prototype.

Mind-Stretching Activities

What he is doing in this ostensible retirement is acting as a kind of public
policy guerrilla, picking out issues he was long unable to address publicly and
subjecting them to the full force of his formidable managerial talent.

''I try to spend about half my time on private sector affairs and half my time
on public sector affairs,'' he said in an interview in the K Street office
building that also houses such other former Government luminaries as Henry A.
Kissinger and James R.  Schlesinger. ''I've established two criteria. Each
activity I'm associated with I try to insure it both stretches my mind and also
offers an opportunity to contribute something.''

Mr. McNamara, now 66 years old, still refuses to talk substantively about
Vietnam or to write a book describing his intimate, often criticized, role in
the war's prosecution. He has, however, visited the recently dedicated Vietnam
memorial, which he describes as ''very moving.'' He also has yet to speak
publicly about the Reagan Administration's economic policy, although he is
believed to have strong reservations about it.

Statement on Nuclear Strategy

''There are two subjects I've addressed in the past year that have been very
much on my mind for a decade or a decade and a half,'' he said. ''One was
nuclear strategy and the other was apartheid, both in its moral and its
geopolitical dimensions and I couldn't address either one of those while I was
president of the World Bank.''

It was last spring that Mr. McNamara joined with McGeorge Bundy, national
security adviser to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson; George F. Kennan, former
United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union, and Gerard C. Smith, former
Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, in a call for the United
States to renounce a possible first use of nuclear weapons if the Soviet Union
attacked Western Europe with conventional forces.

They argued in an article in the quarterly magazine Foreign Affairs that this
would both reduce the risk of nuclear war and lead to a buildup of the
conventional defenses of the West, thereby adding to the credibility of overall
deterrence.

''I spent seven years as Secretary thinking about the use and nonuse of nuclear
weapons and I think the lessons I learned there are applicable today,'' said Mr.
McNamara, the former ''whiz kid'' who left the Harvard business faculty when he
was 27 to become a civilian consultant to the Air Force in Britain in World War
II.

A 'Fascinating' Debate

He said that it had been ''fascinating'' to watch the debate the Foreign Affairs
article inspired, noting with some satisfaction that Gen. Bernard W. Rogers, the
Supreme Allied Commander in Europe, had at least partially bought the idea by
advocating a NATO shift to a position of no early first use. General Rogers, Mr.
McNamara added, has also taken direct exception ''to what Al Haig said was the
necessary conclusion of our article - that the buildup of the conventional
deterrent would require reinstituting the draft, tripling the number of men in
uniform and putting the economy of the country on a war footing.''

Mr. McNamara, who joined the World Bank straight from the Pentagon in 1968,
remains involved with the developing world.  He chafes at what he says is the
niggardly assistance provided by the United States. ''We were generous at the
time of the Marshall Plan; we are not generous today,'' he said, citing a 90
percent decline in aid, relative to American incomes, since the early postwar
years.

''I have found that the moral argument is not very persuasive,'' he said, but
''what is becoming persuasive is ... the degree to which our own welfare is
directly affected by economic and social advance, or the lack of it, in the
developing countries.''

When asked about criticism that the World Bank has failed over the years to make
sufficient use of private incentives in its development work, Mr. McNamara, now
on the board of the Washington Post Company and Royal Dutch/Shell, said: ''I
didn't spend 15 years as one of the highest paid private-sector industrialists
in the world without being sensitive to the potential contributions.'' However,
he added, the public sector was ''a very important foundation.''

Seems Confident on Vietnam

Mr. McNamara's unwillingness even now to discuss Vietnam or to write about is in
contrast to his approach to the Cuban missile crisis, which he second-guessed
for a newsmagazine recently in trying to enunciate its lessons.

Although he does not say so, Mr. McNamara seems supremely confident that
dispassionate future historians will not judge him harshly. ''I hope a very
detailed examination will be made by scholars of the decisions that affected our
role in Vietnam. It has not yet been made.''

Mr. McNamara, still trim and athletic-looking, bemoans the fact that he no
longer can run up 11 flights of stairs to his office as he did at the World
Bank.

''They won't let me run up the damn stairs. The doors are locked, top and
bottom, so I can't do it. So I get up in the morning and I jog. I hate jogging,
but it's the necessary foundation for the skiing and the mountain climbing and
the tennis.''

He used to play squash, too, but he has given this up since Orville L. Freeman,
the former Secretary of Agriculture with whom he ''about split'' 2,500 games
over many years, left town.

On Wednesday Mr. McNamara heads for a 10-day skiing vacation at his place in
Colorado where he and some friends have begun building a series of overnight
cabins for long-distance skiers in memory of his wife, Margaret, who died last
year. The first two, on a trail from Aspen to Vail, will be opened to the public
this week.

''I had Thanksgiving dinner of dehydrated soup at 11,200'' feet in one of the
cabins, Mr. McNamara said. ''It was perfectly gorgeous.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Robert MacNamara

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DOCTORS TO JOIN SHUTTLE CREWS TO MONITOR MOTION SICKNESS

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Dec. 21


A doctor will be added to two space shuttle flights next year to monitor the
crew and to find ways to alleviate what the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration calls ''space adaption syndrome.''

''You could call it 'space sickness' or 'space motion sickness,' '' David Alter,
a space agency spokesman, said today.  Astronauts have experienced nausea, loss
of appetite, drowsiness and cold sweats since the earliest days of manned space
flight, especially in spacecraft with enough room for them to move about while
in orbit.

''It's not so serious that you're incapacitated,'' said Mr. Alter.  ''It's a
malaise, not feeling well without specific complaint, perhaps a headache, the
nausea and appetite loss.''

Problem Could Become Serious

In some cases, however, astronauts have become so ill that they have vomited,
which could be a serious problem for someone in a spacesuit outside the
spacecraft.

A space walk scheduled for the last space shuttle mission in November was
postponed when William B. Lenoir became ill. The activity was later canceled
when two spacesuits malfunctioned.

Although monitoring of astronauts' medical condition has been an important part
of the space program, no medical doctors have flown on the five shuttle
missions. A medical doctor, Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, was in the three-man crew of
the first Skylab mission in 1973.

Dr. Story Musgrave had already been scheduled to join the crew of the sixth
space shuttle flight early next year, but his duties, while not yet fully
determined, will not be related to studying causes and possible cures for the
illness, Mr. Alter said.

Crew Will Expand to Five

The physicians to be included on the following flights are Dr.  Norman Thagard,
who will be aboard the seventh flight, scheduled for next April, and Dr. William
Thornton, who will be on the eighth flight, in June. They will raise the size of
the crews to five, but no extensive alteration of the spacecraft will be needed.

''They are both mission specialists who will conduct medical tests and
physiological changes associated with space adaptation syndrome,'' Mr. Alter
said.

Dr. Thornton, 53 years old, a native of Faison, N.C., obtained his medical
degree from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.  He has had
extensive conventional flight experience in the Air Force and was selected for
astronaut training in 1967. He was a physician crew member for a Skylab
simulation and was a support team member for the three Skylab missions. He would
be the oldest American astronaut to go on a space mission.

Dr. Thagard, 39, a native of Jacksonville, Fla., flew 163 combat missions as a
Marine fighter pilot in Vietnam. He earned his medical degree from the
Southwestern Medical School of the University of Texas. He was selected as an
astronaut in 1978, receiving one year of training as an in-flight specialist on
manned spaced flights.

Focus on Neurological Areas

Mr. Alter said the doctors would focus on ''the neurological system'' during the
flights, but he said he was unable to give details. ''This will be an inflight
search for the countermeasures and to provide a more complete understanding of
space adaptation syndrome,'' he said.

The decision to add the two doctors was reached today, he said.  Officials said
the decision to add the doctors resulted from an inability to otherwise
determine the causes of the sickness.

''They had hoped they would have the answer before they sent a man out in the
spacesuit,'' Mr. Alter said. He said medical medical sensors on the astronauts
that were monitored from the ground and the use of several different medications
had failed to provide specific answers to the problem.

''It's about time we tried to solve this, expecially if we're going to fly as
often and also into extravehicular activity,'' he said.  Mr. Alter said about
half of the 12 men who have flown on the five flights of the space shuttle have
experienced some degree of sickness.

''They don't suffer this immediately,'' he said. ''It's not until the first or
second day, and usually they're O.K. by the fourth day.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-EDITOR SHOOTS WIFE, THEN HIMSELF

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 393 words


A retired Wisconsin newspaper editor and publisher who had been suffering from
cancer shot and critically wounded his wife yesterday and then killed himself in
their home on a Rockefeller estate in the Adirondacks, the state police said.

Miles J. McMillin, 69 years old, who retired four years ago from The Capital
Times of Madison, Wis., and his wife, Elsie Rockefeller McMillin, 58, were found
by her daughter and their son. Both were shot in the head.

Mrs. McMillin, who was in critical condition at the Champlain Valley Physicians
Hospital Medical Center in Plattsburgh, is the daughter of William Avery
Rockefeller, a grandson of William Rockefeller. William Rockefeller was
associated with his brother, John D. Rockefeller, in the organization of the
Standard Oil Company. From 1946 to 1955, Mrs. McMillin was married to Senator
William Proxmire, Democrat of Wisconsin.

Classified a Suicide

Mr. McMillin joined The Capital Times in 1945 and served as a reporter,
editorial writer, columnist and associate publisher before becoming publisher.
He was an early critic of both Senator Joseph R.  McCarthy, Republican of
Wisconsin, and the Vietnam War.

After retirement, he remained a member of the newspaper's board of directors.
The state police said Mr. McMillin had undergone radiation and chemotherapy
treatment at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., and was in the ''advanced
stages of terminal cancer.'' They classified his death as a suicide.

Nine years ago, Mrs. McMillin's father committed suicide on the same 20,000-acre
estate.  Mrs. McMillin and her husband had been living on the estate since his
retirement.  Elsie Proxmire Zwerner and Miles McMillin, who found the couple,
said they became suspicious that something had happened when they saw no lights
in the house shortly before 7 P.M.

They went inside, the state police said, and found the McMillins on a bed. The
police said they found the apparent weapon, a .25-caliber automatic pistol,
nearby.

The estate, now known as Bay Pond, is in the community of Paul Smiths, about 12
miles northwest of Lake Placid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Miles McMillin

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 22, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


By Le Anne Schreiber
BREAKING BREAD. The Catholic Worker and the Origin of Catholic Radicalism in
America. By Mel Piehl. Temple Uni- versity Press. 296 pp. $19.95.

DOROTHY DAY hated to be called a saint. She thought it a sentimental term used
by people who wanted to patronize her, blunt her social criticism, or excuse
themselves from following the example of her utter dedication to living
humanely. But she probably would have liked Mel Piehl's book because, without
canonizing her, it gives her her due as one of the most compelling personalities
of the century and as the driving force behind Catholic radicalism in this
country.

''Breaking Bread'' is not a biography of Dorothy Day, it is a history of the
Catholic Worker Movement, which she co-founded in 1933 and which she kept vital
until her death two years ago at the age of 83. Her co-founder was Peter Maurin,
an eccentrically brilliant French peasant whom some considered a Union Square
crackpot and whom Dorothy Day called her mentor and, well, a saint.

When they joined forces in 1933, Miss Day was a 35-year-old muckraking
journalist and Catholic convert trying to put a bohemian past behind her; Mr.
Maurin was 54, a penniless religious visionary and social agitator who preached
to the New York wind in a thick French accent. When he suggested that she start
a Catholic newspaper to spread his ideas, she conveniently chose to regard it as
a command from on high.

From its first issue, however, The Catholic Worker was more Day than Maurin. His
deepest commitment was to his vision of an agrarian Christian utopia. Her
mission was to bring a Gospel-inspired ethical radicalism to the most pressing
social issues of her time. He, for instance, had no interest in the labor
movement, thinking that industrial workers should simply leave their jobs and go
back to the land. She thought that, in the meantime, they should organize. A
typical issue of The Catholic Worker devoted one page to Maurin's proselytizing
for farm communes and seven pages to some of the best early labor reporting ever
printed. Appropriately, he started a Catholic Worker farm on donated property in
Pennsylvania and she organized the Catholic Workers' urban Houses of
Hospitality, which still offer free food, clothing and shelter to all comers.

As a journalist, Dorothy Day was far-sighted and often acerbic.  She attacked
German nationalism and anti-Semitism in 1933, Mussolini's invasion of Ethiopia
in 1935, Franco's insurrection in 1936. In her first column after the bombing of
Japan, she wrote: ''Jubilate Deo. We have killed 318,000 Japanese.'' In 1954,
she wrote a lengthy article about the French war in Vietnam and warned against
American intervention.

In the 30's and 60's, when her positions on particular issues seemed to coincide
with those of a sizable liberal mainstream, her movement flourished; those were
also the periods when the religious nature of her radicalism was least
understood, even by her own followers. In the 40's and 50's, without the
camouflage inadvertently provided by a liberal national consensus, her true
radicalism was more visible. As the Stanford-trained historian Mel Piehl makes
clear, Miss Day was not liberal or leftist in any conventional political sense;
her unswerving commitment was to a Gospel-based rejection of all force. Which
meant that she remained a pacifist even during World War II - a stance that not
only isolated her from her church and countrymen but also caused widespread
defections from the ranks of the Catholic Workers.

Joining (and leaving) the Catholic Worker movement was a thoroughly unofficial
affair. Miss Day, who was anarchist as well as pacifist, liked to call the
movement ''an organism rather than an organization.'' There were no vows, no
articles of belief, no training, no officers, no meetings, rules or salaries.
There were not even any assigned tasks on the farms or in the Houses of
Hospitality, where workers lived in voluntary poverty, sharing food and clothes
with their guests.

Unlike religious orders, whose collective wealth often cushions members from
their vows of poverty, the Catholic Workers aspired to a state of ''precarity,''
which was defined as ''the opposite of security.'' Whatever was sufficient for
more than the day was given away. Profit, to Miss Day's mind, was a form of
force. And voluntary poverty was more than a form of do-gooding; it was economic
pacifism, or as Mel Piehl puts it, the Catholic Workers' ''very deliberate
strategy for undermining the ideological foundations of capitalism.''

Understandably, the turnover rate was high in a movement based on willful
disorganization and a very low standard of living. The fact that the Catholic
Workers will celebrate their 50th anniversary next May Day should probably be
called miraculous. For 48 years, the movement was held together by the personal
force of a woman who would no doubt hate having that term force applied to her.
How long the movement will survive her will be the true test of what she tried
to accomplish.

The virtue of Mr. Piehl's graceful and intelligent book is that it reckons with
Dorothy Day not just as our lady of the bread lines, but as a far-sighted
religious thinker whose ideas are now being debated in such an unlikely quarter
as the American Council of Bishops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
GHOSTS

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Dec. 22


It has been 10 years now. At this season in 1972, American bombers made their
last massive attack in Vietnam: the Christmas bombing. Over 12 days, 100 B-52's
and 500 smaller planes struck Hanoi and Haiphong. It was the most intensive
conventional bombing campaign in history.

How easily a decade has slipped by. How little we remember. How seductively we
are led to forget, to ignore history. But it is necessary to remember. For the
Christmas bombing exemplified a fundamental reason for the American disaster in
Vietnam: the use of violence by politicians when their own courage and wisdom
failed.

Why did we bomb? After the memoirs of the last 10 years, the answer is
unarguable. We punished North Vietnam, which had agreed to peace terms, in order
to impress our allies in South Vietnam, who were balking.

''Peace is at hand,'' Henry Kissinger said in October, just before the election.
He said that because he had finally negotiated a peace agreement with North
Vietnam. But he had not kept President Thieu of South Vietnam informed on the
negotiations; and when Mr. Thieu was told the terms, he rejected them.

Saigon demanded 69 changes in the draft. The list was ''so preposterous,'' Mr.
Kissinger said in his memoirs, that ''it must have strengthened Hanoi's already
strong determination to dig in its heels.'' Hanoi demanded changes of its own.
The answer was the Christmas bombing.

Mr. Kissinger's deputy, Alexander Haig, flew to Saigon and explained that the
United States was ''brutalizing'' North Vietnam.  The South Vietnamese had to
agree to the peace terms now, he warned, or risk losing American support. They
reluctantly agreed. After some minor concessions by Hanoi, the document was
signed.

The details of the peace terms seem irrelevant now. And they really were then.
What mattered was a crucial concession made earlier in 1972 by Mr. Kissinger:
agreement that North Vietnam could keep its troops in the South. That was the
clause unknown to President Thieu.  Once it was conceded, all the elaborate
provisions for truce teams and ''reconciliation'' were window-dressing.

The story comes down to this: Mr. Kissinger and President Nixon did not have the
courage or the wisdom to negotiate with President Thieu in the first place - or
confront him. That failure led to the Christmas bombing.

The Nixon-Kissinger policy on Vietnam as a whole was marked by that pattern of
unwillingness to face unpleasant reality. When they came to power in 1969, they
knew that the United States could not win the war by any means politically or
morally open to us. But they fudged that fact by withdrawing American forces
while continuing to talk about victory -about the need to prove that America was
not ''a pitiful helpless giant.''

In the years 1969 through 1972 the United States dropped four million tons of
bombs on Indochina, spent $50 billion, lost 20,492 American and hundreds of
thousands of Vietnamese lives. And gained what - honor? Credibility? National
security? All were in fact damaged by those years of pointless war.

Compare what Charles de Gaulle did when he inherited a war in which his
countrymen had far more invested, politically and psychologically. He had the
courage to cut the tie to Algeria. He took on himself, alone, the burden of
reality - and put France on the road to healing and strength.

That comparison makes clear the nature of the American failure in Vietnam. It
was a failure of political leadership. We had no one in power, ever, with the
guts to admit that it was the wrong war, that there was no way to victory, that
our national interest required a prompt end to the American role. For that
failure we paid not only in lives and treasure and international respect but in
corrupting doubts among ourselves about our leadership.

Right-wing voices, like those of the German right after World War I, have been
telling us lately that America lost in Vietnam because the military had to fight
with one hand behind its back. That is nonsense: U.S. forces in Vietnam,
eschewing only nuclear weapons and at times some bombing targets, applied
immense firepower.

Military power could not solve what was a political problem. The United States
was trying to impose a solution from outside, and in abysmal ignorance, on a
political conflict that had been going on in Vietnam for decades. Today we look
at the result of a Communist victory and deplore the harshness. But the painful
fact is that we could not prevent the outcome: indeed, that the added years of
war, after we knew its futility, only added to the pain of the Vietnamese
people.

When the Vietnam memorial was dedicated in Washington recently, the novelist
Ward Just, who was a correspondent in the war, wrote a piece called
''Remembering Vietnam.'' The memorial, he said, ''gives to the dead and their
comrades not dignity - no man-made structure ...  confers dignity - but
memory.'' We must remember what happened in Vietnam, or we shall relive its
disaster in new forms. Not dignity but memory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 23, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 925 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
IN THE CITY OF FEAR. By Ward Just.  291 pages. Viking. $14.95.

BEFORE I get around to all that's right about ''In the City of Fear'' - Ward
Just's dark, dense, complex novel about Washington in the Vietnam era - I may as
well warn readers of the many obstacles they will have to overcome.

First and most obvious, there's the novel's principal theme - the corrupting
effect of Vietnam over two decades in the life of the nation's capital. This is
bound to produce a sense of woe in the reader, whether one believes that the war
is now best forgotten or one thinks that our faces should be rubbed in the
calamity until we learn its many lessons.

Less obvious but even more nettlesome: Mr. Just, a former reporter for The
Washington Post, seems to feel that the usual inauthenticity of political
fiction can best be overcome by sheer complexity and mystification. Thus,
through nearly half of ''In the City of Fear,'' it is sometimes difficult even
to tell what is going on.

To the apparent end of enriching the novel's texture, Mr. Just will overlap
multiple conversations, or withhold the point of what various characters are
discussing, or shift the narrative point of view so frequently from one person
to another that the reader sometimes forgets through whose consciousness a given
episode is being filtered.

The present and the past fade into one another in a way that is often confusing.
For example, a guest at a dinner party will announce that he is going to relate
a key occurrence from the recent past.  This incident will then be narrated from
the various points of view of its participants. Finally, the scene will shift
back to the dinner party and, as matters proceed, an omniscient narrator will
relate how much of the flashback was revealed to the dinner guests and how much
has been withheld.

To be sure, these devices effectively promote the illusion that we are dealing
with a world of secrecy and doubletalk that we can barely hope to understand -
which is part of what Mr. Just is trying to assert about Washington in the
1960's and 70's. But I often found myself reading the same sentence over and
over again, and having to slap the back of my neck in order to make the words
sink in. Too often, the text seemed consistent with one character's opinion of
modern journalism's objectives - namely, to ''enhance the present, obscure the
beginning, confuse the end. Journalism has no memory!  The more exotic and
confounding the details, the richer the sum, the more mysterious and suggestive
the experience. Detail piled upon detail, a disorganized militia of details, all
of them marshaled in service to ... the moment.''

Yet perseverance in deciphering Mr. Just's complexities is finally worth the
considerable effort. Eventually, most of the cryptic references are explained
and the plot of ''In the City of Fear'' succeeds in elucidating itself. It turns
out that the three sections of the novel occur progressively earlier in time -
Part One, on a hot August afternoon in Washington, sometime after the end of the
war; Part Two, either late in the Johnson era or early during Nixon's
Presiden@cy, at a dinner party in Georgetown; and Part Three, during a September
of the Kennedy years, at a wake and a memorial service of a young member of the
National Security Council who has died in a freak accident.

It turns out that Mr. Just is dramatizing in dozens of subtle ways how
Washington, and hence the country, was altered during the Vietnam era -what the
war did to the home front, and what the home front did to the war; how everyone
was affected, from the cynics and game players and power brokers down to the
righteous soldiers in the field who believed, with Oliver Wendell Holmes, that
''In the midst of doubt, in the collapse of creed, there is one thing I do not
doubt, and that is that the faith is true and adorable which leads a soldier to
throw away his life in obedience to a blindly accepted duty, in a cause which he
little understands, in a plan of campaign of which he has no notion, under
tactics of which he does not see the use.''

In the third and final section of the novel, Mr. Just achieves the tragic
grandeur he has been striving for all along. Dennis McDonough, one of the most
outstanding of the Kennedy Administration's best and brightest, is killed by a
freak accident involving a runaway taxi. In the obsequies that follow, the story
echoes at an intimate and plausible remove those mournful days of Kennedy's own
assassination.  There is even a hint - delicately balanced between the
incredible and the inescapable - that some sort of conspiracy has been involved
in McDonough's death, that someone with an interest in the war's execution
arranged to stifle McDonough's criticism of it.

Set against what has preceded the funeral - which in real time is what happened
afterwards - the final act of the drama suggests with stunning poignancy the
amputated hopes that for many people Kennedy's death has come to represent. Yet
Mr. Just hasn't sentimentalized the Kennedy era, has he? I don't believe so. But
in order to understand exactly what he has done with it, one must really begin
the novel over again. By the end, this is something one is altogether willing -
even eager - to do.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GUNMEN FIRING WILDLY KILL 3 IN CHINATOWN BAR

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1385 words


Masked gunmen firing pistols burst into a crowded Chinatown bar and reputed gang
hangout early yesterday and killed three people, including a 13-year-old boy.
Eight others were wounded, two of them critically.

Witnesses at the bar - the Golden Star at 51 East Broadway - compared the scene
to a battleground, with screaming victims and paramedics and with the dead and
wounded sprawled inside and on the sidewalk.

Inspector Joseph DeMartino of the Manhattan Detective Command said several of
the victims belonged to gangs that have clashed over the lucrative protection
racket in Chinatown. He called it the worst outbreak of Chinatown gang violence
in recent years.

The killings came amid reports that Federal authorities had joined local law
enforcement agencies in an effort to break the control the gangs are said to
have over businessmen.

25 Patrons in Bar

Inspector DeMartino said that witnesses were afraid to come forward with
information and that details of the shootings remained sketchy.  At about 2:30
A.M., the bar, which was filled with up to 25 patrons, was invaded by ''several
male Orientals'' wearing face coverings of ski masks, stockings or bags, he
said. Accounts differed on the number of gunmen involved, and the police said
there were as few as two or as many as four.

The intruders pulled out handguns, determined from shell casings to be a
9-millimeter automatic, a .45-caliber pistol and a .32-caliber pistol, and raked
the room with gunfire, the inspector said. He said the gunmen apparently fired
indiscriminately. They then fled on foot or by car and escaped, the inspector
said.

Police officers searching the neighborhood later found a fully loaded
.25-caliber pistol at a building across the street from the bar. It was sent for
tests to determine if it was connected to the killers. The police also took away
a car parked outside the Golden Star for fingerprint tests on the chance that
the gunmen might have touched it. An alarm about the shooting was called in to
the 911 emergency number by one of the two barmaids, according to the police at
the Fifth Precinct. One victim, 13-year-old Stephen Chan, was pronounced dead at
the scene. Two others died at Beekman Downtown Hospital. They were identified as
Michael Tsun, 20, and Irving Woo, 17.

Among the eight wounded were two the police said were in extremely critical
condition. They were identified as Dan Lee Chan, 19, who was taken to Bellevue
Hospital, and Edwin Li or Lai, no age given, who was taken to St. Vincent's
Hospital.

The others wounded were listed as George Tom, Tam Kwong, Chris Chang, Wei Chow,
Tommy Lee and Michael Tam.

Membership in Gang Disputed

Police officials said, however, that some of the victims may also be known by
other names.  At Bellevue yesterday, a friend who had come to see the patient
known as George Tom identified him as Peter Lee and said he was 18, not 16 as
the police said.

The friend, who declined to give her name, also said Mr. Lee was not a member of
any gang and that the Golden Star was a place for young people to meet, a
singles club. She said the bar had been open for at least 15 years.

Inspector DeMartino and other police officials gave a different account.

'Fight Over Turf'

The inspector said that some of those in the bar had been identified as members
of several Chinatown gangs, including the Free Masons and the White Tigers.

District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan, who has been investigating
the Chinatown gangs for years, said yesterday that most of the patrons in the
bar were believed to be gang members.

''This was a fight over turf,'' he said. He declined to be more specific.
Police intelligence officers, who spoke only on condition that their names be
withheld, said that the Free Masons - a gang not affiliated with the established
fraternal lodge of the same name - had recently expanded and might have been
talking to the Queens-based White Tigers. Such moves, they said, might have
angered rivals, including the Flying Dragons.

Payments Demanded

Over the years, Chinatown gangs have demanded payoffs from Chinese restaurateurs
and operators of gambling dens on the threat of violence. Usually, the police
say, the victims comply rather than complain to the authorities.

Mr. Morgenthau said that with the cooperation of some merchants, his office had
prosecuted about 70 gang members over the last three to four years. He said he
had virtually put the Ghost Shadows - at one time Chinatown's most feared gang -
''out of business.''

A former rackets investigator said the Justice Department had recently opened
its own gang investigation under provisions of the Federal anti-racketeering
statute.

Several reputed members of the Ghost Shadows charged in the slaying of a
Virginia woman last August are apparently being held in jail as possible
witnesses in the Federal investigation. Richard Cushing, a court-appointed
defense attorney representing one of the charged youths, Johnny Yuen, said he
understood that there was a Federal investigation under way.

''My client was indicted three months after the event,'' he said.  ''No bail was
set from October to December, and bail still hasn't been set. Evidence wasn't
turned over to us. They had to have the information to prove that my client was
linked, but they haven't turned anything over to me and I can't adequately
represent my client, and that's highly unusual.''

Shooting in Narrow Barroom

Neither Mr. Morgenthau nor John S. Martin Jr., the United States Attorney for
the Southern District of New York, would comment when asked if a Federal
investigation was under way.

The scene of yesterday's shooting was a narrow barroom down a flight of concrete
steps on a busy stretch of East Broadway between Market and Catherine Streets.
The bar covered most of the right side of the room; along the left and in the
back were small tables.

The first paramedics on the scene were Paul Maniscales and Kirby McElhearn.
''It was chaotic from the word go,'' Mr. Maniscales said. ''Sheer pandemonium.
It was almost like being in a battle, something you see on TV. It was like being
in Vietnam. Everybody was shouting and screaming and yelling. Everybody wanted
to go to hospital right away.''

When the two arrived, they saw a man with five bullet wounds lying on the
sidewalk near the bar door. He had wounds in the abdomen and in the legs. He was
still breathing but had very low blood pressure.  ''We knew we had to move quick
or he would die,'' Mr. Maniscales said.

They placed the man, who was not identified, in so-called antishock trousers -
inflatable pants that push blood from the legs to the trunk -and began an
intravenous procedure.

Then Mr. McElhearn went inside. ''People were lying on chairs, people were lying
on the floor bleeding from gunshot wounds, mostly wounds in the legs and arms,''
he said. ''Everybody was making noise. Friends of the victims were screaming and
shouting. Everybody wanted treatment at once.''

''I said let's get down to work,'' he said. ''I knew that if I got emotional,
people would die. As soon as I walked in, I guessed eight people had been
shot.'' He called for help. Ultimately, five paramedics and five ambulances and
two supervisors responded.

''It was like playing checkers with personnel,'' Mr. Maniscales said. ''It was
chaos. People lost their partners. But it was like a well-run machine.
Everything worked out because we all knew each other.''

Monte Feiler, who with his partner, Eric Frick, was the second paramedic team at
the scene, said the bar was dimly lighted.  ''One patient,'' Mr. Feiler said,
''was lying on top of his buddy, trying to shield him. But his buddy was dead.
it's something I haven't seen in all my years.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Map of Chinatown (Page B2) photo of a bar

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IMMIGRANTS ENCOUNTERING CHOICE BETWEEN FRIENDSHIP AND ISOLATION;
A New Melting Pot: The City in the 80's

BYLINE: By DENA KLEIMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1528 words


A New Melting Pot: The City in the 80's Last of nine articles that have appeared
periodically since Sept. 27. By DENA KLEIMAN

They live across the hall from one another - two couples who could not have less
in common. One grew up in Brooklyn, the other on the outskirts of Saigon. And
yet they have had a powerful impact on each other's lives by sharing what they
know best.

Miriam and Bernard Roiss used to pride themselves on their recipes for Hungarian
goulash and kidney pie. Now they stock rice wrappers in their refrigerator and
eat most of their meals with chopsticks.

Nieu and Pheu Trieu and their five daughters had never tasted cheese before they
met their neighbors. They had never been to a circus or known the convenience of
disposable diapers.

Now the Trieus call the Roisses ''grandmother'' and ''grandfather.'' They shop
together, cook together, celebrate holidays together and tend to each other's
health, sharing good times and bad - the kind of give and take that some might
say in a broader sense New York itself has carried on with immigrants for
generations.

Residents From 11 Countries

They are just two of the families who live on the sixth floor of 87-30 Justice
Avenue, a fascinating corridor in Elmhurst in the center of Queens, where 40 men
and women and 18 children from 11 countries live side by side, providing a rare
insight into immigrant life in the city today.

Theirs is hardly a typical relationship for the sixth floor - a place of
contrasts and contradictions, where disparities of culture intertwine,
reflecting many of the concerns involving immigrants today.

Many of the others on the floor lead isolated, lonely lives - some by choice,
others because they are timid or have other priorities.  Some people on the
floor, in fact, are so isolated or indifferent to their surroundings that they
believe they are the only foreigners around.

Some immigrants, it could be said, take more from the city's offerings of jobs
and housing than they are prepared to give. They are not interested in its civic
machinery. They do not know the name of its Mayor and have no interest in
learning its customs or even the English language. But others might say these
same individuals are contributing by providing a vital source of labor and the
kind of ethnic texture that has long been the city's stamp.

Still there is a difference between life for today's immigrants and the way it
was at the turn of the century when tenements were filled with individuals from
the same countries with similar dreams.

On the sixth floor of 87-30 Justice Avenue today - in part because of the
differences in language and in part because air travel permits the dissatisfied
to leave - much of life goes on in private. It is almost as if the nature of
assimilation itself has changed from a relatively easy process of osmosis to one
that requires individual initiative.

Because there is such diversity today, not only in national origin but also in
educational backround, there seems less pressure to become a part of the city.
For many immigrants it is no longer clear what it means to become a New Yorker -
or indeed an American. Does it entail abandoning one's customs and language to
become part of a more homogenized whole? Or does it allow for some assimilation
while maintaining ethnic distinction?

'We Work for the Children'

With only one-third of the floor's 16 apartments occupied by Americans and the
rest natives of Chile, Korea, India, Peru, Uruguay, Haiti, Colombia, Nigeria,
Bangladesh and Vietnam, the floor offers endless ethnic surprises. One housewife
on the floor, who prepares only traditional Indian food for her family, fixes
poori in a food processor. Another resident eats Kentucky Fried Chicken with
chopsticks.

''This is New York,'' said Mr. Roiss, who was born and raised in the city and
has lived in apartment 6E for the past 15 years. ''We wouldn't have it any other
way.''

Mr. Roiss, who is a laboratory technician and whose children are grown and live
in California, used to spend his evenings at the television set. Now he reviews
American history and spelling with his newly-acquired ''granddaughters.'' The
doors remain open all evening as the children, who range in age from six months
to 12 years, scamper between apartments.

The Trieus have not only given him renewed purpose, Mr. Roiss said, but an
education in Oriental medicine, cuisine, family life.  Mr. Trieu, once a
successful businessman in Saigon, is now a parking lot attendant. He lives with
his family in a cramped space. A clothesline stretches from one end of their
crowded bedroom - with its four bunk beds and extra mattresses - to the other.
But in this country, he said, he has found something beyond a job.

''I don't live here to become rich man,'' said Mr. Trieu, who was accustomed to
many comforts in Vietnam, but has reconciled himself to making do with next to
nothing so that he can have political freedom. ''I want my children get good
education. That's all. For what do we work? We work for the children. For the
future of the children. I don't need too much money. I need everybody happy.''

Explaining American Life

The Roisses, he said, have bolstered that happiness.  To spend an evening with
these two families is to watch the unusual for New York, for many the stereotype
of an anonymous city where neighbors hardly acknowledge each other in elevators.
When Mrs.  Roiss, who is an office manager for Shearson/American Express, comes
home from the office, Mrs. Trieu often sends over one of her daugthers with a
pot of soup or a platter of Vietnamese-style shrimp.

When the Trieus' daughter Julie, 11, was not doing well in school, it was Mrs.
Roiss who went to speak with Julie's teacher because she felt she best could
understand the teacher's English and what was expected in an American school.
And, she said, she identified herself - to the teacher's surprise - as the
youngster's ''grandmother.''

Mrs. Roiss has tried to explain to the Trieus just about everything about
American life. The other night, she offered strings of licorice.

''You don't like it,'' Mrs. Roiss said, ''you don't have to eat it, but you have
to try it.''

Feelings of Isolation

Yet for others on the floor, isolation abounds, the way it does in so many New
York dwellings, and it is difficult to know how much of this is a function of
cultural diversity. Clearly, for some immigrants, the facility of air travel and
the possibility of returning home, not only for vacations but also to live, has
reduced the incentive to abandon old customs.

''It's different here,'' said Nur Ahmed, 31, a recent immigrant from Bangladesh,
who owns a candy store on the Lower East Side. ''In my country, I never have to
be alone. In this country, everyone is a stranger.''

Mr. Ahmed lives in the three-bedroom L apartment he shares with his wife,
3-year-old son and four brothers, who range in age from 18 to 29. Three of the
brothers are waiters at restaurants in Manhattan. The youngest attends high
school.

Because they are so busy with their work and school, the Ahmeds - like many
others on the floor - say they have not had time to become familiar with their
new surroundings. They know, for example, that Ronald Reagan is the President of
the United States, but have never heard of Mayor Koch. They are fuzzy about the
precepts of American democracy.

It is not, they said, that they have contempt for the American system of
government or are disinterested in its ideals. It is rather a preoccupation with
earning money that has forced isolation - so much so that they have not even met
their neighbors.

A Chance to Learn From Others

They have never met the handyman in apartment H, who has been in this country 10
years from Uruguay and who - having become disenchanted with the life here - is
now planning to move his family to Australia.

Nor do they know the Indians in apartment C, who continue to speak Gujarati at
home and who in the past six years have visited India twice.

Yet at times the anonymity of the city is shattered on the sixth floor. Paula
Walker, an American accountant in apartment A, had her first taste of rawfish
last year when the Peruvians in apartment B invited her over for a birthday
dinner of ceviche.

''I asked her how she cooked it,'' said Mrs. Walker, who is still uncertain
whether ceviche is a food she might want to consume again.  ''Then she told me,
she didn't.''

Sylvester Stankis in apartment R, another of the Americans on the floor, is
helping a young woman who recently arrived here from Peru to learn English.
Three times a week, Mr. Stankis stands at his living-room mirror giving lessons
a la Henry Higgins to Rocio Arajuo, 18, who lives in apartment B.

Mr. Stankis, a retired businessman, said he has never felt more ''useful.'' Miss
Arajuo said Mr. Stankis's help has allowed her to study nursing.

''Have you ever heard of 'My Fair Lady'? '' Mr. Stankis asked Miss Araujo the
other day as she stood at the glass practicing.  At that point, she hadn't. Mr.
Stankis explained and now - of all things - Miss Araujo can recite the lyrics to
the 'Rain in Spain.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Last of nine articles that have appeared periodically since Sept. 27

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of immigrants in the U.S.A.

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ON THE INTREPID FLATTOP MUSEUM FOR HOLIDAYS

BYLINE: By RICHARD F. SHEPARD

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2002 words


THE aircraft carrier Intrepid, no less a battlefield where Americans died
fighting for their country than the fields of Flanders, Gettysburg and Normandy,
lies tethered to Pier 86, West 46th Street on the Hudson River, where she has
become a museum and a good place for a family visit this holiday season.

She has been open seven days a week (although not tomorrow or New Year's Day),
but after New Year's Day, she will receive visitors only Fridays, Saturdays and
Sundays for the winter months. Since she was opened to the public Aug. 4,
250,000 visitors have walked through spaces that once rang to the clatter of men
racing to action stations and the growl of planes straining to go into combat.

The Intrepid's planes flew against the Japanese over Tokyo, helped sink the
batttleship Musashi in Leyte Gulf and the world's largest battleship, the
Yamato, off Okinawa. She accounted for 650 enemy planes destroyed and 289 enemy
ships sunk or damaged. She was hit by a torpedo and, even worse, by kamikaze
planes that took the lives of more than 40 members of her crew. She was, for a
while, known as the ''Unlucky I,'' but she has outlasted most of her
contemporaries.

After World War II she sailed with the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean,
recovered the Mercury 7 and the Gemini 3 space capsules and made three combat
cruises off Vietnam. Having survived all this, she retired in 1974 and the
question for her sponsors now is how she will survive as a museum. Certainly, to
judge by the lines frequently waiting to go aboard, she may do so with her
customary aplomb.

It is difficult to convey the immediacy of wartime in a museum, to get across
the idea that men actually died here, that young Americans rushed across these
decks to planes that are to today's jet and supersonic aircraft as rowboats are
to hovercraft. But this is often the way with battlefields visited by later
generations; it takes a will of the visitor to recreate the drama of the time.

The mere look of the 900-foot, 41,000-ton hull with flared bow and island
structure towering above her flight deck tells the basic story. She is still
essentially a warship designed to practice her trade with deadly accuracy. To
old-timers, the Intrepid recalls days when the fleet visited New York, when such
carriers as the Saratoga tied up at piers, battleships moored in the river and
lines of New Yorkers avidly boarded for visits. Navy ships still visit the port,
but they are, if more deadly than their forebears, much smaller, lacking the
bulk that in itself made a warship a fearsome creation.

The Intrepid dominates a waterfront in a neighborhood where giant liners once
ruled, but that is now largely devoid of such shipping except on weekends, when
cruise ships sail from the passenger terminal half a dozen blocks north.

Children Are Awed

Like any museum, the Intrepid has a fascination for special tastes. Children,
for instance, enjoy and are awed by her. They sit at the guns, climb into an
orientation cockpit on a Skyhawk plane, goggle at the films. Veterans of World
War II, of course, can touch a piece of their past on the Intrepid, though they
may never have been aboard or even have seen a carrier.

One veteran of service on the Intrepid boarded her not long ago for the first
time in decades. He was Roger Holwick of San Diego, who served as yeoman third
class aboard the carrier from May 1945 until March 1946, celebrating his 19th
birthday during that span. He had a battle station in an engine space below
decks, where he manned a sound-powered telephone to the bridge. After the
Japanese surrender, the Intrepid launched hundreds of planes on patrol in the
Yellow Sea and over camps that held American prisoners of war. Then it carried
home 2,000 G.I.'s on a 13-day trip to San Francisco, a group that came close to
what only such passenger ships as the Queen Elizabeth or Queen Mary could
handle.

''We had them and 3,500 crewmen and - do you know what? - the food was good,''
Mr. Holwick said as he came aboard, looking for his old emergency station, which
is an area not open to visitors. It was unlocked for him by the staff.

''I don't know if you can understand how I feel about seeing her as a museum,''
he said. ''I see plastic all over now, and I see people running about. It does
affect me.''

He Couldn't Wait to Get Back

There are several Intrepid veterans among the 80 paid workers and the 100
volunteer workers aboard her now. Tom Murray, aviation boatswain's mate from
1960 to 1963, is now an exhibition supervisor and is very enthusiastic about the
preservation.

''Twenty years ago I couldn't wait to get off of her,'' he said.  ''Now I
couldn't wait to get back aboard.'' Ship buffs and historians certainly find
much aboard the Intrepid to occupy mind and time. She is the 11th to bear this
Navy name since 1803, when the first Intrepid was captured from Barbary pirates.
And, despite all the new electronic wizardry that has gone to sea since this
Intrepid's palmy days, she is still every inch a grand ship.

Several large scaffoldings on the pier have stairways that ascend to the
Intrepid's hangar deck. It is a high climb, but the several flights of steps are
each short enough to allow time to catch the breath. The museum anticipates the
opening soon of an elevator to the hangar deck to accommodate the handicapped
and, eventually, the use of the carrier's bomb elevators to the top deck.

Once aboard, the visitor goes through ordinary doors into the ship itself. Here
it is possible to rent, for $2, a recorded tour, which does an admirable job of
shepherding you from point to point while filling you in on the background of
the vessel. The first stop lies somewhat forward of the entrance, into Navy
Hall, where you wait for the start of a standing-room wide-screen film in the
Carrier Operations Theater that thunderously puts you alongside a day in the
life of a carrier, with jets roaring off and onto the flight deck. It is an
impressive experience and orients you to what you will be looking at farther on.


19 Planes on Display

After the film, the path leads beneath suspended planes, some of the 19 deployed
about the ship. The planes are suspended from the overhead and give every
appearance of being in flight. The visitor can walk out on the starboard side to
the spot where the astronauts of the two missions were brought aboard.

Astern of Navy Hall is Intrepid Hall, which tells about the ship itself, with
model dioramas of naval actions and a multimedia presentation, ''Spirit of the
Intrepid,'' about her World War II days. You hear young voices telling how they
came to be aboard and you hear the angry sounds of war.

Farther aft is Pioneers Hall, a space in which ancient wood-andcanvas planes of
aviation's earliest years hang from the overhead and make only flights of fancy.
In sharp contrast, just behind it is Technologies Hall, where the space craft of
today and tomorrow introduce you to upper regions the Wrights may never have
dreamed of conquering. Here is another film, ''Men and Ships in Space,'' the
story of an Apollo flight. Another film, ''Reflections,'' about the Apollo
mission, is also showing.

The Intrepid has a mess hall of sorts, for tourists, and not related to the ones
in which her crew ate. It is near the stern of the ship on this hangar deck, and
there one can buy light snacks, candy, sodas - in short,the K rations that
sustain sightseers throughout the world.

900-Foot Flight Deck

On the flight deck, the visitor can get the sensation of the carrier as carrier.
The 900-foot flight deck is too big to encompass in one glance. It has not been
redesigned or retooled for its role as museum; it is the artifact itself. The
guide lines for takeoff and landing are painted, the planes themselves are
there, as though ready for launch. Among the seven aircraft positioned on deck
are a Lockheed P-2 Neptune, circa 1945; a smaller McDonnell Douglas A-4 Skyhawk
light attack bomber; a Grumman F-11 bomber, and the oddlooker, a dish-topped
Grumman F-1 Tracker, a 1957 model equipped with radar and designed to give early
warning of enemy approach.

You may have to wait on the starboard side, where the grim-looking island
structure towers, a part of the ship that looks as if it came from an earlier,
standard man-of-war. The steps up are narrow, and the space above is cramped, so
visitors are allowed up only in small groups to prevent congestion. The visitor
goes to the captain's bridge and to the admiral's bridge and sees the places
from which the giant ship was actually maneuvered.

The Intrepid is in what may be her last operation, although she is not now what
she is going to be. Lawrence Sowinski, a former advertising man and now the
ship's director of exhibits, told how the ship came to her present assignment
and what he hopes will become of her.

''The Intrepid was launched in 1943 and retired just over 30 years later, one of
the most decorated ships in Navy history,'' he said.

Fisher Lends Support

In 1973, she was laid up but not mothballed. This meant that much of the exposed
areas suffered atmospheric deterioration, requiring much work. Interior spaces
down below, such as the auxiliary conn (one of the ship's navigation centers)
and the brig are in fine condition.

In 1981, after the Intrepid had been berthed in Philadelphia, the Navy gave her
to the Intrepid Museum Foundation, which wanted her in New York. None of this
would have happened without the support, financial and otherwise, of Zachary
Fisher, a real-estate man who is head of the board of trustees. With the help of
a Federal grant and the city's contributions in sprucing up the pier, the
foundation spent $22 million, mostly borrowed, to get the Intrepid to opening
day. It is this sum, Mr. Sowinski said, that the admission price is paying for.
He added that it has also been a success as a place for private parties and
dinners after visiting hours.

Guns and Exhibitions

In addition to the 19 planes the carrier has on view, eight more will be
arriving in the near future. The museum is trying to get some Air Force and
civilian aircraft to join its squadron. There are 13 gun mounts carrying 20
guns, including a 5-incher, a 3-incher and the ubiquitous 10-millimeter
antiaircraft weapons.

The restoration of the Intrepid continues, almost like an archeological dig -
bit by bit. Mess halls and crew quarters will be restored while the after half
of the vessel will be given over to museum exhibitions.

Mr. Sowinski led the way to the radar and communications center, below the
island structure, a section that will be opened in a few months. Jim Caldwell, a
specialist in aviation electronics and a former marine reserve gunnery sergeant,
was piecing together wiring amid a deck full of radarscopes.

''This is a lifetime thing,'' Mr. Sowinski added, ''rehabilitating the ship.''
''I intend to be at it a long time,'' Mr. Caldwell said.

Getting There

The Intrepid is at Pier 86, West 46th Street, on the Hudson River.  The M-27
49th-50th Street bus stops at the entrance. The M-102 42d Street crosstown and
the M-16 34th Street crosstown buses stop at 42d Street and the river, at the
Circle Line pier, four blocks south.

The Intrepid is open 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. every day. Admission: $5; under-12's,
$2.50, and over-65's and students, $4. Information: 245-0072.

Wintry winds on the flight deck make it advisable to dress warmly.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 25, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Veterans Begin Vigil

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 43 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 24


A group of unemployed Vietnam veterans began a round-the-clock candlelight vigil
at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial tonight to call attention to the 1,421 veterans
still missing in action.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Veterans Hold Vigil

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 43 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 25


About 12 unemployed Vietnam veterans began a round-the-clock vigil Friday night
at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial to call attention to the 1,421 servicemen still
listed as missing in action.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARCHITECTURE VIEW;
THE MODERN CITYSCAPE NOW FINDS ROOM FOR THE PICTURESQUE

BYLINE: By Paul Goldberger

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1660 words


Michael Graves's Portland Building in Portland, Ore., finished last October, may
not be the best building of 1982 - indeed, it is not.  But its completion
certainly ranks as the most compelling architectural event of the year, for the
transformation of this structure from a much talked-about set of drawings into a
real and rather powerful work of built architecture represents something much
larger than a single building. It reminds us that the movement that has come to
be known as Postmodernism has become vastly more than a curiosity; now, at the
end of 1982, it is unquestionably something that is having a genuine effect on
the cityscape.

The Portland Building is the largest built work yet of Michael Graves, whose
style is a highly personal mix of Cubism and classicism - a kind of Cubist
collage of abstracted classical elements, all given bright, even garish,
coloration. The building has been criticized as being no more than a loudly
decorated box, and it is true to say that it is a straightforward box given
ornate wrapping. But far from being less important for this, it becomes almost
more so, for the idea of making a major public building out of a piece of
decorated construction represents a crucial change in our attitude toward civic
architecture.

Where this important building can be faulted is not in its basic stance - in its
architect's attempt to merge a basic box with classical elements and color to
provide a kind of symbolism lacking in austere International Style Modernism.
The problem is in the Portland Building's proportions, which are squat, and in
the use of an unfortunate reflective glass, which is the only element in this
relatively inexpensive building that actually looks cheap. But these things do
not deny the significance of the Portland Building as a beacon, illuminating the
distance we have come from the moment when the steel-and-glass vocabulary of
orthodox modern architecture seemed the only way in which to make a large,
public building.

And if this distance is clear in Oregon, where the Graves building happens to be
situated, it is all the more visible elsewhere. In New York City, the A.T.& T.
Building by Philip Johnson and John Burgee edges toward completion, looking more
like a convincing work of architecture and less like an eccentricity; even its
detractors seem prepared to concede that it will be a major Postmodern monument
- a skyscraper that has a fresher and more potent presence than almost anything
else on the skyline right now. And A.T.& T. is but the most prominent of
numerous civic buildings, houses and interiors that can be classified as
Postmodern - as rejecting the purist austerity of Modernist abstraction in favor
of something less abstract, more willing to relate to the conventions of
architectural history.

This was a year, in other words, in which expectations changed: this, more than
any specific accomplishment, characterized 1982.  Shifts in architecture are
gradual, and this one has been going on for some time - but it is fair to say
that it was in 1982 that the arguments against the sleek, austere abstractions
of the International Style, the architecture we commonly think of as ''modern,''
seemed more than ever to be taken for granted. The public has now come to expect
of its architecture something other than orthodox Modernism was bringing to it.
It has come to assume that buildings will be more than simple boxes.

Not that this means that Modernism has disappeared from the cityscape - or from
our thinking. Quite the contrary; Modernism, in both thought and building, has
been a presence in the past year as surely as it was in the days when it was the
clearly dominant style.  Indeed, in some ways the idea of modern architecture
has been more with us in this past year than at any time in the last decade -for
as the era of Modernism's dominance recedes into the past, we are freer, in a
sense, to ponder the idea of Modernism, to study it, to understand it, and to be
willing to use it in the circumstances in which it is appropriate.

We are certainly seeing more and more buildings that struggle to merge certain
aspects of International Style Modernism - sleekness, coolness, materials like
metal and glass - with the impulses toward the lively and the picturesque that
characterize Postmodernism. In New York City, the Park Avenue Plaza skyscraper
by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, a multi-sided tower of reflective blue-green
glass with a huge covered public arcade, is the most notable such building
completed last year. And the coming year will see more such ''late-Modernism,''
to borrow a term from the architectural classifier Charles Jencks, with the
completion of Museum Tower by Cesar Pelli and Trump Tower by Der Scutt and
Swanke, Hayden & Connell.

The idea of Modernism was certainly the issue underlying the debate over the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial on the Mall in Washington, D.C., which was largely
completed last month. As designed by Maya Yang Lin, who won the commission in an
international design composition, the memorial is a starkly abstract
composition, a pair of granite walls set to form a ''V,'' with the ground
between the walls sloping down toward the center of the ''V.'' On the walls are
carved the names of the 58,000 Americans who died in Vietnam.

It is a profound and moving monument - surely Washington, D.C.'s most important
work of architecture in some time. Its abstraction recognizes the conflicting
meanings the Vietnam War has had for this country, and yet the prominence given
to the names of the dead assures that they, rather than any viewpoint about the
war itself, are the image we take away with us. Unfortunately this was not
understood by some veterans, who petitioned the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Commission to add a flagpole and a statue of a soldier to the composition with
the aim of making it less ''modern''; this was a case of the current drift of
thinking away from Modernism going wildly out of control and causing the
compromise of an important modern design that, unlike the typical glass
skyscraper, seemed to speak very much to the concerns of the 1980's.

Two other events occurred this past year to help put our attitudes toward modern
architecture in perspective. The first was the exhibition last summer at the
Museum of Modern Art of the work of Richard Neutra, the California-based
architect who died in 1970.  Neutra was a confirmed Modernist who forged a
synthesis between the puritanical lines of the European International Style and
a kind of easy, indulgent Southern California ethos. For years his work has been
given short shrift, first, probably, as a result of the genuine weakness of his
late buildings and later as part of the general shift of attentions away from
Modernism.

The excellent and sympathetic, but hardly worshipful, look at Neutra that
curators Arthur Drexler and Thomas Hines offered at the Modern was something
that could not have come even five years ago.  There was no sense last summer,
as there might have been a few years before, that praise for Neutra might
indicate indifference to the concerns of Postmodernism, or that criticism of him
would mean a lack of respect for the principles underlying so much of his work.
He was able to be viewed on his own terms, and that in itself says something
encouraging about this moment in architectural history.

One of the greatest works of 20th-century architecture in New York City, Lever
House of 1952 by Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, has been threatened with
replacement by a 40-story skyscraper, and the New York City Landmarks
Preservation Commission's decision to designate Lever House as an official city
landmark ranks as a further turning point in our evolving attitudes toward
Modernism. To realize that a glass-and-metal skyscraper can be old enough to
fall under the umbrella of historic preservation is itself somewhat shocking;
that the landmarks commission was forthright in designating the building,
despite its flaws, is welcome news, and ranks among the year's most significant
architectural events. (It is urgently to be hoped that the Board of Estimate
ratifies the Lever House designation.)

The reason Lever House is threatened is the reason much of midtown Manhattan is
in trouble - there is simply too much building in too small an area, and the
other reason 1982 will be remembered in terms of actions by the New York City
government that affect architecture is that this was the year in which the New
York City Planning Commission, after long delays, finally passed some
restrictions on midtown skyscraper development. The restrictions, embodied in a
new zoning code for midtown, are an attempt at political compromise, and thus do
not stop development altogether. But they represent an earnest and intelligent
attempt to limit and direct growth, and as such symbolize a turning point in the
city's attitude.

It is an attitude that has been buttressed by the Planning Commission's more
recent proposal for sharp restrictions on the socalled ''slivers,'' or narrow
towers that rise on squeezed-in sites never intended for high-rise buildings.
These restrictions, unlike the midtown zoning code, are not yet law. But the
likelihood is that they will soon become official, and in any case, they were
put forth this year - making 1982 all the more a year in which the city began at
last to concede the dangers of excessive and unguided development.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMIC AFFAIRS/William D. Nordhaus;
Destroying the Economy To Save It

SECTION: Section 3; Page 3, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words


LIKE children who have discovered that there is no Santa Claus, the country is
becoming increasingly disillusioned about the Reagan Administration's promises
that Christmas will come every day.

Instead, the stockings are empty and threadbare in the wake of two years of
ideologically driven and incompetent economic management.

Given the frictions and shocks of a modern capitalist economy, it is not
possible to fully employ our workforce or factories. But the recession has gone
far beyond the bounds of prudent management.  Instead, economic policy has
intentionally idled 9 million people and is wasting $350 billion annually in
lost output. These tragic losses are the excessive slack beyond what is
necessary to prevent a resurgence of inflation.

In a way that is reminiscent of the war in Vietnam, today's economic policy is
destroying our economy in order to save it from the specter of inflationary
expectations.

But isn't recovery just around the corner? It seems likely that the recession's
trough is behind us, but this observation misses the fact that this business
cycle is a breed apart. Thus, the seven postwar business cycles before 1982
experienced an unemployment rate at the trough of 7.1 percent compared to 10.8
percent today.

The difference between 1982 and earlier cycles also emerges in the strength of
the recovery. In the seven earlier cycles, the unemployment rate averaged 5.7
percent after one year of recovery.  The outlook for Christmas 1983 is for an
unemployment rate above 10 percent.

Even after a year of recovery, it is likely that next year's economy will stand
in worse condition than at the bottom of earlier business cycles. Indeed, given
underlying trends, we are unlikely to see a return to a 7 percent unemployment
rate before 1987. Therefore, given today's economic policies, it may take five
years for the economy to return to a level associated with the trough of earlier
business cycles.

Why is the nation so passive in the face of the current economic debacle? At the
heart of this depressing outlook is the paralysis of economic policy that today
prevents an effective recovery program.  The economy is like a sick patient,
with the doctors standing helpless at his side because they are unable to agree
on either the diagnosis or the remedy.

No one disputes that the American economy is very ill. But no coherent recovery
program emerges. Chief resident Reagan has been stung by the evident failure of
his earlier high-risk operation of tight money and supply-side tax cuts. He is
reluctant to admit that the blood-letting has left the economy in critical
condition, and is hoping that the natural forces of recovery will allow the
patient to revive.

The policy paralysis has been most evident in the post-election Congressional
session, which was unable to provide a single piece of legislation that will
effectively revive the economy. The only legislative initiative was the gasoline
tax. While this represents sound policy for the long run, even with the highway
construction program it is likely to lower real spending power and to reduce
employment over the next couple of years.
TO those who follow developments in economics, the paralysis should c ome as no
surprise, given the demise of the earlier Keynesian c onsensus. Economists are
today a shellshocked army, barraged by c riticism because of poor forecasts,
confused because of divided i ntellectual leadership, unsure which way to
retreat.

Out of the ashes of defeat has risen a new phalanx of competing theories, a
rag-tag collection of discarded ideas and unproved fancies. The theorists
-monetarists, supply-siders, flat taxers, protectionists and gold bugs -are so
numerous and vocal that our political leaders stand paralyzed waiting to see who
emerges victorious.

Perhaps the greatest confusion is to sort out the real from the false policy
dilemmas. Policy makers too often distort their actions to retain credibility,
or to restore the confidence of financial markets. Such steps are futile because
financial markets are intrinsically volatile - they can no more be calmed than
can the seas.

The central dilemma for economic policy today is inflation vs.  unemployment.
More precisely, given the substantial reduction in the underlying rate of
inflation, from 10 percent per annum in 1979 to 6 percent today, should we aim
for rapid recovery? Or are the risks of, and our aversion to, increasing
inflation so great that we should dedicate the rest of the 1980's as the Decade
of Slack?

In my view, the time has come, in the spirit of Senator Aiken's 1968 remark
about Vietnam, to declare victory over inflation and more decisively to insure a
rapid economic recovery. In designing steps for a rapid and durable recovery, I
would envisage three:

* First, we should move decisively to bring the curtain down on the disastrous
monetarist experiment of the last three years. Real interest rates -still five
percentage points above historical norms - should be rapidly decreased to the
zero to 2 percent range. Such a step would give a sharp boost to the economy,
particularly in sectors like investment that are critical to future output, or
to areas that are most exposed to international trade, like our hard-hit Rust
Bowl.

* Second, we should take temporary fiscal steps to promote jobs, while moving to
close the medium-term deficit. In the short run, such steps would be jobs
programs, as well as one-shot fiscal relief for states, localities and low- and
middle-income individuals. In the medium term, the deficit should be reduced by
a further stiff gasoline tax increase along with base broadening and repeal of
indexation in the personal tax system.

* Finally, we must assure that, when recovery occurs, we protect our costly
gains against inflation. Leaving aside formal incomes policies as unrealistic
before 1985, the most important set of steps would be to allow maximum play of
market forces. We must tenaciously reject protectionist strategems like the
domestic content bill; we must pursue deregulation, and we must desist from
government policies that raise the price level.

Most analysts today would concur on the pressing need for recovery. But in
today's state of intellectual anarchy, forging a consensus on an economic
program equals in likelihood the election of the Pope as the head of the world's
religions.

Failing steps to promote recovery, the American economy can anticipate at best
halting growth, volatile markets and a period of slack as far as a forecaster's
eye can see.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
William D. Nordhaus is John Musser Professor of Economics at Yale and one of
four economists who regularly write for the Sunday Business section.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A TRADITIONALIST WHO WORE RADICAL STRIPES

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 950 words


Dwight Macdonald, who died last week at the age of 76, was a radical and a
democrat, an iconoclast and an elitist. To all these roles he brought the high
wit and solid scholarship that distinguished him as journalist and critic.

Mr. Macdonald could be counted on to stand against the pieties of the hour. A
man of the political left, he quit Fortune magazine in 1936 over changes made in
his article on the U.S. Steel Corporation.  He was a forthright anti-Stalinist
in the battles that agitated the American Left for two decades, and continued to
cause tremors in the years that followed. During World War II, when the nation,
left and right, put differences aside to fight the common enemy, he remained a
pacifist and established an inimitably independent magazine, Politics, that is
remembered with admiration even by those who could not share his view of the war
as an imperialist boondoggle.

After the war, he was scathing about those ''totalitarian liberals'' who
continued to embrace the Soviet Union, and he had a fine time playing
cartographer to ''the mental habitat of Henry Wallace plus a few hundred
thousand regular readers of The New Republic, The Nation and P.M. ... a region
of perpetual fogs, caused by the warm winds of the liberal Gulf Stream coming in
contact with the Soviet glacier.'' In 1949, he embarrassed the pro-Soviet
sponsors of a much-publicized conference on the arts by rising to ask the Soviet
emissary what had happened to 33 ''missing'' Russian writers.

Unlike some anti-Communists, however, Mr. Macdonald never had a good word for
Congressional red-hunters. He resigned from the anti-Communist American Congress
for Cultural Freedom because of its ''anti-anti-McCarthyism.'' Nor did he move
into any variety of ''neo-conservatism''; he emerged from a period of political
inactivity in the 1960's to oppose America's adventure in Vietnam. At one stage
of his intellectual peregrinations he considered himself a Trotskyist, at
another an anarchist, but no single category could accommodate him.

The slashing style that served Mr. Macdonald so effectively in his political
writings was put to equally good service in the cultural arena. As a movie
critic, he did not succumb to the pretentiousness that often seems to go with
the calling; jargon was not his style.  Watching ''Ben-Hur,'' he wrote, ''was
like waiting at a railroad crossing while an interminable freight train lumbers
past, often stopping completely for a while.'' In another delicious review, he
described Doris Day as being ''as wholesome as a bowl of corn flakes and at
least as sexy.''

Cultural Fig Leaves

A favorite target was American mainstream culture. The distinctions he found
between ''masscult'' and ''midcult'' set the terms of cultural analysis for
critics to come. Masscult he defined as the
''giving-to-the-public-what-it-wants'' line, which ''refuses to discriminate
against or between anything or anybody.'' For purveyors of masscult, such as the
popular magazines, he wrote, ''everything becomes a commodity, to be mined for
$$.''

He was even more irritated by the ''tepid ooze'' of midcult.  Favored examples
of this species were Ernest Hemingway's ''The Old Man and the Sea'' and Thornton
Wilder's ''Our Town,'' but he found many other targets, from the Book of the
Month Club to the Museum of Modern Art to educational television. He charged
that they all donned a cultural fig leaf to conceal the same formulas and lack
of standards that characterized masscult. His skewering of James Gould Cozzens'
1958 best seller ''By Love Possessed,'' and of reviewers who praised it, remains
a classic send-up of American middlebrowism -and, incidentally, more readable
than the novel.

To Mr. Macdonald, midcult was a corruption of culture, just as Communism was a
corruption of radical politics. He combined a readiness to smash political and
economic conventions of the present with a determination to safeguard
achievements and standards of the past. He preached against many of the changes
in the best selling and ''authorized'' Revised Standard Version of the Bible,
and had a field day with Webster's Third New International Dictionary, which he
found an exercise in ''permissiveness, in the name of democracy, that's debasing
our language.''

This review revealed most clearly Mr. Macdonald's traditionalist stripe.
''English, like other languages,'' he wrote, ''is beautiful when properly used,
and beauty can be achieved only by attention to form, which means setting limits
or de-fining, or dis-criminating.  Language expresses the special, dis-tinctive
quality of a people, and a people, like an individual, is to a large extent
defined by its past - its traditions.'' The radical as conservative.

Speaking at his funeral last week, the critic John Simon said: ''He would
search, sift and savor in order to distinguish what enhanced life from what
wasted it.'' On the fields of both culture and politics, Mr. Macdonald directed
his barbs mainly at those who cheapened or perverted the values he prized. He
was equally hard on popularizers who feigned respect for serious art while
devoting themselves to turning an American dollar, and on popular fronters who
flaunted their love of democracy while devoting themselves to the requirements
of Soviet policy.

In his very funny way, Dwight Macdonald was a very serious man. And in every
way, he was his own man.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Dwight Macdonald

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PROGRAM MUSIC, WITH A PROGRAM

BYLINE: By Edward Rothstein; Edward Rothstein is a music critic for The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2015 words


MUSIC AND POLITICS Collected Writings 1953-81.  By Hans Werner Henze.
Translated by Peter Labanyi.  Illustrated. 286 pp. Ithaca, N. Y.: Cornell
University Press. $24.95.

IN 1968, at the world premiere of Hans Werner Henze's revolutionary oratorio
''The Raft of the Medusa'' in Hamburg, West Germany, the Culture and Revolution
team of the Berlin chapter of Students for a Democratic Society helped organize
a demonstration. The audience was bombarded with leaflets; a poster of Che
Guevara was mounted on the podium. Other comrades put up a red flag. The chorus
refused to sing the work in the presence of the Communist drapery. Then,
according to the composer, who was to conduct the work, heavily armed riot
police marched in and began to beat up and arrest students, along with the
work's librettist, Ernst Schnabel.

Though Mr. Henze refused to continue with the concert, he could not have
considered the evening an outright failure. After all, the work, which is
dedicated to the memory of Che Guevara, condemns authorities in power and
invokes the names of ''freedom fighters of the Third World.'' And following the
arrests, the composer led the audience in a chorus of ''Ho! Ho! Ho Chi Minh!'' a
chant whose rhythm is reproduced in the final moments of the oratorio. The
boundaries between art and politics had been broken down; the oratorio had
created street theater, raised political consciousness and become part of what
Mr. Henze calls ''man's greatest work of art'' - the ''World Revolution.''

When Mr. Henze refers to ''music and politics'' in the essays of this book,
then, he means business. The selections, with titles like ''Music as a Means of
Resistance'' and ''Art and the Revolution,'' were mostly translated by Peter
Labanyi from a similar German collection; also included are essays written for
this translation and others adapted from interviews. Though many concern
specific works by Mr. Henze and are limited in interest, and though Mr. Henze is
not a profound thinker, the book is important simply because the author is one
of the most prominent, prolific and provocative composers in Europe.

These essays further provide a glimpse into the peculiar connections between
music and politics over the last few decades and suggest some reasons for the
widespread identification of avant-garde composition with political radicalism
in the works of such composers as Cornelius Cardew, Frederic Rzewski, Luigi
Nono, Christian Wolff and Luciano Berio.

Mr. Henze's own political and musical origins are described in a fascinating
essay, reconstructed from a series of interviews and given the title ''German
Music in the 1940's and 1950's.'' Born in 1926 into the middle class, Mr. Henze
served in the German Army during World War II and was even taken prisoner by the
British - but for him the Nazi regime was ''dark and philistine, evil and
dangerous, petty-bourgeois and lethal.'' Opposition to the Government was also
bound up in his musical development. While studying at the Brunswick State
School of Music in the 1940's, he listened surreptitiously to the forbidden
works of Hindemith, Stravinsky, Schoenberg and Berg. The war's end was a musical
liberation for him and a whole generation of composers. Mr. Henze became
intrigued by Neo-Classicism and, for a short time, with the serial techniques of
Schoenberg and Webern. Throughout Europe, manifestoes were written, esthetic
battles declared; the German town of Darmstadt became the center of the musical
avant-garde. A musical and political utopianism was in the air. For Mr. Henze,
the end of the war was a promise that the ''innocent, the pure, and those
purified through remorse'' would gain entrance into a new age.

But as the avant-garde grew in power, Mr. Henze became more and more
disenchanted with it. He recognized that late modernism was itself becoming an
orthodoxy. Serialism, he charged, had been ''institutionalized as official
musical thinking.'' Those who rejected it were excluded from representation at
concerts of new music. Composers felt a ''fear of the avant-garde press'' while
the patrons and priests of new music wielded their power like ''feudal''
princes. Moreover, even in the music itself, the rule of law was asserted, with
every factor of musical composition subject to combinatorial rules. Mr. Henze
attacked the compositional technique as a ''mechanistic heresy.''

In 1953, cut off from the power centers of new music and ostracized, he writes,
because of his homosexuality, Mr. Henze moved to Italy. In his music, which
received a fair measure of popular acclaim, he challenged late modernism - its
estheticism, its ''smug'' opposition to the audience, its antihistorical stance.
He invoked the styles of earlier works, arguing that the musical tradition was
not oppressive but sustaining. He preferred Mahler to Webern and public acclaim
to hermeticism. He found sympathetic librettists in W.H. Auden and Chester
Kallman - the authors of Stravinsky's ''The Rake's Progress'' - with whom he
collaborated on ''Elegy for Young Lovers'' (1959-61) and ''The Bassarids''
(1965). Much of the music of this first part of Mr.  Henze's career is lyrical,
eclectic, Neo-Classical, composed with a subtle ear for sonorities and a sure
dramatic instinct.

Such a conservative musical stance, it would seem, would have marked a permanent
split between Mr. Henze and the avant-garde. But these essays are replete with
contradictory attitudes. Despite his popular success and his professed love for
the audience in general, Mr. Henze detested the bourgeoisie in particular.
Shocking them, he wrote, ''came quite naturally to me.'' He even found modernism
to be a bourgeois phenomenon, comparing it to Nazism.

Such attitudes paradoxically united Mr. Henze with the avant-garde in a
fundamental aspect of its program - the opposition to the middle class. That
program implied a social revolution along with a musical one, for only if
cultural power could be wrested from the hands of the bourgeoisie could the
''progressive'' musical revolution flourish. This opposition combined with a
vulgar Marxism in the musical avant-garde.

So when Mr. Henze finally converted to the ''World Revolution'' in the mid-60's,
it was not only a musical conversion. In 1968, he resigned from the West Berlin
Academy of the Arts and became a member of the East German equivalent. In 1969,
he visited Cuba as guest of its National Council of Culture. (In these essays,
he praised the revolutionary multimedia celebrations of Lenin staged in Cuba, as
well as Cuban cultural life, for its ''lack of hang-ups about art,'' and its
social program, for what he claims is the complete elimination of illiteracy.)
He called on musicians to take an active role in helping ''the oppressed in
their struggle.'' And he pointed to his own revolutionary salvation: ''I no
longer know the feeling of jealousy; I am no longer personally ambitious. I no
longer write music to please myself and a few friends.'' In the new era, he
wrote, all people will be able to compose, their inhibitions lifted.

Indeed, Mr. Henze saw anything that disrupted that vision as representative of
fascism. Like many other social critics of recent decades, he found parallels to
Nazism everywhere, thus managing to make the horrors of Nazism just another
episode in pre-revolutionary goings-on. He found ''remarkable variants of
fascism'' throughout bourgeois society. And in a 1975 essay, for example, Mr.
Henze linked ''lynch-justice in the U.S.A., mass shootings by SS henchmen,
Hiroshima, Nagasaki, Vietnam'' in a litany that invoked four examples of
''fascism'' connected with the United States and one by the most criminally
fascist regime in the history of humanity.

During the same period he wrote music like ''Voices,'' with its often crude
settings of revolutionary poems from around the world, and ''The Tedious Way to
Natascha Ungeheuer's Flat,'' with its call for participation in the revolution.
But this was revolutionary music of limited appeal; like Mr. Berio's it was too
inhospitable in sound for members of the working class to enjoy in their leisure
hours. Mr. Henze's self-righteous radicalism also went along with a luxurious
life style - fine cars, fine clothes, fine food -that seemed to make of the
''World Revolution'' nothing more than a fashionable and highly marketable
''work of art.'' But such contradictions were not Mr. Henze's alone.

Passions have cooled in recent years, but Mr. Henze's views and those of many of
his colleagues have not changed much. In an essay written in English in 1981,
Mr. Henze gave an example of musical salvation in action - the Montepulciano
Cantieri, an avant-garde music festival Mr. Henze helped found in 1976 in an
Italian town with a population of 15,000 ''modest and hard-working people.'' It
was, until the festival came, a ''depressed zone,'' without entertainment or
artistic education, with a dwindling population and a Communist government. The
annual festival, still taking place, is, according to Mr. Henze, succeeding in
its revolutionary project with the workingclass folk. Amid more traditional
teaching and study its events have included a German collective opera called
''Der Ofen'' (''The Furnace'') - a protest against urban air pollution - and a
''happening'' in which the ''horrors of provincial life,'' including ''sadism,
sodomy, blasphemy, suicide,'' were exhibited at the local school; one classroom
was paved with 200,000 lire worth of fresh pizza.

For Mr. Henze this sort of esthetic education is preparatory work for the
revolution. Music, he might say, is politics in sound. And, at least in part, he
would be right. Music is not merely an abstract art developing its own worlds,
independent of society. Indeed, every musical composition - as the philosopher
and critic Theodor Adorno asserted - contains within its structure and tones an
image of the relation between the composer and society.

But Mr. Henze wants to make more than just a connection between music and
politics. Like many of his colleagues, he argues that the very function of music
should be political, that it must help the oppressed, encourage the revolution.
There is no way to escape his late music's ideology with a retreat into esthetic
contemplation.  Music, he would say, should be an instrument of social policy.
This view should be familiar from various totalitarian regimes, which recognize
that music that is not thoroughly servile and politicized may lead to stray
thoughts and dissident emotions.

But increasingly in recent decades the connection between music and politics has
become important in more liberal societies as well. It is now commonly accepted
in this country, for example, that music is an essential part of social policy,
that a Government can weigh music's value and appropriate funds in ways similar
to those used to finance hospitals or roads, that music festivals can help
economically depressed areas, that grants should be given and creativity
encouraged - taking into account, of course, cost effectiveness, demographics,
political influence and fashion.

Governments and patrons have always used music for their own ends, but the
contemporary politicization of music in liberal society and in the avant-garde
has come about, in part, because of a crisis in the music world itself.
Traditional relationships among patron, composer and audience have broken down
in this century, with all roles open to political redefinition. The S.D.S.
demonstration at the Henze premiere, for example, was partially motivated by
objections to the bourgeois composition of the audience. Even in the musical
mainstream, confused about its origins and future, the size of an audience can
affect the size of Government funding. Music becomes bound more tightly to
political programs.

This is a troubling phenomenon, for music and politics are peculiar compatriots
- inseparable but incompatible. The results of their collaboration could be a
fascist salute, a socialist realist smile, a rare esthetic achievement - or a
schoolroom paved with pizza.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 28, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGANS ARRIVE IN THE WEST FOR HOLIDAYS AND VISIT TO SHIP

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 513 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, Dec. 27


President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, arrived here today for an overnight stay
at the home of Mrs. Reagan's mother. They intend to go on to California to spend
the New Year's holiday in Palm Springs.

After Christmas with family at the White House, the Reagans plan to take part in
what has become a New Year's ritual: celebrating the holiday with Mr. Reagan's
wealthy business and entertainment industry friends at the California desert
estate of the Walter Annenbergs.

The only official activity is planned for Tuesday, when Mr. Reagan will board
the World War II battleship New Jersey at Long Beach,, Calif. The battleship is
being recommissioned.

Ship Launched in 1942

The 45,000-ton New Jersey was launched in 1942. It was decommissioned in 1948,
then recommissioned to serve in the Korean War and off the coast of Vietnam.

For its new commission, the ship has been modernized at a cost of $236 million.
Added have been launchers for cruise missiles and what naval officials call the
latest in high-technology radar and communications equipment. Mr. Reagan may
also take the occasion to make an appeal for his military spending plans and for
production of the proposed MX missile. White House aides have said he may also
announce the names of members of a commission to review options for basing the
missile.

The Administration wanted to deploy 100 of the missiles missiles in a cluster in
20 square miles near Cheyenne, Wyo. Congress, to show displeasure with this
''dense pack'' system, has rejected funds for the missile in the interim budget
approved last week.

4 Battleships Sought

The New Jersey is one of four battleships of the Iowa class the Administration
wants to recommission. But in the Department of Defense appropriation adopted
last week, Congress deleted the money for recommissioning the Missouri, one of
the four. Administration aides hope the President's visit will call attention to
the ship's new equipment and security features.

Mr. and Mrs. Reagan flew here on Air Force One. With them was their daughter,
Patti Davis. On arriving in bright sunshine, they traveled to the home of Edith
Davis, Mrs. Reagan's mother. The Reagans plan to return to Washington Sunday,
when Mr. Reagan begins preparations for submitting the Federal budget Jan. 31.

The President, after arriving here today, was asked about a report in The New
York Times that Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan had begun to argue for
selective tax increases next year to reduce budget deficits projected at $200
billion or more. ''Don't believe everything you read in newspapers,'' he shouted
to reporters as airplane jets roared in the background.

In Washington, Treasury officials confirmed the accuracy of the report. But
Larry M. Speakes, the deputy White House press secretary, said, ''There always
are a whole series of options, particularly from Treasury, on taxes.''

He added, ''I wouldn't look for any substantial new taxes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President and Nancy Reagan

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 29, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN HAILS NAVY LED BY BATTLESHIP

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 791 words

DATELINE: LONG BEACH, Calif., Dec. 28


President Reagan today recommissioned the World War II-vintage battleship New
Jersey and asserted that his Administration had dramatically improved American
military readiness after what he called a period of unilateral disarmament from
1970 to 1979.

In an appeal for continued growth in military expenditures, Mr.  Reagan said
critics of his Administration were ''dead wrong'' in suggesting that the
Pentagon was ''inherently wasteful and unconcerned about cost-cutting.''

Speaking from the deck of the 887-foot ship in the shadow of one of her nine
16-inch guns, Mr. Reagan declared: ''As the recommissioning of this ship
demonstrates, we are re-arming with prudence, using existing assets to the
fullest.''

''However, even with maximum efficiency and an eye toward making every dollar
count, we must not fool ourselves,'' he added.  ''Providing an adequate defense
is not cheap. The price of peace is always high. But considering the
alternative, it's worth it.''

Naval Pageantry

Then, with a ''God bless and Godspeed,'' Mr. Reagan formally reactivated the
battleship in a display of naval pageantry. As a band played ''Anchors Aweigh,''
Capt. William M. Fogarty Jr. piped the 1,500 crew members aboard. Mr. Reagan
laughed with joy as members of the crew ran along the
A military analysis by Drew Middleton of the role of the battleship New

Jersey. Page A15.
deck, clapping their hands and cheering and waving.  Meantime, brilliantly
colored signal flags were hoisted and the ship's radar antennas and gun turrets
began rotating. Sirens and bells sounded and a 21-gun salute was fired.

After Mr. Reagan toured the ship, he was flown by helicopter to West Los Angeles
for an overnight stay at the Century Plaza Hotel. On Wednesday, he planned to go
to Palm Springs for the New Year holiday.

At the ship, some 9,000 Navy officials, family members and guests applauded Mr.
Reagan, although they were not his primary audience.  The President was aiming
his comments at a public his advisers fear is disenchanted with big increases in
military spending at a time of budget deficts and economic distress.

A week ago, in a setback for the Administration, Congress approved military
appropriations of $239 billion, almost $20 billion below what Mr. Reagan had
requested. The sum was $6.5 billion below the ceiling Congress itself had
established in June.

Moreover, Congress deleted money for production of the MX missile and for
recommissioning the battleship Missouri, a sister ship of the New Jersey.

4 to Be Recommissioned

The Administration's plan to recommission four such Iowa-class battleships, a
centerpiece of the proposed Naval buildup, has revived the debate in military
circles over whether the battleship has become vulnerable and perhaps obsolete
in an age of missiles and high-technology weapons.

Presidential aides were hoping today that Mr. Reagan's visit to the Long Beach
Naval Shipyard would help win support for the Administration's program to
reactivate the battleships and take other steps to expand the fleet.

Navy Secretary John F. Lehman Jr. said that two years ago,the fleet stood at 460
ships. Mr. Reagan said the New Jersey today became ''our 514th ship'' in a
program to build the fleet to 600.

The 58,000-ton New Jersey was launched in 1942 and decommissioned in 1948. It
was reactivated to fight first in the Korean War, then in the Vietnam War, but
this time it was refurbished at a cost of $326 million with what Mr. Reagan said
today was ''the latest in missile, electronic warfare and communications
technology.''

Doubts About Battleships

In other comments, Mr. Reagan indicated he was aware of doubts raised about the
vulnerability of the battleship, particularly by those who cite the apparent
ease with which Argentina sank the British destroyer Sheffield with an Exocet
missile in the Falkland Islands war last spring.

''We have been questioned for bringing back the battleship,'' Mr.  Reagan
acknowledged. ''Yet I would challenge anyone who has been aboard or even seen
the New Jersey to argue its value.'' He added: ''It seems odd and a little
ironic to me that some of the same critics who accuse us of chasing technology
and gold-plating our weapons systems have led the charge against the superbly
costeffective and maintainable New Jersey.

''I doubt if there is a better example of the cost consciousness of this
Administration than the magnificent ship that we are recommissioning today.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan reviewing Marines

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 29, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE POP LIFE;
Billy Joel Serenades the Dark Side

BYLINE: By Stephen Holden

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1370 words


''WHEN I make an album, I usually try to do something totally different,'' Billy
Joel said the other day. And true to his word the 33-year-old singer, who will
be performing tonight at the Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, L.I., and on New
Year's Eve at Madison Square Garden, has indeed shifted gears on his latest
album, ''The Nylon Curtain.'' With its use of sound effects, aural montage,
exotic orchestration, and thickly overdubbed vocals, ''The Nylon Curtain''is a
far cry from the pared-down rock of ''Glass Houses'' and harks back to the late
60's psychedelia of the Beatles.

''The Nylon Curtain'' has also stirred up some controversy because its
centerpiece is a haunting musical epilogue to the Vietnam War entitled
''Goodnight Saigon.'' The album cut begins and ends with a sputtering helicopter
as it approaches and leaves a jungle site.  These sound effects frame Mr. Joel's
first-person-plural monologue of American paratroopers looking back at the war
in sorrow. The verses are linked by a hearty male chorus repeating the refrain,
''and we would all go down together,'' which conjures up a ghostly brigade
chanting from beyond the grave.

''I wasn't trying to make a comment on the war, but writing about the soldier as
a person,'' Mr. Joel explained. ''The song isn't a political statement, even
though it's been interpreted as one. The European press found it too
pro-American, but in South Korea they won't release the record because the
Government think it's too anti-American.''

Mr. Joel has also received some complaints because he himself did not see
military service. ''Of course I was hesitant to write about Vietnam, because I
wasn't there,'' Mr. Joel said. ''But a lot of my friends fought in Vietnam and
two close friends were killed. But the people I knew who fought and came back
encouraged me to write it. I picked their brains and asked them what music they
listened to, what they did, and how they felt. The feeling of camaraderie, of
only having one another for support, was something they all still share.''

''Goodnight Saigon'' is one of several very sobering songs on ''The Nylon
Curtain.'' The current hit, ''Allentown,'' which also is a first-person
monologue, describes the despair and anger of an unemployed steelworker.
''Laura'' clinically details the way a parent can instill a child with guilt.
''Scandinavian Skies,'' evokes a bad drug experience. ''Pressure'' is about
living in a state of extreme anxiety. And ''Surprises,'' in which Mr. Joel views
his whole life as a mysterious series of changes, was inspired by the singer's
motorcycle accident last April, when he injured his left thumb.

''The biggest thing I learned from the accident was that when you think you have
all the control in the world, suddenly some one is going to run a red light,''
Mr. Joel said. ''Writing the song lyric, I tried to remember, almost through
self-hypnosis, what was going through my mind subconsciously at the time of the
accident. It's very stream-of-consciousness, and to this day, I don't know what
some of it means.''

Perhaps because ''The Nylon Curtain'' contains so many grim undercurrents, it
hasn't sold as well as Mr. Joel's previous three albums. ''One of my original
title ideas, and I wasn't joking, was ''Commercial Suicide,'' Mr. Joel said.
''I've always had a problem with radio station formats. Stations that play
chainsaw Heavy Metal perceive me as the guy who wrote 'Just the Way You Are.'
They see me as a pop singer posing as a rock-and-roller. But I love
rock-androll. I grew up on Led Zeppelin and Jimi Hendrix and Cream.''

Looking back on his career, however, Mr. Joel cites musical influences that run
from Debussy to hard rock. Eleven years of formal piano lessons endowed him with
a classical style and fluency. He characterizes his third album, ''Streetlife
Serenade,'' as ''impressionist.'' ''Turnstiles,'' which was begun in Los Angeles
and completed in New York, echoes Jackson Browne, George Gershwin (''New York
State of Mind''), and Phil Spector, among other inspirations.  And in Mr. Joel's
multimillion selling albums ''The Stranger,'' ''52d Street,'' and ''Glass
Houses,'' one hears inflections of Bruce Springsteen, the Rolling Stones, the
Beatles, and Bob Dylan, among other influences.

With its emotionally tense vocals churning through subterranean instrumental
textures, much of ''The Nylon Curtain'' sounds like a tribute to such John
Lennon aural montages as ''Strawberry Fields Forever.'' ''I'd always thought of
Paul McCartney as a bigger influence, but when John Lennon was killed I realized
he was the one who was kicking in more soul,'' Mr. Joel said. ''I thought about
it a lot, and when I heard my vocals in the playback booth, the similarity to
Lennon seemed weird, because the resemblance wasn't intended. But my producer
and the guys in the band said, 'Leave it, it's right, that's the way you felt.'
'The Nylon Curtain' wasn't an easy album to make.''

Many recent records attest to the adaptability of reggae syncopation to
different pop formats. One of the year's pop sensations in England has been
Musical Youth, a quintet whose members range in age from 11 to 16. Formed
two-and-a-half years ago in Birmingham, the group scored one of the year's
biggest hits in England with ''Pass the Dutchie,'' a vintage reggae song that
had been recorded by the Mighty Diamonds as ''Pass the Kutchie'' (''kutchie''
being Jamaican slang for a ganga pipe). Musical Youth changed ''kutchie'' to
''dutchie'' (a Jamaican cooking pot) and made it into an international hit. It
is one of several appealing tunes on the group's debut album for MCA, ''The
Youth of Today.''

The English producer Peter Collins has done for Musical Youth what the former
Motown producer Freddie Perren did for the Jackson Five a decade ago - helping
to create a fresh adolescent variant of an established pop sound. Exuberant
harmonies are underlined by springy steel drums in a streamlined pop setting
that's slick but not oppressive.

Grace Jones's newest album, ''Living My Life,'' is as sophisticated and dense as
Musical Youth's is buoyant and simple, yet reggae is also it's foundation. The
Jamaican-born fashion model turned pop singer and songwriter has emerged on her
last three albums as a much more interesting artist than the disco cult figure
she was in the 70's. Like the albums ''Warm Leatherette'' and ''Nightclubbing,''
''Living My Life'' was co-produced by Chris Blackwell and Alex Sadkin, using a
Jamaican rhythm section that includes Bob Marley's great sidemen Sly Dunbar and
Robbie Shakespeare.

The production encases Miss Jones's harshly haughty voice in settings that blend
reggae with elaborately synthesized European dance music. The new album includes
a forbiddingly chilly rendition of Melvin Van Peebles's portrait of New York
City, ''The Apple Rising,'' as well as several synthesized dance numbers that
are the last word in icy sophistication.

''Little Shop of Horrors'' does not boast one of the more enduring scores of the
contemporary musical theater, but Howard Ashman's lyrics do have moments of
nasty wit, and Alan Menken's melodies knowingly satirize pop tunes of the Brill
Building era. The show's original cast album, produced by Phil Ramone for Geffen
Records is a technically superior cast album.

Like Geffen Records's cast album for ''Dreamgirls,'' ''Little Shop of Horrors''
blends studio-perfect rhythm tracks with wonderfully immediate vocal
performances. The finely crafted rhythm tracks enhance the score's rock-and-roll
verve and firmly root the tunes to their 60's pop-rock sources. Ellen Greene's
ghastly compendium of 1950's consumer cliches on ''Somewhere That's Green'' and
Ron Taylor's caricature of the Big Bopper, ''Feed Me (Git It),'' stand out as
sharp, comic set-pieces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Billy Joel

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 29, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Careers;
Air Force Attractive In a Slump

BYLINE: By Elizabeth M. Fowler

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 828 words


THERE is one big business so little affected by the recession that it is still
hiring - the Air Force. Brig. Gen. Scott Harpe, 45 years old, a flier who is
commander of the Air Force Recruiting Service, says, ''The recession has had a
good impact on our recruiting.'' In an interview, he said that not only have
more men and women applied to the services but the quality of applicants has
also improved.  General Harpe has 4,000 people in his recruiting unit worldwide.

''I also have noticed a change in attitude,'' he said. ''There is a more
patriotic feeling than 10 years ago, when it was not so popular to talk about
patriotism. It's a much more favorable environment for us. When things get tough
we have real attraction.''

The Air Force has a great deal going for it. It is on ''the leading edge of
technology,'' according to General Harpe. He speaks of ''the excitement of
technology,'' pointing to ''all those kids buying video games.''

''The kids who play video games today will be the fliers of tomorrow,'' he said,
stressing that even in a pushbutton age the ability to work with high technology
provides intellectual challenge.

In technology, the Air Force has much to offer. Avionics training, for example,
can give recruits the technical skill and experience in electronics specialties
that later can be used in civilian jobs. And this has not escaped many
18-year-olds just out of high school and unable to find jobs. ''We make them
more marketable,'' General Harpe said. There are many educational opportunities,
some of which provide college credits through the Community College of the Air
Force.

Then there is the expense of a college education. Some people find they cannot
afford to go unless they take jobs for a few years. Work in the armed services
offers an alternative.

In addition, a student can join the Reserve Officers Training Corps while in
college. Programs range from $100-a-month allowance to a full-tuition
scholarship plus monthly allowance. Upon graduation the student is commissioned
as a second lieutenant (or Navy ensign). Some programs require several years of
active duty.

General Harpe, asked why the Air Force did not recruit from middle-aged civilian
ranks to make up for specific shortages, said: ''We grow our people from the
bottom. There is a need first for military officers and secondly for those with
technical knowledge.  Rank progression is important in military service.''

General Harpe said that he might not have thought of the Air Force as a career,
but he took a mandatory R.O.T.C. course at Florida State and joined the service
afterward. He was named a brigadier general two years ago at the early age of
43, following years as a fighter pilot and several medals for exploits in
Vietnam.

General Harpe said that his effort to recruit pilots and navigators ''has been
doing quite well,'' but he added that there were shortages of engineers,
particularly of electrical engineers. ''We can give engineers more
responsibility at an earlier age than they could get in civilian life,'' he
said. The problem is that the Air Force competes for engineers with civilian
companies paying higher salaries.

Doctors, particularly orthopedic surgeons, are also in short supply. Like
engineers, physicians usually can earn more in civilian life. The military
services, however, have programs to encourage young doctors. For example, the
services will pay for medical school in exchange for several years of active
duty.

''We're keeping more of them now,'' General Harpe said of the physicians. ''Our
goal in the last fiscal year was 120 new doctors.  This year we only need 50 new
ones.''

He also said that the Air Force needed more linguistics specialists for
listening posts, those who know certain foreign languages or can learn them
quickly. ''We provide language training,'' he said.

General Harpe said that meteorologists had also been in short supply, ''but we
have crossed the hump and there is no big problem.'' One concern facing the Air
Force is that the population from which it recruits - the 18-year-olds - will
drop by 17 percent between 1982 and 1985. And General Harpe added that ''once
the recession gets better, we won't have such a big pool to recruit from.''

General Harpe called for another G.I. Bill. ''We need the G.I. Bill for our
people,'' he said last week. ''We lost it. The importance of keeping people and
saving taxpayers' money is the rationale for increased benefits for service
people.''

''We are no longer a leader in perks,'' he said, adding that private industry
had surpassed the military in benefits. ''For example, we don't have dental care
for our families, which many companies have.'' He also said that ''just keeping
military pay comparable to increases in inflation is important.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of a jet

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 30, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A SOVIET NAVAL BUILDUP IN WEST PACIFIC REPORTED;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 586 words


Western intelligence sources say there has been a slow but significant expansion
of Soviet land, air and sea forces in the West Pacific this year.

This development is reported in an area that American strategists have long
considered of importance to the United States and to Japan and China. For
example, Adm. Maurice F. Weisner told a Congressional committee three years ago
that he believed ''the most critical sea lines of communication'' to be those
that supply oil through the South China Sea and the Philippine Sea. He also
cited ''those great circle routes from the United States which pass near the
Soviet Kamchatka Peninsula and the Kurile Islands.''

From the Japanese standpoint, there has been a marked deterioration of the
situation in the Kuriles. An island chain seized by the Soviet Union seized from
the Japanese in 1945, part of which Tokyo wants returned.

Four of the Kurile Islands off the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido are now
said to be garrisoned by a Soviet mechanized infantry division of 14,000 men. In
late 1981, a Japanese Foreign Ministry spokesman said there were 10,000 Soviet
troops on the islands.

The disputed islands are also the site of a Soviet headquarters system capable
of handling the operations of an entire army corps, according to Patrick J.
Garrity, writing in Military Review, the publication of the Army's Command and
General Staff College,

In addition, the Soviet Union reportedly sent a squadron of 12 supersonic MIG-21
fighter-bombers recently to replace a squadron of subsonic MIG-17's on the
island of Iturup, known by the Japanese as Etorufu.

The Soviet explanation for the Kurile buildup, American analysts say, is that it
responds to American plans for the deployment in northern Japan starting in 1985
of 50 advanced F-16 fighter-bombers, which can carry nuclear weapons.

Some Western intelligence sources suggest another explanation. They speculate
that the reinforcements in the Kuriles, which lie between the Sea of Okhotsk and
the Pacific, are part of a program to provide a barrier behind which Soviet
submarines equipped with ballistic missiles capable of reaching the United
States could operate with relative impunity.

The waters adjacent to Vietnam have seen the greatest increase in Soviet naval
strength. Soviet task forces, usually led by a guided missile cruiser and
including nuclear-powered submarines, are said to rendezvous at Cam Ranh Bay and
Da Nang. One task force of 10 ships was said to have been deployed early this
year in the South China Sea.

The Chinese Government, sensitive to these deployments, has accused the Russians
of starting construction of another naval base, on Con Son Island in the South
China Sea about 80 miles southeast of Vinh Loi in Vietnam.

According to Mr. Garrity and Western intelligence sources, 5,000 to 8,000 Soviet
military advisers and technicians are now in Vietnam.  They repair and service
weapons, predominantly of Soviet manufacture, train pilots and missile crews and
operate and service radar installations at Tan Son Nhut airfield at Ho Chi Minh
City, the former Saigon, and at Da Nang, Bien Hoa and Cam Ranh Bay. Peking
asserts that there are more than 4,000 Soviet advisers in Laos as well.

The Soviet Union also provides Vietnam with military assistance now believed to
be running at a rate of $1.3 billion a year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 30, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Robert D. Hershey Jr. and Lynn Rosellini

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 765 words


The Meese Connection

T he Moss Institute, a new organization to research the future in behalf of what
it calls the ''meat-and-potatoes man,'' has been quietly guided in its first
year by its interim executive director, Ursula Meese. Her resume, which lists
many previous administrative posts, including deputy probation officer in
Oakland, Calif., makes no mention, however, of the fact that she is the wife of
Edwin Meese 3d, counselor to President Reagan.

Women these days tend not to trade much on such connections and some people in
Washington haven't yet made the association, an aide says. But when someone does
ask whether Ursula Meese is related to Edwin Meese, her favorite response is:
''Only by marriage. His daughter is my niece's cousin.''
Search for Information

I t has been almost 16 years since Bernard B. Fall, a journalist and historian
whose extensive writings about Vietnam brought criticism from doves as well as
hawks, was killed by a Vietcong mine while patrolling with American marines. But
Mr. Fall, who was a professor of international relations at Howard University,
remains the subject of hot debate.

Since 1979 his wife, Dorothy, has been trying with little success to obtain
files on him from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central
Intelligence Agency. One of the main reasons Mrs. Fall, a graphic designer,
wants the material is so she can finish the book about her husband that she
began in 1970.

The Government, which at one time sought to prove that Mr. Fall, who retained
French citizenship, was a foreign agent, has provided some of the documents.
Among them were 652 largely blacked-out pages from the F.B.I. But the agencies
have generally resisted Mrs. Fall's request on the ground that national security
would be compromised; they have asked a court to rule that they have met their
obligations under the Freedom of Information Act.

Mrs. Fall has now asked that the court privately review the files to see
whether, in fact, their release could be damaging. ''I can tell it's
biographical information about him that's common knowledge,'' Mrs. Fall said of
some of the heavily censored material she has been given.

''People always hear that the public is forever harassing the Government'' over
the Freedom of Information Act, she added. But of the problems of those making
requests, she said, ''They have no idea.''
A Question of Energy

T here was a certain novelty about the meeting yesterday of the board of
Americans for Energy Independence. In the past, the energy situation has
dominated discussion at most meetings. But yesterday a more pressing problem was
at the top of the agenda. Should the sevenyear-old coalition of nuclear-oriented
companies and labor organizations disband?

''The energy problem hasn't gone away but the oil glut and the Government have
created a perception that it has,'' said the group's executive director, Elihu
Bergman. ''Therefore, it's much more difficult for an outfit like ours to raise
money.''

Two of the coalition's biggest supporters, General Electric and Westinghouse,
have decided they will no longer make more than token contributions to its
budget, which was about $375,000 this year. ''I don't have a safety net,'' said
Mr. Bergman, who presides over a staff of six, including four part-timers.
''I'll be out on the street if this thing folds.''

In the end, the board fell back on the classic Washington solution to its
problem. It deferred a final decision until March.
World War I Premiums

T he Veterans Administration didn't appear to be doing anything overly generous
when it announced that, as of New Year's Day, veterans of World War I would no
longer have to pay premiums on their life insurance policies. Since the war
ended 65 years ago, this suggested that it was talking about a small group of
people mostly well into their 80's.

Actually, the World War I program remained open to servicemen, war veterans or
not, until 1940. Thus, explained a V.A. official, Paul A. Koons, there are some
27,000 of the policies still in force, some of which pay dividends higher than
their annual premiums. The regulations are being changed in favor of
policyholders to save on the high administrative costs of the 1980's.  Robert D.
Hershey Jr.  Lynn Rosellini

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 30, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 102 words


Forgotten Americans A sign in a Veterans Administration Hospital reads, ''The
Price of Freedom Is Visible Here,'' and the U.S.O. has not forgotten the men and
women who have fought for the nation. The friendly smile of a volunteer and the
red, white and blue U.S.O. banner make the Vietnam veterans in the 12 V.A.
hospitals in the metropolitan area as well as the servicemen from World War I
and World War II feel that their sacrifices are appreciated.

Tax-deductible gifts may be sent to the U.S.O. of Metropolitan New York, 110
East 42d Street, Suite 1812, New York, N.Y. 10017.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 31, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ETHNIC 'BRUNCHES' FOR THE MORNING AFTER

BYLINE: By MIMI SHERATON

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 812 words


''THERE may be some perfectly nice people who use the word 'brunch,' '' the late
Heywood Broun is reported to have said, ''but I prefer not to know about them.''
However you may feel about the word, brunch probably conjures up generally
expensive meals for which reservations must be made and special clothes (at
least, casually elegant) must be worn. As pleasant as such a meal can be, after
a week of holiday celebrations topped by New Year's Eve, a more relaxed and less
self-conscious version of brunch might be just the thing for New Year's Day.
Relaxed and generally inexpensive breakfast-lunches can be had in a number of
the city's ethnic restaurants, few of which require reservations, nor do they
inspire serious attention to dress. The varied and savory Chinese dumplings that
comprise a dim sum breakfast make a diverting and soul-satisfying first meal for
the New Year. There are several dependable Chinatown meccas for dim sum that
will be open tomorrow. Among the best are Hong Gung, 30 Pell Street (571-0545),
serving dim sum from 9 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.; Hee Seung Fung (H.S.F.), 46 Bowery
(374-1319), with dim sum from 8:30 A.M. to 5 P.M., and the Imperial Inn, 23 Pell
Street (233-1014), where dim sum can be ordered from the menu between noon and 3
P.M. Menus at kosher dairy-vegetarian restaurants offer wide choices that are
suitable for a brunch. Thick and steaming vegetable soups, omelets or scrambled
eggs with smoked salmon and onions, bagels, lox and cream cheese, assorted
herrings and blintzes are foremost among such choices. French toast, matzoh brei
and potato pirogen - either boiled or fried and served with sour cream - are
also available, and so are generally good yeast coffeecakes. You will find all
of those dishes at Ratner's, 138 Delancey Street, between Norfolk and Suffolk
Streets (677-5588), open from 6 A.M. to 2 A.M. They are also served at the few
tables and the long counter at the B. & H. Dairy luncheonette, 127 Second
Avenue, between Seventh and Eighth Streets (777-1930), from 6 A.M. to 6 P.M.

The classic New York delicatessen provides such stick-to-the-ribs brunch
possibilities as hefty omelets made with tongue or salami, rich soups and
sandwiches or platters of some of the milder meats, like turkey, roast beef or
center-cut slices of tongue. Kosher-style (but not kosher), the Carnegie
Delicatessen and Restaurant, 854 Seventh Avenue between 54th and 55th Streets
(757-2245), also has very good cheese blintzes, French toast, smoked fish,
smoked salmon with cream cheese and bagels, and chicken soup with matzoh balls
that should nullify the effects of a New Year's hangover. Nondairy dishes are
available on New Year's Day at the Second Avenue Kosher Delicatessen and
Restaurant, 156 Second Avenue at 10th Street (677-0606), open from 7 A.M. to 10
P.M., and Fine & Schapiro, 138 West 72d Street, between Broadway and Columbus
Avenue (877-2874), open with table service from 11:15 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.

Italian and Indian Choices

Crunchy, anise or nut-flecked biscotti, as well as panettone and flaky
cheese-filled sfogliatelli can be had with bracing espresso or soothing
cappuccino in Little Italy at Cafe Roma, 385 Broome Street, at the corner of
Mulberry Street (226-8413), from 8 A.M. to 2 P.M.

If too much partying has left your palate jaded, try restoring it with the fiery
south Indian vegetable fritters and curries, and the intriguing pancake breads
served at Madras Woodlands, 310 East 44th Street, between First and Second
Avenues (986-0620), from 1 P.M. to 10 P.M.

Similarly, there are alluring flavor and texture contrasts in the pungent foods
of Vietnam, and the many appetizers make a lively holiday brunch. Try them at
Saigon in Chinatown, at 60 Mulberry Street, near Bayard Street (227-8825), from
11 A.M. to 11 P.M.

Tops in Hamburgers

If only hearty fare seems in order, the best choices for hamburgers on New
Year's Day are Diane's, 249-251 Columbus Avenue, between 71st and 72d Street
(799-1930), and Tennessee Mountain in SoHo, at 143 Spring Street, at the corner
of Wooster Street (431-3993), where you can also get very good barbecued beef or
pork ribs.

And though a good deal more expensive and fashionable than the places mentioned
above, the Russian Tea Room at 150 West 57th Street, between the Avenue of the
Americas and Seventh Avenue (265-0947), is the source of the city's best
sirniki, tiny cheese pancakes; blini, the buckwheat pancakes served with red
caviar and sour cream ($17.50); cheese blintchiki with sour cream, and hot
cabbage borscht with meat-filled piroshky. Those dishes will be available on the
lunch menu from 11 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 318 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 31, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AT THE MOVIES;
'Staying Alive' with a couple of tough guys.

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 6, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1362 words


NEXT Monday, Sylvester Stallone begins his new job, directing John Travolta in
the sequel to ''Saturday Night Fever,'' which is called ''Staying Alive.''

Mr. Stallone wrote the script, too. He says of himself and Mr.  Travolta:
''We're kind of, like, in the same mold. I met him just before he did 'Saturday
Night Fever,' and after that, we crossed paths a few times, and I've always
liked him. It's interesting, I came out with 'Rocky' in '76, and he came out
with 'Saturday Night Fever' in '77; it happened for us at the same time.

''He's had his problems, I've had my problems, but I think, that, together, we
can override all that. It's nice to direct one of your contemporaries. It
doesn't happen so often, and I think he's an excellent actor, and I'm glad he's
going back to this material. But it's no more of the disco and Brooklyn. It's
more lonely, solitary.  It's really about the birth of a young artist.''

Loners interest Mr. Stallone. The Vietnam veteran he plays in ''First Blood'' is
a man who single-handedly goes to war against a whole small town and the
National Guard and even units of the United States Army. ''First Blood'' came
out in October and made more than $20 million in the first 17 days it played
across the country, which surprised Mr. Stallone. ''Because,'' he says, ''I had
thought the subject matter was out of vogue. The way I saw it, people didn't
want to remember the war. But the picture went beyond the war, got into morality
and man's dignity and civil rights.''

Although many critics found ''First Blood'' violent and immoral, Mr. Stallone
believes that its release so close on the heels of ''Rocky III'' helped it.
''Also,'' he says, ''it's heavy action, which is what people want today in
films. Quick, to the point. As a matter of fact, there's only about 100 words of
dialogue in the whole thing.

''It's based on a novel. I took a script that had been knocking around for eight
years and rewrote it. In the original script, the guy was a homicidal
psychopath. He killed everybody. He was relentless. It made sense, but it was
hard to take. So I thought, what I want is to get across his alienation and his
wanting to get back into the mainstream of society. Once you've killed someone,
you've crossed over the line.''

Do bad reviews bother him?  ''If a review is personally vicious, that bothers
me,'' he says.  ''There are 10 or 15 people who just don't like me, and I've
come to accept that. But I look forward to helpful criticism. I think if I can
be audacious enough to put a very expensive piece of material out there for
people to see, someone should come forward and tell them it's really worth the
money.''

In addition to his movie work, Mr. Stallone is now handling a heavyweight
fighter named Lee Canalito (''He was in 'Paradise Alley' with me, played my
brother''), and he promotes a monthly fight card to discover boxing talent.
''It's almost like casting a movie,'' he says.

''There are 30,000, 40,000 fighters across the country and a network of
managers. You contact the managers. You match one fighter, his personality and
style, with another fighter. I'll go out and get 14 to 18 fighters a month and
put them on a fight card, seven or eight fights, and we take this around the
country. It's very time consuming, but I have a partner who trained the
heavyweight champion, Larry Holmes, and he helps me.''

Does Mr. Stallone wish he could stop punching people out and still have a hit
movie? Does he hanker to play more intellectual types?  No, he doesn't.  ''If I
looked at it from a religious standpoint,'' he says, ''maybe that's what my
destiny is. Maybe I speak better through body language than the spoken word. I
think it's taken me a few years to find my milieu, and I like it.''
From Hair and Bridal Ads

To Stage and Screen

Like Sylvester Stallone, Julie Hagerty has worked on a sequel. She is one of the
stars of ''Airplane II,'' she is soft voiced and beautiful, and the bread she
casts on the waters is forever coming back buttered.

Ten years ago, she arrived in New York from Cincinnati and started modeling. ''I
did a lot of hair and bridal dresses,'' she says. ''It was O.K. It was a real
good way to pay the rent, and I love to eat.''

Eventually, Miss Hagerty's brother, Michael, who shared her dreams of a life in
acting, followed her to New York and, with several of his friends from college,
started a theater company in Greenwich Village. ''I used to go down and help
them, like, clean the theater,'' she says. ''And do tickets and serve the punch
at intermission. And then they were doing this play called 'Mutual Benefit
Life,' and Norman Rene, who was directing, asked me to audition.''

Guess what? She got the part. ''I was terrified,'' she says, ''but it was
wonderful, working with your friends. And also, Off Off Broadway, you don't have
much money, so we took all the furniture out of my apartment, and put it on the
set. It was easier to walk onto a set that looked like your living room. I loved
the whole thing. They used to joke that I would get to the theater at 3 in the
afternoon and wait.''

Almost as soon as Miss Hagerty had been seen on stage, she was offered a screen
test for the part of the stewardess in ''Airplane!'' She flew to Hollywood, the
producer Howard Koch himself took charge of the test (''He's just one of the
most wonderful people on the planet,'' she says), and once again, she got the
part.

Another play, John Guare's ''The House of Blue Leaves,'' and another movie,
Woody Allen's ''A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy,'' followed. Of the Allen movie,
she says, ''My agent told me, 'Woody wants you to come and read the script.' I
went and read the script in a little room by myself, and then Woody poked his
head in and said, 'Hello,' and I said, 'Hello,' and we talked for a couple of
minutes.

''He said, 'Do you have any questions?' I said, 'No,' and he said, 'Bye.' I
didn't hear anything for about two months, and then I read with Woody, and he
read all the other parts and was as kind as could be. He said, 'Just do what
you're doing, don't be scared, and if you have any questions, ask.' ''

Miss Hagerty is unmarried, but, she says, ''I see someone special.  He's a
writer. And I have a bird named Bud, who thinks he's a chicken. He's always
walking around on the bottom of the cage, and the only time he sings is when you
cover him up for the night. He's an odd bird.''

For a while, right after the first ''Airplane!,'' Bud's owner tried living in
California. No good. So she moved back to New York. ''I need to go outside and
walk the streets and see the faces,'' she says. ''I know the people in my
building, I know the guy at the hot dog stand. It makes you feel alive.''

Short Subjects

''Wasn't That a Time,'' starring the Weavers, has been playing at the Agee Room
of the Bleecker Street Cinema and will continue there through Jan. 3. The
musical will be followed by ''America - From Hitler to MX,'' which will be shown
Jan. 5 to 11, and has been called by a British critic, ''The most powerful
antinuclear documentary yet to be produced.'' ... Tonight, Theater 80, on St.
Marks Place, is having its annual New Year's Eve champagne and buffet party. Ten
dollars buys you the party at midnight, plus tickets to a double header,
''Design for Living,'' the 1933 Paramount comedy starring Miriam Hopkins, Gary
Cooper and Fredric March, and ''Private Lives,'' the 1931 M-G-M classic starring
Norma Shearer and Robert Montgomery. ... The Chinese Government has decided that
a portrayal of Sun Yat-sen by a non-Chinese actor is ''not acceptable,'' and so
Carl Foreman's projected movie about the Chinese hero has been sidetracked, at
least for the time.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sylvester Stallone

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
